
      
         
            
            
            OF THE EXPRESSE VVORDE OF GOD.
            
            A SHORTE, BVT A MOST EXCELLENT TREATYSE AND very neceſſary for this tyme.
            
               VVritten in Latin, by the right Reuerend, Lerned, and vertuous Father Staniſlaus Hoſius, Biſshop of VVarmia, Cardinal of the Holy Apostolyke See of Rome, and one of the Preſidents in the late General Councel holden at Trent.
            
            Newly tranſlated in to Engliſh.
            
               Beholde I come to theſe Prophetes (ſayth our Lorde) vvhich take their ovvne ſayinges, and ſaye. The Lorde ſayeth it.
               Ierem, 23.
            
            
               
                  Hilarius lib. 2. de Trinitate.
               
               Of vnderſtanding not of Scripture ryſeth haereſy: 
               And the meaning, not the vvorde is blamed.
            
            
               Imprinted in Louayne, by Iohn Bogard at the ſigne of the golden Bible: with Priuilege. An. 1567.
            
         
         
            
            PRIVILEGIVM.
            REgiae Maiestatis Gratia Speciali permiſſum et conceſſum eſt Ioanni Bogardo Typographo iurato Academiae Louanienſis, tuto ac liberè imprimere libellum Anglico ſermone ſcriptum, & inſcriptum: A Treatyſe of the expreſſe worde of God: ac publicè diſtrahere nullo prohibente.
            
               Datum Bruxellis. 4. Nouemb. Anno. 1566.
               
               Subſign.
De la Torre.
            
         
         
            
            THE TRANSLATOVR TO THE READER.
            
               SEing the Iniquyte of the preſent tyme to be ſuche, that the mouthes of al Catholyks being ſtopped, the aduerſaryes only of Chriſt and his Croſſe are ſuffred to crie and crowe with open mouthe againſt our common mother the Catholyke Churche, ſeing the faithe of our Fathers aſſalted with hereſy, Truthe ouercraked with falſhood, Religion turned in to opinions, Vnite in to ſectes, I coulde not but thinke it high tyme for euery honeſt and faythful Chryſtian, in ſuche ſorte as he were able, to ſteppe to the ſuſteining, and repayring the Rā
               pars of the Churche, being daily bothe by ſecret vndermyninges and ſuche open ſhott, ſo fiercely aſſaulted and ſhaken by Sathā and his Miniſtres.
            And being vpon theſe and other iuſte reſpectes entred in to that mynde and determynacion, fynding yet my ſelfe (in myne owne conceyte) vnable to yelde of myne owne, any thinge worthe the reading, I thought not amiſſe (for a beginning) to Imparte by the cō
               modyte of our vulgar toūge to my vnlerned

countremē (in which ſorte I thinke the greateſt number of the deceyued to conſiſte) ſome worthy worke of ſome other mannes.
            Amonge the whiche, fynding (in myne opinion) none more leekly to induce reaſonable men, to ſee their owne faulte, and by what meanes they haue bene, and daily be deceyued, I haue ſelected out of the notable workes of the light of this our age, that moſt vertuous and lerned Father, Hoſius, nowe Cardinall, and one of the Preſidētes in the late general Coū
               cell holden at Trident, that diſcourſe and treatyſe, which he made and intytuled, Of the expreſſe worde of God, a worke allready tranſlated in to diuerſe vulgar tounges, ſette forthe in ſondry editions, diſtracted and ſolde by greate numbers, for the ſingular and euident cōmodyte thereof. And this pece the rather amōge the reſt I haue ſelected, for that I haue by experyence noted, that there is no one deceyte vſed by Sathan, that dothe ſo muche enlarge his kingedome, or ſo muche withdrawe the membres of Chriſt from his Myſticall body, the Churche, as dothe that glorious ſhewe, which by his Miniſtres he maketh of his owne worde, vnder the plauſible name of the VVorde of God.
            For well ye wote, nothinge is in the mowthes of theſe newe and ſedytious Miniſters, and promoters of the v. Ghoſpel, more ryſe

and cōmon then the ſcripture, the Goſpel, and the worde of the Lorde.
            The worde of the Lorde, the worde of the Lord, is euer in their mouthe. Of this they iā
               gle. This they ringe allwaies in our eares. But the Catholike church, of whō we ſhoulde lerne what in dede the word of God is, of whoſe mouthe only we muſt harken for this worde, and by whom only we knowe, which is the true written worde of God, and what the true ſence of that worde is, this Catholyke Churche they ſpeake not of. VVe profeſſe in our Crede, that we beleue in the Catholyke Churche. If we did in the Crede, ſo expreſſely profeſſe, we beleue in the worde of God, howe vehemently ſhould that Article haue bene beaten into our heades? VVhat vauntes, what exclamations, what repetityōs woulde here haue ſuffiſed? Nowe the Church, not the worde being expreſſed, the Maſter and teacher, not the leſſon it ſelfe beīg profeſſed, they crake of the leſsō, and forget their teacher: they bable, the word. And no word of the Church.
            The parte of lerned and playne dealing mē, had bene firſt to define, and make playne vnto the worlde, what that is which they call the clere and expreſſe worde of God, and which they make as it were, their ſhooteanker, their toucheſtone and their cōmō refuge, whēſoeuer they be by the Catholiks preſſed with ſoū
               de

and vnuincible Authorite of the Churches doctrine. In dede Epicure (out of whoſe ſcholeLib. 2. de ſinibus bo norum & malorum this voluptuous ghoſpell may ſeeme to haue iſſued) did not leeke to haue thinges plainely defined. But Cicero ſayeth, that without definition it can not be that they which contend aboute any thinge, can agree what is the thinge in queſtion. Theſe men therefore ſeeking to kepe in ſtore blinde and vnknowen Angles to flee vnto, when they be chaſed, wil not orderly define what is that their Gods worde, of which they triumphe ſo much, nor allowe any expoſitiō thereof, but their owne: or any iudge but the vnlerned multytude.
            Sins therefore that is the ſwete bayte, wherewith the mortal hooke is coouered, and the ſofte fleſe wherin the wolfe is wrapped (who gladly will not diſcouer him ſelfe) this graue, vertuous and lerned Father, Hoſius the Auctor of this treatyſe, moued with Chriſtian pietye will herein manifeſtly open and diſplaye vnto thee, what is hiddē vnder the glorious ſhewe of Gods worde: howe farre the bare and darke letter of the ſcriptures, where in they only comprehend their Gods worde (at the leſt yf they lymit it within any compaſſe) is from being ſo clere and playne as they ſuppoſe it. And farther that the ſame being by them peruerted and deliuered to thee, with a wrōge ſence and a wrye hereticall expoſitiō, differing

from the Churche (which is the ſure groūde and piller of al truthe, the faitheful interpreter1. Tim. 3. of Gods worde, aud the ſtorehowſe of al right knowkeadge) is in dede ſo farre frō being the expreſſe worde of God, as that thou ſhallt plainely perceyue it to be the expreſſe worde of the diuell.
            Finally thou ſhalt (beſides many other notable things by the waye, whereof in the Table to this Booke annexed thou ſhalt ſee greate Copie) lerne alſo herein the true definition of Gods worde, and which is the very true, expreſſe, and (as they call it) the liuely worde of the Lorde, that is, the quickening and lifegiuing worde of God. VVhich in dede is open and clere: Yea ſo clere, ſhorte and eaſy, as it maye of all perſons, of all ſortes, ages and capacytees be lerned, euen without euer reading the Scriptures. And that is this worde. Loue or
               1. Tim. 1. Rom. 13. Galat. 5. Leuit. 19. Matth. 22. 
               Charyte: The only ſcope of al ſcriptures. The ende of all the Cōmaundemētes: The cōſummatiō and accōpliſhemēt of the whole lawe. Frō the knowleadge and ſight of which true, clere, and expreſſe worde of God, conteyning in it the ſomme and effect of all the wordes that euer God vttered in the lawe, and the prophetes, thou ſhalt perceyue in the diſcourſe hereof, howe farre theſe men be, that yett thinke thē ſelues of ſuche ſharpe wytte, and quicke ſight, that they ſee beyond all the graue

and lerned Fathers that haue bene, or be at this daye. And doo with their forged Gods worde (which is in very dede but their owne worde) labour and tēde to none other ende, but to the diſſoluing of vnite, and māgling the miſticall body of Chriſt, the Churche.
            This true worde of God therefore, this Loue, I ſaye and Charyte which on the other ſide dothe not diſſolue, but vnyte, not mangle, but amende: not rente and wounde, but ioyne and heale, and is euer occupied, in doīg good, hath nowe moued me to beſtowe this trauayl in imparting to thee (my dere Countrey mā) this godly and lerned Treatyſe moſt neceſſary for thy health and ſauegarde in this perillous tyme.
            Reade therefore with humilyte, and ſuſpēd, I praye thee, thy partial foreiudgemēt, (if thou be of the nūber of the ſeduced) vntill thou haue read it to the ende. And then if thou fynde thy ſelfe to haue receyued good thereby (as I beſeche God thou mayeſt, and nedes thou muſt, if thou haue any ſparke of grace left, vnquenched in thee:) then geue the honour and glory thereof to almighty God: And for recompence bothe to the Auctor, and Tranſlatour, afford them in thy deuoute prayers a place amonge thy frendes. Fare well. From Louayne: The 3. of Ianuary.
         
      
      
         
            
            TO THE RIGHT, FORTVNAT AND RENOWMED PRYNCE SIGISMOND BY THE GRACE OF GOD KYNG of Polonia, Mighty Duke of Lithuania, Ruſſia, Pruſsia, Lorde and heyre of Maſouia, and Samogitia, his moſt gracious Lorde: STANISLAVS HOSIV'S Biſshopp of VVarmia, his prayer and ſeruyce Reuerently commendeth.
            OF THE EXPRESSE WORDE OF GOD.
            
               THAT Somwhat I ſhould write vnto your highnes of the expreſſe worde of God, (Right myghty kyng Sigiſmond) the vnbrideled bouldnes of the heretikes of our age hath moued me. VVho albeit emong them ſelues they be wonderfully diuided, yet doth eche ſecte of them, ſo contentiouſly challenge the ſame vnto themſelues,

yea ſo vſurpe it vnto them ſelues alone, that from the poſſeſsion therof, they labour to exclude, not only all ſuche ſectes, as diſſent frō euery of them, but euen the very Catholikes and right beleuers. For ſuche is the arrogācy of theſe men, ſo great the forgetfulnes of thē ſelues, that they take all others, to be but fooles, doultes, and blockes, that cā ſee nothing in the ſcriptures and perſwade them ſelues to be the only perſons, that haue attayned to the true vnderſtanding therof.
            But is it leekly, where ſo great pryde reſteth, where ſo great inflation of the mynde is, that there can be that Spirit, which [reſteth not but ouer the hūble and meeke, andEſa 66. ſuche as fearfully tremble at his word?] VeryProuer. 11 notably ſayd the wiſe man. [VVher is humillite, ther is wiſdo: wher is pryde and ſwelling of the mynd, ther is follye. For calling thē ſeluesRom. 1. wiſe men, they are become fooles. In the lowe valleys (ſayeth that holly Kynge andPſal. 103. Prophet) not in the high hills, doth God ſend foorth the ſpringes and foūtaynes of his grace: he hydeth his myſteries frō the wyſe andMatth. 11. reueleth them vnto the hūble and meeke.] Therfore none do leſſe vnderſtād what is the

expreſſe worde of God, then they which most glory therof, and which do ſo arrogat vnto thē ſelues alone the vnderſtādig therof that (as the Prouerbe ſayeth) they will ſeme toThey are ſayd to pryck out the choughs eyes vvhich condēne and out of thoſe thī
                  gs vvhich vvith great cō
                  ſent hath byn allovved of old tyme by their forfathers Hiere. 28. pricke owt the choughs eyes. But this is no newe practys. It hath allwayes been the propertie of heretikes to glory of the clere and expreſſe word of God, and to challēge it vnto thē ſelues alone. VVith what other ſhewe or pretēce did the falſe ꝓphettes, euē before the byrth of Chriſt, deceiue the people, but with this, of the word of God? VVhē the ꝓphet Hieremy did foretel many heauy thigs, we reade he vſed to begynne with theſe wordes, as other the ꝓphets of God did. [Thus ſayth our lord:] And did not the falſe ꝓphet Ananias alſo vſe the ſame wordes, whē falſely he prophecyed farre cōtrary thinges? who our lord denyed to haue beē ſent frō him? VVhō in an other place wee heare thus ſpeaking of theſe falſe ꝓphets: [Falſly do prophets propheſie inHie. 14. 29 my name, I ſent thē not, I cōmaunded them not, neither ſpake I vnto thē. They propheſie vnto you a falſe viſion, a deceiuable propheſie, and the wrōge cōceyte of their owne hart.] And in an other place. [Harken notHier. 23.
               
(ſayth he) vnto the wordes of prophetes, which propheſie vnto you and deceyue you. They tell you the viſion of their own hart, and not out of our lord his mowthe. They ſaye vn to them which blaſpheme me. [The lordIbidem. hath ſayed: peace ſhalbe with you] and a litle after, he ſayeth, [they ſteal his wordes.]
            VVhich place S. Hierome doth thus interprett: A lye (ſayth he) doth allwayes counterfait,Hieron in cōmenta. ibidem. and borowe the likenes of a truthe. For howe could it otherwiſe abuſe and deceyue the ſimple? Euen ſo therefore as falſe prophetes did lye vnto the people before the comyng of Chriſt, ſaying, [Thus ſayth the lord I haue ſeen the lord, and the word of the lord was ſhewyd to hym, or to hym:] ſo doo heretikes take vnto thē the teſtimonies of ſcriptures out of the owld and newe teſtamēt, and ſteale the wordes of our Sauiour, euery one, of that which cometh next to hand: of the Prophetes, Apostles, and Euangelistes, and take vnto thē their tounges, that therwith they may vtter owt of their mowthes, the poyſon of their hartes. Very aptly doth S. Hierom compare heretikes with thoſe lying prophetes, and right well (ſaid he) doth a lye

allwayes imitat, and counterfait a trowthe. For as the prophetes of God ſaid: [The word of our lord, The mowthe of our lord hath ſpoken it. Thus ſayeth our lord] the ſame phraſe and termes vſed alſo the falſe prophettes.
            But what they bothe prophecied lett vs marke a litle. The prophettes of God rebukedThe prophetes of God. the ſinnes of the people, exhorted them to amendement, and for ſhewed vnto them, the heauy wrathe of God to hāg ouer their heades, that he would cōſume them with ſworde, famyn, and pestilence: That he would oppreſſe them with moſt harde bondage, yea and vtterly deſtroy them with an vniuerſal ſlaughter.
            On the other ſyde, thoſe lying prophettesFalſe prophetes. Hiere. 14. (whom our lorde had not ſent nor cōmaunded) ſayde [yowe ſhall not ſee the ſworde, and hunger ſhall not be emong you, but the lord will geue you, true and ſure peace. They cured (ſayth the prophett) the cōtritiō of theHiere. 6. dowghter of my people ſlenderly ſaying peace, peace, yet was there no peace] And as one other prophet ſaith of thoſe lyars, who ſaid, [Thus ſayth the lord] whē the lord had notEzech. 13. ſpoken it, [they ſowde together cuſshins for

the elbowe of euery hand, and made pillowes to lay vnder the heades of euery age, the more eaſely to entrape their ſoules.]
            How contrary was the preaching of theſeThe difference betvvene true and falſe prophetts. ij. ſortes of prophetes? They thretned, to ſaue: Theſe lulled, to deſtroye: Yet in the meane tyme both prophezied in the name of God: bothe gloried in the worde of the lorde.
            But is not the trade and manner of the prophets of our age euen leeke to this? VVhat do they els which be laufully ſent of the Catholike Churche, but denoūce vnto the people the ſame which Eſaie, Hieremie, Ezechiel,Eſa. 58. Daniel, Ioël, Ionas, & other the ꝓphets of God, did in thoſe dayes denounce? They rebuked the wickednes of the people, they exhorted thē, that beīg drōke, they would awake, weepe, and howle. Fearfull thinges they fortolde thē. And being ſo put in feare, they exhorted thē, that they ſhould turne vntoIoell 1. our lord, that they ſhould yeld worthy fruits of penaunce, that ſo being throughly correctyd thy might happely eſcape the paynes wherwith the lord had threatned thē. And being ſo turned ageine vnto our lord [yn faſting,Ioell 2. weeping, and mourning] then at the

last, did they diſcouer vnto thē, the mercye of our lorde and did forbidde that no perſon throwgh the greatnes of his ſinnes, ſhould diſpayre of pardō. [For our lorde is gētle andEzech▪ 33. mercyful: pacyēt and of much mercy, and one that wilbe intreatid, to remitt his diſpleaſure. He will not the death of a ſynner, but rather that he ſhould conuert and lyue:] He followeth not mans impatience, but [loge looketh for our repentaunce] ſo as yf weeHiere. 26. yeld worthy fruictz of penaunce he alſo repenteth him of his threates, and forbearith to lett faull vppon vs the plages which he denounced, and with our chaunge, is alſo chaunged him ſelf.
            Thus the myndes of mortall mē beyng lyft vp into a better hope, leſt perhaps the preaching of the greatnes of Gods mercye might make them agayn negligent, and careles, behold how he tempered his ſpeeche. [VVhoIoel. 2. knowyth (ſayth Ioël) yf he ſhall turne? yf he ſhall forbear and leaue behynd him his bleſſing.] As though he would ſaye (ſayth S. Hierome) wee, truly do exhort ſo myche asHiero▪ in cōmenta. ibidem. in vs is, to repentaunce, becauſe wee knowe the mercy of God to be vnſpeakable:

but becauſe we can not knowe the bottom of the wiſedom and knowledge of God, we temper our ſpeeche, and wiſhe rather then preſume our ſinnes to be forgeuen vs. And Remigius the Biſshopp of Auxerre,Remigius Altiſiodo rēſis Epiſcopus. about 700. yeres past or there about, following herein S. Hierō: They might (ſayth he) haue anſwered, becauſe the lord is pacyēt and of myche mercy, as thow ſaiest, it is not needful that we afflict our ſelues and do penaunce, for he will haue mercy on vs, what ſo euer we do. But the prophett to mete with this, ſayth: what man liuyng knoweth yfIoel. 2. God be turned from the fury of his wrathe to mercye? It is not poſsible for any man to knowe it. It is better that doing penaunce wee meryt to atteyne pardon of our ſinnes, and after penaunce doon hauing obteyned remiſsion thereof, then wee offer ſacrifice vnto our lord.
            
            After the ſame ſort more then 400. yeres paſt Rupertus Abbat of Tuitia (by Collē)Rupertus Abbas Tu
                     •
                  tiēſis. reporting the ſame wordes. Euē yn penance it ſelf (ſayth he) the Prophett wiſsheth vs to be ware, and taketh away ſurety. Of the ſame opiniō allſo nere 300. yeres past was Albertus

(not without cauſe named the great) whoo expownding the ſame wordes. Although (ſaith hee) it bee certaine that God pardonethAlbertus magnus the cōtryte, yett is it vncertayne whither any man be truly contryte: he ſhall ſee that he cā not be correctyd whom God hathEccl. 7. deſpyſed. The wicked mā prayed to the lord,2. Mach. 9. of whom yet hee did not obteyne mercye. Cain made oblation, yett God had no regardGene. 4. Nume. 16 to his ſacrifyce. Moiſes ſaide of ſome: behold not o lord their oblations. Thus farre Albert. Behould how Ioël preached and how euer ſince by the ſpace of one Thouſand ij. hundred yeres by long ſucceſsion of Priestes and Biſſhops, euen to this our age theſe wordes of his, haue been vnderſtanded.
            Yet did not Iohel alone ſo preache, but DanielDaniell. 4 allſo. VVhen he expownded to the king Nabugodonoſor his dreame, did hee not in the beginning terribly feare him, when hee declared what miſchieffs ſhould happē vnto him? yet did he not by and by will him to diſpayr: but ſhewed him the waye wher by he might eſcape the paynes which were thretnyd vnto him. [Let my councell (ſayth he) (O king) pleaſe the: Redeme thy ſinnes

with almes, and thy iniquitees with mercy toward the poore.] VVith theſe wordes he brought ſome comforte to the kinge, being before ſtryken with a wonderfull feare. Yett would hee not ſett him in a careleſnes or ſurety. He ſaid not, be ſure thy ſinnes ſhal be forgeeuē thee, but thus. [God will perhaps forgeeue thy ſinnes.] Of wich wordes S. HieromHierō in Danie. treating: when Daniel (ſayth hee) forknowing thinges to come doubteth of Gods determination, full raſhely doo they which bouldly promiſe forgeuenes to ſinnes. And the ordinary Gloſe ſaith. This their temerytee is intollerable. Thus thē propheſied Ioëll, and thus Daniell.
            But what did the kinge of Niniue when Ionas the prophett fortolde him, it ſhouldIon. 3. The penaunce of the kyng of Niniuee. come to paſſe, that with in xl. dayes Niniue ſhould be deſtroyed? did not he (beīg clothed him ſelf in ſackcloth and ſitting ī aſhes) exhorte the people to penaunce, that men and beaſtes ſhould be couered with ſackes, that they ſhould ſtrōgly crye vnto our lorde, that men might be turned frō their euill waye, and from the iniquitees which they had in hand? But did he after ſuche cōuerſion bidd

them ſtande by and by in ſurety of pardon? No: but as Ioël and Daniel did, ſo did he: [who knoweth (ſaith he) yf godd will be turned, and forgeue vs?] which wordes S. Hierō
               Hieronymus ibidē
                expoūding ſayth. Therfore this (forgeuenes) is made doutfull and incertain, that while men ſtād yn doubte of their ſaluacion, they ſhoulde the more earneſtly doo penaūce and more ſtirre God vnto mercy. which wordes are in like termes repeted of Remigius and Rupertus and yn the ordinary gloſe. In ſuch ſorte that neuer any one mā yn the Church of God ſemeth otherwiſe to haue vnderſtode the wordes of thoſe ꝓphettes. VVhoſe māner of preaching yn this point, wee reade the Apoſtles allſo to haue followed. For ſo did PeterAct. 8. ſpeake vnto Simon Magus, who thought the gift of God might be poſſeſſed for moony: [Doo penaunce (ſaith he) for this thy wickednes,No man ought to ſtand aſſured of his ſaluacion and pray to God, to ſee yf happely this nawghty thought of thy hart may be forgeuen.] If happely (ſaith he:) he dooth not bid him to be certayne and ſure therof.
            This doctryne of the prophettes and Apoſtles, dooth the Catholyke Churche yett howlde, geeuing Terrour to ſinners,

that therby ſhee may the more effectually ſtirre them to repētawnce, which whē they haue done, ſhee dooth not therfore cōmaund them by and by to be owt of feare, but rather by all meanes dooth feare them from perillows ſecurite, and well commawndethPſal. 36. them, [to hope in our lord and to doo good]. But aſſurednes of forgiuenes of their ſynnes, and certayn knowledge therof to bragge of, and yn that ſuertye rechleſſe to reſt, ſhee forbyddeth. For albeit of the mercy of God, of his promyſes, of the merytt of Chriſt his death, of the vertue and efficacye of the ſacramentes no good man ought to doubte, yet when anny man reſpectyth hymſelf, and his owne infirmitee, hee may well feare and ſtand yn doubt of Gods grace in his owne parte. This is the preaching of the Catholyke Churche, well and rightly agreyng with the doctryne of Eſay, Hieremie, Ezechiell, Daniel, Ioël, Ionas, yea and of S. Peter the Apoſtle.
            But doo theſe men which not muche more then. xxx. yeres paſſed, departed from vs agree therwith? Naye: rather they ſeeme, to ſtand cleane ſquare from this doctrine.

For what other thing ſaye theſe teachers,The doctryn of he retikes. but that which Ananias, Semeias, and the reſt of the faulſe prophetes ſayde, to whom our lord had not ſpoken? [you ſhall not ſee the ſwoord (ſay they) there ſhalbe no famyn emong you, but ſure peace wyll the lord geeue you.] Peace, Peace, they crye, when peace is not, and denouncyng a ſownde ſlepe ſecuryte, deceyue the ſowles of many.
            For they teache what ſo euer our woorkesSo Luther in lib. de fide Chriſtiana. be, ſo our fayth be fyrme and ſtedfaſt, wee are ſure of our ſaluation, for that God regardeth not woorkes: VVhere yet the playn woordes of the ſcripture be manyfeſt to the contrary. Namely where it ſpeakyth of the Niniuites their appeaſing of God. [God ſawe their workes and becauſe they were turned frō their euill waye, he had mercy of them.] God ſawIon. 3. their woorkes (ſayth the Prophet:) Theſe fellows on the other ſyde ſaye, God regardeth no workes [Behould lord, (ſayth the prophet Dauyd) my humillite and trauayll, and pardonPſal. 24. all my ſynnes] And in an other pſalme, [Regard my humillitee, and deliuer me, becauſePſal. 118. I haue not forgotten thy lawe. Behould (lord) becauſe I haue looued thy commandementes,

Quicken me yn thy mercye.
            VVhich wordes S. Hilary expounding. TheHilarius ſuper pſal 118. prophett (ſayth he) reſeruyng all to the iudgement of God, deſireth to be deliuered, forAmbroſi' the meryt of his humillitee. whom S. Ambroſe following, ſayth. As he which hath hūbled his hart, As he, which hath laboured muche there he deſireth his ſinnes may be forgeuē, and here he prayeth to be deliuered. And after a fewe wordes he thus ſayth farther. A good wreſtlar ſheweth his lymmes, that the well orderyng of him ſelf for that feate, may be allowed: he allſo then ſhewyth his lymmes, when after hard tugging, and paynfull grypes, hee is ageyn prouoked to the wreſtlyng place: to the end, the Iudge, ſeing his weary and trauayled body, compell him not eft ſoones to wreſtle. She we thow therfore the humillitee of thy hart, that the tokens of thy vertue may appeare. Shew alſo the paynfull ſtryfes thy body hath Indured, that thow mayeſt ſaye, I haue wreſtled a good pulle. I haue endyd1. Tim. 4. my race, and the ſpirituall Iudge beholding, thy ſtriuing for the game, may adiudge vnto thee, the Crowne of iuſtice, becauſe

thow haſt accompliſſhed the lawe of the game. The prophett prayeth godd that hee would regard his humilyte, his trauayll, and that he was not forgetfull of his lawe, that hee looued his Commandementes, which Saint Ambroſe commaunded alſo wee ſhould ſhewe vnto Godd.
            But the falſe prophetes and falſe GhoſpellersThe fauls prophetes of this our age denye that God, hath any regard to our vvorkes. of our age, denye that God regardith our workes. They denye that he hath any care of them, and teache, that how ſo euer our workes be, yett muſt euery man ſtand aſſured here of, that freely for Chriſtes ſake, his ſinnes be forgeeuen him. That hee is in the fauour of God, and heyre of the lyfe euer laſting, for ſo muche as all our Iuſtice, and all our holynes, is but This is the clere doctryne of Luther in his Articles ad Leon▪ 10. Art. 1. & 6 10. 11. 12. & 31. 32.mere ſynne, and a thing Condempned. As for Contrition that it is a thing ſo farre from profytyng that it makyth a man the greater ſynner. That yff remorſe of ſynne doo gnawe any mans conſcyence, hym doo they commawnd thus to awnſwer.
            
               VVhat is ſynne but Sinne? I am notwithſtandyng
               The vvicked ſaienges of heretikes 
               holly, or yf I be not, yett

Chriſt is God, As though it were lauſull for euery man to be wicked, becauſe Chriſt is God? By his Iuſtice (teache they) wee are Iuſt, by his goodnes wee are good, yea thowgh wee haue not in vs ſo muche as one ſparke of his goodnes. Yea althowgh wee be ouer whelmed yn all kindes of Iniquitee. Looke how muche the more wicked thow art (ſayth one of theſe newe Ghoſpellers) ſo muche the ſooner dooth God geeue his grace vnto thee. Yea hee Commawndeth his followers, thus to ſaye, My ſinnes doo burdē Chriſt, not my cō
                  ſcience.
            
            But what? maye not wee ſay with Hieremie the prophett? [VVoonders are happenedHie. cap. 5. vpon the earthe to the aſtonning of men. Prophetes propheſied lyes, Prieſtes clapped their handes, and my people leeked ſuche thinges.] In dede the people hath leeked ſuche thinges. For ſo may wee ſee men rauiſſhed with the ſmothe woordes of theſe lyeng prophetes, euen as it were with the ſweet ſonges of meremaydes, that yf a man will go aboute to preache vnto them rather true and holſom thinges, then thoſe which are ſwete and pleaſaunt to the eares, he

ſhall be hiſſed out of the place. And rude vnlearnyd aſſes, will not ſtyck ſometyme to preſcribe vnto the prophettes, what they ſhall preache, and to teache them of whom they ſhoold be taught. [See not (ſay they) looke not owt for vs thoſe thinges which ar ryght: Speake vnto vs pleaſing thinges, Looke owt errours for vs.] Preache vnto vsEſaie 30. S. Hierō. in commentar. ibidem only fayth. Threaten not hell fyer, but promyſe vs the kingdom of heauen. that after our ryott, and delycaces, after our inceſtuous wedlockes, wee may yett looke to fynd paradyſe open vnto vs. what ſhewe youe vnto vs the way of the lord which wee are not willing to enter yn to? what doo youe recyte to vs the name of the holly one of Iſraël, which dooth not enter ynto the ſecrettes of our hartes?
            Thow ſeeſt (moſt vertuows kyng) of what ſort is the preaching of thoſe, which in this our age call them ſelues Goſpellers, (wher yn deed they haue no agreement with the Goſpell,) and what ys agayne the doctryne of the catholykes. Thoſe men commawnd nawght ells, but that eche man ſtedfastly beleeue, and reſt well aſſured that

he ſtandeth yn the ſtate of grace, and ys anLuthers doctrine vvorde for vvorde in lib. de Chriſti ana libertate & in cap. Baby lonica▪ The maner of pre achīg and vniforme doctrine of the catholikes vndoubted heyre of the kyngdom of heauen, how ſo euer his workes be, And with this their vayne ſurety they leade men hedlong to the euerlaſting paynes of hell.
            Our men on the other ſyde, albeit they cōmaund vs to hope, for mercy at our lorde his handes, yett doo they forbydde men, recheleſſe to lyue yn ſecurite, and farther warne them, that they thinke it not Inough to amend, except they yeeld allſo woorthy fruictes of penaunce, and ſhewe foorth by their workes, the fayth which they profeſse: That when wee ſhall appere at the laſt Iudgement, it ſhall not be aſked of vs what wee beleued, but (beleeuing) what good or euill wee haue done here in this liffe.
            But ſeeme they not on bothe ſydes armed with the woordes of the lawe of godd? TrulyThe ſcriptures of the catholikes againſt Only faithe. Matt. 3. both partes glory of his expreſſe woorde. Bothe crye▪ the woorde of the lord. The mouthe of the lord hath ſpoken it. Thus ſayeth the lord. The Catholikes bring foorth theſe ſcriptures. [Shewe foorth good

fruictes of penaunce. Except yee repentLuke. 1
                     •
                  
                yee ſhall all periſhe. VVee muſt ſuffer, with Chriſt, yf wee wyl be glorified with him, wee muſt dye with him, yf wee willRom. 8. 2. Tim. 2 lyue with him, wee muſt indure with him, yf wee will raigne with him.
            If thow wilt enter ynto life, keepe theMatt. 19 loan. 3. commawndementes. If you knowe theſe thinges, yee are happy ſo that yee doo them. Thow lord wilt geeue to euery man accordingRom. 2. to his woorkes.
            VVee muſt all be browght before the2. Cor. 5. iudgement ſeate of Criſt, that eche man may carry away according as hee hath done yn the flleſhe either good, or euill. Mercy ſhall make a place to eche man accordingEccleſ. 16. Apoc. 22 to the merytt of his workes. I comme quickly, and my reward is with me, to yeeld to euery man according to his workes.
            They which haue doon good ſhall coomeIoan. 5. foorth to the Reſurrection of lyffe and they which haue doon euyll to the Reſurrection of Iudgement. Man knowythEccl. 9. Pſal. 18. not whither hee bee woorthy of loue or hatred. VVho vnderſtandeth his offences?

From my ſecret and hidden ſinnes lorde clenſe me. who can ſaye my hart is cleane,Prou. 20 Iob. 9. I am pure from ſynnes? I fearid all my woorkes knowing that thow wooldeſt not ſpare an offender. My conſcience dooth1. Cor. 4. not accuſe me of any thing, yet am I not Iuſtified therby. Of ſynne pardoned, yett ſtand not cleerly without feare. Say notEccl. 5. the mercy of the lorde is great, he will haue mercy on the multitude of our ſinnes: For his mercye, and wrathe are ſoone at hand, and wrath is bent vppon ſynne.
            VVith feare and trembling worke your ſaluation.Philip. 2. Bleſſed is the man▪ that is all wayesProu. 28. fearfull: He that is without feare can not be iuſtified.]
            Theſe and many others which were toEccl. 1. long to recyte, are the ſcriptures wherby the Catholykes and right beleeuers, as by the expreſſe word of God, Indeuour to proue, that it is not Inough for a man to beleeue, his ſinnes be, thorowgh Chriſt, forgeuen him, that hee ſtandeth yn good grace, and is an heyre of the lyfe euerlaſting, howe ſo euer the matter goe with his workes, but euen as [It behoued Chriſt firſt to ſufferLuke 24.
               
and ſo to enter ynto his glory,] ſo muſt wee allſo ſuffer before wee come to that glorye, and [as hee walked ſo muſt wee allſo walke] That wee muſt [by our good workes make2. Io. 2. 2. Pet. 1. ſtronge or ſure our vocation,] and yett when wee haue all doon, wee muſt not ſtand aſſured, or Careleſſe, but miſtruſt all ourIob. 9. Luc. 17. Eccle. 5. workes, and [ſay wee be vnprofitable ſeruauntes,] ſo farre foorth as wee [be not without feare euen of that ſynne which is forgeeuen vs.]
            They on the other ſyde which haue deuyded them ſelues from the Churche, bring foorth allſo their ſcriptures and defend the contrary opinion. [Hee that beleeueth and is baptiſed, ſhall be ſaued. So God loouedMark 16. Ioan. 3. the world that he gaue his only begotten ſonne, that euery mā that beleeueth yn him ſhould not periſ he, but haue lyfe euerlaſtīg. Doo manfully, and feare not at the ſight of them. Doo manfully and thy hart ſhalbeDeut. 31. comfortyd. Saye yee vnto the cowardes,Pſal 26 Eſai. 35. Epheſ. 6. 1. Pet. 5 be yee of good chere, feare not. Putt on you all the armour of God, that yee may reſiſt yn the euyl daye. VVhom reſiſt you being ſtrong yn faythe. Hee hath ſent his ſonne yn1. Ioan. 4.
               
to the world that wee ſhould liue throwghRom. 5. him. Godd ſhewyd foorth his loue towardes vs in that, that when wee were yet ſinners, Chriſt was doon to deathe for vs.
            The lord gouerneth me and I ſhall want nothing,Pſal. 22 Ibidem If I walke yn the middes of the ſhadow of death, I will feare no euill, becauſePſal. 26 thow art with me. The lord is the protector of my lyffe, of whom ſhould I beePſal. 30 affrayed? In thee (lord) haue I truſted, I ſhall neuer be Confownded. Sure I am thatRom. 8. neither deathe, nor lyfe, nor Angels, nor anny other creature can ſeperatt me from the looue of God.
            All that my father geeueth me, ſhallIoan. 6 come vnto me, and him that cometh to me, I will not caſt foorthe. VVhoo ſo euer callythRom. 10 on the name of the lord ſhal be ſauyd. All that is borne of God, ouercometh the1. Ioan. 5. world, and this is our victory which ouercometh the world, Our fayth.] Theſe be theBrentius 
                     •
                  n his 2. pericope of his apologie ageinſt Peter A ſoto. ſcriptures which Brentius bryngeth to confirme his aſſurednes and vayne ſuerty by. Yett they be ſuche, as you ſhall ſooner drawe foorth mylke of a poomiſſe ſtone, then owt of thē, the thing which Brētius ſeeketh.
            
               You ſee now how owld a practys this hath been of heretikes to glory yn the woord of God, ſins it was vſed euen yn the dayes of Hieremy and Ezechiel. But what? Euen ſoone after the coomyng of Chryſt was not that deuyſe allſo putt yn vre? VVell knowen is that Storye of the Goſpell,Matt. 4 wher in it is wrytten howe Chriſt ſo ſoone as he was baptiſed, was ledd by the ſpiryt ynto the wildernes, and was there tempted of the deuill. But with what other weapons, did he aſſault Chriſt, but with the very ſcriptures?
            The Euangelyſt Mathew ſayth. [TheMat. 4. diuell ſett him on the pinacle, of the Temple, and ſayd vnto him. If thow be the ſonne of God, throwe thy ſelf downe. For it is written, he hath geeuen his AngellesPſal. 90 charge of thee, that they ſhall take thee yn their handes, leſt thow hurt thy foote ageinſt ſoome ſtone,] which place S. Ambroſe treating of prouidently warnythLib. 4. in Lucan
                     •
                  
                vs, ſaieng, Learne here allſo for the diuell tranſſormyth him ſelf yn to an Angell of light, and of the diuyne ſcriptures thē ſelues, makyth ofte tymes ſnares, to intāgle the

faith full. So dooth the heretike, ſo dooth heeHeretikes trāſformed ynto Aungells of ligh. ripp vp the faith, ſo dooth hee aſſault the lawes of pietye. Therfore lett not the heretike deceyue thee becauſe he can bring foorth ſome exāples of ſcripture: Lett hī not ſtande much in his owne conceyte becauſe he hath ſome ſhew of Learning: for the diuell allſo vſeth the teſtimonye of the ſcriptures, not to teache, but to cumpas, and deceiue.
            
            Very excellenty allſo doth VincentiusVincentius Lyri nenſis Lirynenſis a writer allſo in the dayes of S. Ambroſe handle that place, yn that his goulden booke which hee intitules, For the antiquitee, and vniuerſalyte of the Catholyke faythe. I will the more at large repete his wordes, becauſe they are worthy not only to be read, but to be lernyd without booke.
            
            
               Here (ſayth hee) ſome man will, perhapsHeretikes vſe the reſtimonyes of ſcriptures to confirme their doctryne aſke, whither heretikes doo allſo vſe the teſtimony of the ſcriptures. They doo ſure, and that vehemently, for youe ſhall ſee thē fllee throwgh euery volume of the holly lawe, Throwgh Moyſes, the bookes of the kinges, the pſalmes, Apoſtles, Euangelyſtes, and prophettes. For be it emong their famyliers, or ſtraungers in priuatt, or in publyke, yn their

Sermons or bookes, at feaſtes, or yn the ſtreates, they neuer vtter anny thing, of their owne, but they ſeeke to ouer ſhadow it with ſome wordes of the ſcripture. Reade the workes of Paulus Samoſatenus, Priſcillianus,The vvor kes of olde heretikes full of Scriptures Eunomius, Iouinianus, and the reſt of the peſtilent heretikes, and thou ſhallt fynde there, an infynitt heape of examples, and almoſt no one half leafe omitted which is not paynted, and coloured, with ſentences of the newe and ould Teſtament. But looke now myche the more couertly they lurke vnder the ſhadowe of Gods word, ſo myche the more muſt thow feare and be ware of them. For they knowe their vnſauery fylthe, would hardly at the firſt, pleaſe any man: therefore do they ſprinckle it ouer as with a certayn ſweet ſpyce of Gods word, to the end that he which eaſely would fynd, and reiect the errours of men, may yett forbeare to contemne that, which ſemeth to be drawen out of the word of God. Therefore as they which geue vnto children ſome bytter drynckes do firſt annoynt the brimmes of the cuppes with hunny wherby their vnſkilfull childiſhenes hauing fore taſted the ſweett, feareth

not the bitter. And as they, which vtter vnholſome drogges of ſeedes and liquors, vnder colour and names of medicynes, whereby he that fyndeth written theron the name of a medicyne ſuſpectyth not the poyſon: euen ſo do heretikes.
            
            
               And heerof did alſo our Sauiour hym ſelf forewarne vs, Crieng out vnto the people.Matth. 7. [Beeye ware of faulſe prophetts, which come vnto you in ſheepes clothing, and are with in rauenīg wolues.] VVhat other thing is this ſheps clothīg, but the wordes vtteryd by the Prophets and the Apostles, which they with playne and ſymple ſinceryte, did worke (as it were, fleſes) to that vnſpotted lābe, which taketh away the ſinnes of the world?
            
            
               And what other be thoſe raueningRauenīg vvolues. wolues, but the fell and greedy wittes of heretikes, which do allwayes trouble, and aſſaylle the foulde of his churche, and teare in pieces his flocke by all meanes they can? But the more craftely to ſteale vpon the ſelly ſhepe, keeping ſtyll their woluiſh feerſenes, they lay aſyde their woluiſhe ſhape,

and wrap them ſelues yn the ſentences of Gods word, as it were in certayne fleeſes, that when one feelyth the ſoftnes of their woll, he ſhould not feare the ſharpnes of their teethe.
            
            
               But what ſayeth our ſauiour? By their fruicts youe ſhal knowe them. That is to ſaye when they begyn not only to vtter the diuin wordes, but alſo to laye them abroade, not only to vawnt therof, but allſo to interprett and expownd the ſame, then lo is perceiued that Bitter, that ſower, that Rage: then doth the ayre of the nue poyſon breathe foorthe, then are opened prophane noueltyes. Then maieſt thow behowld the hedge cutt down, the awncyent bowndes of the fathers caryed awaye, the Catholyke faith troden downe, and the doctrine of the Churche torne in pieces.
            
            
               Suche are they whom the Apostle Pawll ſtreeketh at, in his ſecond Epistle to the Corinthians, ſaying: [Suche falſe Apoſtles2. Cor. 11. Heretikes transfigured into the Apoſtles of Chriſt. leeke ſubtyll workmen transformed them ſelues into the leeknes of the Apoſtles of Chriſt.] what meanyth that? How did they transforme them ſelues in to the Apoſtles of

Chriſt? The Apostles browght foorth examples owt of the lawe of God. So did they allſo. The Apoſtles vouched the ſaienges of the Prophettes, So did they to.
            
            
               But when they beganne to expound leeke textes, with vnleeke, and farre contrary interpretations, then were the playn dealers, diſcernyd from the crafty, the naturall from the paynted, the right from the peruers, and finally the true Apostles from the falſe [and2▪ Cor. 11. Sathan transformid in to an Aungell of light. no maruaill (ſayth he) for Sathan transformyth him ſelf into an Aungell of light, then is it no greate matter for his miniſters to transforme them ſelues into the leeknes of the miniſtres of iuſtice.] Therfor according to the teaching of the Apostle Pawll when ſo euer falſe prophettes, or falſe doctors vouche the ſentences of the lawe of God, by the wrong interpretation wherof, they labourThe deuil can find no eaſier vvay to deceiue mē vvith, then by pretence of the vvord of God. to buyld vp their errors, it is not to be doubted, but they followe the ſubtill deuiſes of their auctor the diuell, which doubtles he would neuer haue inuentyd, had he not found that ſame of all other, to be the eaſyest waye to deceyue. That where he would induce couertly a wycked and pernicious errour,

there to holde forth the auctoritie of Gods worde.
            
            
               But ſome man perchaunce will aſke me, howe proue youe that the diuell vſeth to vouche the ſcriptures. Lett him (I ſaye) reade the Ghoſpell wherin it is written. [ThenMatth. 4. the diuell toke him vp] (that is to ſaye our lord and Sauiour) [and ſett him vpon apynnacle of the temple, and ſayde vnto him. If thou be the ſonne of God, Throwe thy ſelf downe. For it is written, he hath geuen his aungells charge of thee, that they keepe thee in all thy wayes. They ſhal take thee in their handes, leſt thow happ to daſhe thy foote against ſome ſtone.] VVhat will this fellowe do to vs wretchyd men, who did with teſtimonies of ſcriptures, geue the onſett euen to the very lord of Maieſtye him ſelf? [If thow be (ſayth he) the ſonne of God, Throwe thy ſelf downe:] why? [For it is written] ſaith he.
            
            
               The doctrine of this place, is eſpecially toNote. be marked and remembred, that when we ſee any man with ſuche an example of euangelicall auctorite, bringe foorth the wordes of the Apostles, and Prophettes, againſt the

Catholyke fayth, wee nede not to doubt, but it is the diuell that ſpeakyth by him. For euē as then the head ſpake vnto the head, euen ſoo do now the lymmes, ſpeake vnto the lymmes, that is to ſaye, the lymmes of the diuell, to the lymmes, and mēbres of Chriſt, the Traytorous to the faithful, Churche robbers, to the Religious, and finally heretikes to Catholikes.
            
            
               But what ſayth he? [If thow be the ſonne of God, throwe thy ſelf downe.] That is: wilt thou be the ſonne of God and receiue the inheritaunce of the heauenly kingdom? then throwe thy ſelf downe: that is from this high churche, which is reputed the churche of God and from the doctryne and tradition therof, throwe thy ſelf downe. And if you aſke one of theſe heretikes that perſwadeth ſuche things to himſelf, how ꝓue you, or how will you teache vs, that we ought to forſake and lett goe the vniuerſall and aūciēt faith of the Catholike Churche? By and by [for it is written] ſayth he. And therwith all he preſently getteth him a Thowzād witneſſes, examples, and auctorities, owt of the lawe, the Pſalmes, the Apoſtles, and Prophettes,

wherwith beyng expoūded after a newe and lewd ſorte, the vnhappy ſoule is throwen downe headlong from the high Tower of the catholike Churche, into the bottomles pitt of hereſies. Then, with ſyche promiſes as followe, do heretikes vſe wōderfully to abuſe, ſuche as be not heedfull, and ware. For they will not ſtick to promeſſe, and teache, that in their churche, that is in the conuenticles ofCōgregations of heretikes. their cōmuniō, the great and eſpeciall grace of God is, perſonally preſent, yea ſo as without any labor, ſtudye, or induſtrie, although they neuer aſke, ſeeke, or knocke, yf they be of their number and ſect, it is ſo from God him ſelf diſpēſed vnto them, that they being holden vp with the handes of Aungells, that is, kept with angelicall protection, can neuer hurt their foote againſt any ſtone, can neuer offend or fall into any errour. Thus farre Vincentius.
            And coulde he poſsibly with more notable markes haue painted foorth the heretikes of our age, thē in this place wee ſee he hath done? For what doth Sathā more earneſtly attempt by thē, then to perſuade mē to throwe thēſelues downe? to let thēſelues fawll, from

the doctrine and tradition of this high Churche, (which Chriſt callyth the CiteeMatth. 5. builded on a hyll)? VVhich thing ſo ſoone as he hath once perſwaded, thē hath he atteynid, the vndoubted victorye. For vntill aThe firſt and principall attempt of Sathan to bringe a mā to hereſie. man throwe him ſelffrom that high Cite, yn vayn are all the attemptes of Sathan. But ſo ſoone as he letteth him ſelf fawll downe from thence, ſo ſoone as he is departyd from the fowld, and ſeuerith him ſelf from the reſt of the flocke, then is he immediatly becoome a praye to the wolf. To this one end therfore doth the diuell bend all his force, that he may leade men, to throwe them ſelues downe, from the high and infallible doctrine of the church. To ſett nowght by the traditions therof, to followe and eſteme rather the priuatt ſpiritt of them ſelues, or of any one man, then the interpretatiō and conſent of the Catholike and vniuerſall Churche, wher vnto is promyſed the ſpiritt of truth.
            Neither is he without ſcripture, wherby he indeuoureth to perſuade the ſame. For it is written (ſayth he) [walke not in theEzech. 20 Math. 16. precepts of your fathers. In vayne doo they

worſhip me teaching the doctrines and cō
               maundementsEzech. 20▪ Marth. 15. of men.] That yf in any one thing he may perſuade a mā to throwe him ſelf downe, to departe, from the precepts, and ordonaūces of his forefathers, and from the doctrine and traditiōs of the Churche, then hath he wonne him within his reache, then doth he eaſely fynd the meanes, that he ſhal daily throwe him ſelf downe deeper. Neither is there any doctrine thē ſo farre wyde from all pietye, or godlynes, wherin he doth not eaſely ſtayne and infect his mynd. In this one thing therfore doth he ſpend his whole ſtudye and trauaill, to accuſtome men to throwe them ſelues downe, and not to make any accompt of the ſence and generall cōſent of the whole churche, but eſpecyally to reſist and withſtand the ordonaunces therof.
            VVhich thing, as of all other heretikes,Martine Luther The enſign bearar of Sathan. ſo Martiu Luther their capitaine and ſtandard bearer in this our age, wee ſee dilligētly and very handſomly practyſed. For what other thing ſoundeth he in all his wrytings, but that men ſhould throwe them ſelues downe? That they ſhould cutt them ſelues from the churche, reſist the decrees therof,

and what ſo euer ſhee commaundeth, in deſpightPreceptes of the Churche. to doo the contrary.
            As for example. The Churche cōmaundeth thee to fast in the lent, and toward the feaſt of Eaſter, to confeſſe thy ſinnes, and to come to the receauing of the ſacramēt: ButPrece ptes of Luther what ſayth Luther to this? Thus he ſayeth.
            Becauſe it is ſo appoynted by the churche,Vide Roffenſ. in
                     ••
                   therū. A
                     •
                  t 28. ad Leo nem. for the ſelf ſame cauſe will I not doo it, and yf it had not commaunded me, I would haue doon it, but I will now doo it at ſome other tyme, which the Churche hath not appoynted: at what tyme, and in what ſorte ſo euer myne owne free will ſhall moue me.
            Likewyſe, The eleuation of the Saeramēt he thinketh a thing indifferent: But bicauſe the Churche hath thowght good it ſhould be lift vp, therfore in deſpite of the Churche he teacheth it muſt be forborne. Ageyn to receyue the ſacramēt in one, or bothe kyndes, in many places he writeth to be indifferent, for that nothing is commaunded therof by any precept of God, as of neceſsitee: yet in his booke which he intituled of the foorme of the maſſe, he ſayeth.
            Yf by chawnce the councell ſhould ſoLutherus
               
decree, then would wee not receyue yt inī libro de formula Miſſae. bothe kyndes, but in deſpight of the coūcell, vſe only the one kynd, or neither of bothe, and not bothe, and holde them for accurſed that by the auctoritee of the councell ſhould vſe bothe.
            But what doth a Councell repreſent, but the Churche? Sathan therfore by this his not obſcure member, commaundeth to do all thinges contrary to the decrees therof, yea and that yn deſpight of the ſame, and by that his worthy lymme yet cryeth. [Throwe thy ſelf downe.] And doth not he throwe him ſelf downe who followeth not that, which is vniuerſall, catholyke, receiued, and allowed, by generall conſent of the whole world, which profeſſeth the name of Christ, but more willingly repoſeth him ſelf in that which ſome one fantastycall man hath better leekyd? VVho albeit he be perhapps reputed circumſpect and diſcrete, yett when he ſpeakyth of hī ſelf, vttereth nowght ells (asIohn 8. the Truthe it ſelf bearyth witnes) but a very lye. For maye a man more throwe him ſelf downe, then to ſlippe from that ſence and vnderſtānding, which is vniuerſall, and common

to all, vnto that which is but priuatt? that is, from trowth to faſhed, which man vtterith whē ſo euer he ſpeaketh of himſelf?
            The very ſame ſong therfore which the diuell himſelf ſonge vnto Chriſt in the deſert, the ſame doth he euen now ſing by his members to Chriſtians. Neither doth he vrge any thing more, then that they ſhould throwe themſelues downe, and lett goe theVVhat Sathan promeſyth and perſuadeth to heretikes. vniuerſall and auncient faith of the catholyke Churche. He promyſeth by his membres and yet ſtill teacheth, that in the congregations of his communion, there is a certain great, peculiar, and perſonall grace of God.
            He perſuadeth the vnlerned yf a manSo did Eunomius the Archeheretike perſuade his ſcolers alſo Auguſt. ad Quodnu
                     •
                  tdeum haereſ. 54 imbrace the priuatt and eſpecyall faith, of his members, that he (though he be not only vtterly voyde of good workes, but allſo drowned in all kynd of wickednes) muſt yett be well aſſured, he is in ſtate of grace, and that the Aungells ſhall one daye take him vp in their handes, and leade him ſtraight to heauen: That beyng preſerued by their protection, he ſhall not once hurt his foote againſt any ſtone, but ſtandeth highly in Gods fauour, yf he continewe to the end. This he

will haue his mēbers, to make ſo full and aſſured accompt of, that they muſt thinke there can be no greater ſynne or wickednes committed, then once to doubt neuer ſo litle therof. which perſuaſion is cōmon to all heretikes. For the Lutherans doo no leſſeVVhat the Lutherās, Svvī
                  ghans, A nabaptiſts and al other ſectes, of heretikes doo all a leeke promeſſe to their follovvers. carneſtly exact this of their followers, then do the Zwinglians and Anabaptistes of theirs: when in the meane tyme fyer and water do not more diſagree, then the doctrines of theſe men do one from an other: ſo as it cānot be, by any reaſon, but ſome of them are leekly, rather by the handes of diuells to be throwen into the bottomles pyt of hell▪ then that the aungells of heauen wil vouchfafe, to help them vp to heauen. VVho when they haue all a leeke, cutt them ſelues of voluntarely from the body of Chriſt, that the heauenly Aungells haue then nothing to doo with them, it is more certayn, then that it may be doubted of. Now therfore haue wee ſeen how Sathan aſſaulted Christ with the expreſſe word of God.
            And hath he not doon the ſame alſo by his lymmes & mēbers agaīſt the ſame Chriſt the ſonne of God? Did he not labour by the

expreſſe word of God, to ſhew that Christ was not only no prophett, but allſo worthy to dye? wee reade in the Goſpell, that when the Iewes heard the word of Chriſt, ſome ſayd,Ioan▪ 7. An other teſtimony vouched by the deuill out of holy ſcripture. [this is a ꝓphet] ſome others [this is Chriſt] yett were there not ſome emong them that ſayd? [What? Shall Chriſt come owt of Galilee? Doth not the ſcripture ſaye, Chriſt cometh of the ſeed of Dauid, and foorth of the Caſtle of Bethleem, where Dauid was?
            The Phariſeys allſo ſaid to Nicodemus: [Searche the ſcriptures, and ſee, that owt of Galilee ſhall aryſe no prophette.] Yett notIoan. 7. content therwith, by the ſcriptures, which they browght foorth to denye him to be a prophett, they cryed out farther ſaying: [VVeIoan. 19. haue a lawe, and by that lawe he owght to dye, becauſe he hath made himſelf the ſonne of God.]
            VVho will not be aſtonyed when he readeth theſe thinges? The membres of the diuell browght foorth the lawe, and the prophetts againſt the very auctor and lord of the lawe and the prophetts. And (as to them it ſeemed) proued by the expreſſe word of God, he was not only not a prophett, but one

worthy of death as a wicked tranſgreſſor of the lawe. So that if againſt Chriſt him ſelf, when he yett walked emong men, ther was ſo earneſt fyghting not only by the diuel him ſelf, but by his members allſo, and that with the very ſworde of the ſcriptures, what ſhall wee thinke may not be doon againſt vs ſelly men? Or what will not Sathan preſume, and not hope to cōpaſſe, which thought aſſuredly he could euen by the very ſcriptures teache that Chriſt not only was no prophett, but alſo worthy of death?
            Nowe therfor is this made playne, that the diuell feared not euen with the weapons of ſcripture to aſſault Christ the ſonne of God lyuing here on earth: and looke what ſence he drewe foorth therof, that would he haue to be takē for the expreſſe word of God.
            But what? did he not euen with the ſame tooles ſett on the Apoſtles? yes▪ and that very ſore. For what ells ſhewe theſe wordes ofSathan aſſalted the Apoſtles euen as he had befor aſſailed Chriſt him ſelf of S. Pawll? [Suche fauls Apostles, are ſubtyll workmen, trāsfiguring themſelues into the Apostles of Chriſt. And no marueill. For euen Sathan transfigurith him ſelf in to an aungell of light. It is not myche therfore if

his miniſters transforme them ſelues, in to the leeknes of the miniſters of Iuſtice.] How properly S. Pawll heer paynteth owt the fauls Apoſtles of his tyme? They woldyn no wyſe ſeeme to preache, ay other thing, then Chriſt and the Goſpell. But as the heretikes of our age woold pull from the Churche,The Crafty practis of the fauls Apoſtles in the primatiue Churche, renued at this day by the heretikes of our age▪ Galath 1. the Catholike doctryn, ſo woold they haue doon the name of the Goſpell from Pawlls preaching, and woold ſeeme to arrogat the ſame vnto them ſelues.
            Dooth not S. Pawll openly ſignifie this, whē he thus wryteth vnto the Galathians? [I marueyll you are ſo ſone caryed away from him which caullyd you vnto the grace of Chriſt, yn to an other Goſpell, which is but one, not diuers. Only ſome there be which trooble you, and woold turne the Goſpell of Chriſt.] VVhich place Iohn Chriſoſtom (the true and faythfull Interpreter of S. Pawll)Chryſoſt in cōmē tar. ibidē
                expownding ſaieth. Suche is the ſlaight of the diuell, not to laye open the ſnares wherin hee ſeekyth to cache and intangle men. For if they had ſayd, departe from Chriſt yee Galathians, they wold haue auoyded thē as wicked and corrupt deceauers: But now

ſuffring them as it were to remayne in their faith, and in the meane tyme couering their frawd with the name of the Goſpell, the vnderminers without any daunger with great bouldnes vndermined the houſe, whil by the ſpreding of theſe veyls, their right names wer couered. Sins therfor they termyd their fraud, the Goſpel, S. Pawl alſo ſtriueth againſt the name, etc. You ſee now howe euē at thatThe deceitfull pretē
                  ce of heretikes in al ages. tyme, as in this our age, ſome cloked their deceyt with the name of the Goſpell, and called their frawde, the Goſpel. That which they taught, and not which Pawll preached, they would haue to ſeeme the Goſpell, and with this honeſt pretēce, caſting a colour before men, they labored to crepe into their myndes: So doth Sathan to ſnare mē, alwayes vſe ſome ſhrowd, and doth not ſtreight waye (to vſe the: phraſe of the cōmō people) ſheweSathan vſeth to ſhrovvd him ſelfe vnder the name of the Goſpel, his hornes, but layeth the forthe name of holly ſcripture, of the word of God, of the Goſpell, that he may the more eaſely drawe men before they beware, in to his nettes. But it becomyth not faithful folcke by and by to be moued with ſuche, maſked Sprittes, nor if a man call his owne trechery the Goſpell,

ſtraight way for ſuche to repute it.2. Theſſ. 2.
            
            The ſame Pawll allſo remembryth writing vnto the Theſſaloniās, that there were ſome, which feared men by an Epiſtle ſent as it were from him, as though the day of the lord were euē then at hād, when yett by S. Pawll no ſuch thing had bene writtē. But where as he, in his former epiſtle to thē had thus written,1. Theſſ. 4. [VVe which lyue, which remayne to the comyng of our lord ſhal not come befor them which haue ſlept,] to thoſe his wordes they fastned that ſtraunge ſence, which he neuer mēt. So allſo euē whyle Pawll yet lyued, ſome were not affrayd to miſconſter his wordes. For thus S. Peter the Apoſtle writeth of2. Peter 3 Pawlls Epistles. [That ſome things therin be hard to be vnderſtanded, which vnlernydVnlerned and lightheadde perſons depraue the ſcriptures. and wauering perſons do depraue, as they doo allſo ſome other ſcriptures to their owne damnation.] If then whyle Pawll yet liued on the earth, there were ſome found which turned and miſconſtrued his wordes, what wonder is it if after ſo many ages past ſins his death, they haue been, and yet be handled in lyke ſorte?
            But what that was, which vnlernyd and

wauering perſons ſowght in Pawlls epistlesAuguſt. de fide & operibus Cap. 14. to peruert, S. Auguſtin teachith, in that his booke, which he intituled of faith and workes. For where Pawll had writtē, wee thinkeRom. 3. man to be iuſtified by fayth, without the workes of the lawe, ſome lewde and vnlernyd perſons (ſayth he) ſo tooke theſe wordes, that with a certayn wicked ſecuritee, and careleſnes, they caſt awaye both them ſelues and others, whyle they gathered heerby, thatThe hereſie of iuſtiſicaciō by faith only ſprāg euē vvhill the Apoſtels yet liued and vvas by them ſelues impugned. to obteyn Saluatiō only faith ſuffiſed: which thing (he ſayeth) was the cauſe, that the other Apostolicall Epistles of Peter, Iohn, Iames, and Iuda, are chieffly bent and directyd againſt that opiniō, ſo, as they very ſtrongly buyld and mayntayn the cōtrary. VVhich is, that faith without workes proffitteth nothing.
            
            
               As S. Pawll him ſelf alſo teacheth. VVho defyneth not euery faith wherby wee beleeue yn God, but that only to be the helthſome, and true euāgelical fayth, [which workythGalat. 5 by loue.] VVherby how litle or nothing that fayth auayleth which ſome thinke ſufficient to ſaluation, he ſo farre foorth ſhewyth, that hee ſayth: [If I haue neuer ſo1. Cor. 13
                  
myche fayth, ſo as I be able to remoue mountaynes owt of their places, and yet haue not charitee, I am nothing.] But wher this faith full charitee, worketh, ther no doubt is good life. For [the fulnes of the lawe is Charitee.]
               Rom. 13. Thus farre S. Augustyn.
            Behould I pray yow how owld this hereſie is which ſayth: Only faith is ſufficient to ſaluation. For it ſprang euen whill Pawll yet leeuyd, and was ſought to be prouyd and mayntened, euē by the expreſſe word of God, vtteryd by that his elect veſſell Pawll the Apostle, when yett this was neuer the mynde of S. Pawll, but as Saint Peter1. Pet. 3. writeth, [ſome vnlernyd and vnconſtant heades peruertyd the meanyng of his wordes.] And what (for Gods loue) dooth Sathan ells now allſo more earneſtly ſeeke by his members to beate into the eares and myndes of men, but that they ſhould hold for ſuertye, that only fayth ſuffiſeth both to iuſtification, and to ſaluacion?
            If Peter then at that tyme complaynyd of the peruertyng of Pawl his wordes, How myche more would he now complayne, when this moſt pestilent doctrine, is with ſyche

vehemencye ſett foorth, when it is obtruded to the eares and eyes of men, with theſe moſt pernicious wordes?
            That the Goſpell may not ſuffer to heareAmoſt peſtilent doctrine of proteſtants. any preaching of good workes. That the ſheepe of Chriſt quakyth, when he hearyth them namyd of the preacher. That faythe may not abyde any good workes to ſtand nere her: That they which are coueryd, as it were with good workes, can hardly enter into heauen, for that workes following after iuſtification are vncleane. Luther defendeth this propoſition ſtoutely againſt Pope Leo Art 31. & 32. Vide Roffen. Yea and the beſt good worke is very ſynne. That they are peſtylent teachers, and that it is a Roote budding nowght but Gawll, owt of the newe Teſtament to vexe conſciences with workes, and that there can not be together in the Churche, a teacher of fayth and of workes?
            This ſo vnpure and wicked doctrine, yf Peter ſhould heare cloked with the name of the Goſpel, yf Pawl ſhould heare theſe wicked men vawnt them ſelues that they had drawen this doctryne owt of his Epistles, wherin it appearyth he did ſo carefully recommend vnto vs good workes, and ſtirre

vp all faithfull mē, to vſe and embrace them, what thinke wee, would they bothe, ſaye, and doo therunto?
            But herofinowgh. For in this place wee mynded no more, but to ſhewe that euen in the Apoſtles tyme, allſo, ther wanted not ſome, which ſhrowded their lewde deceytes vnder the name of the Ghoſpell, and which of the very wordes of S. Pawll, by peruerting the ſenſe therof fearyd not to profeſſe, and ſett forward a contrary doctrine. So that if first againſt Chriſt, the very auctor of the ſcriptures, Sathan feared not to bring the ſcriptures, and agaīſt Pawl him ſelf, to bring by his members, Pawll his owne wordes wreſtyd into a reprobat ſenſe, who can myche merueil if in thies latter dayes, he hathwith more impudence, attemptyd the ſame?
            Tertullian is a very owld writer not lōgTertulliā. lyued in the yere of our lorde. 230. after the Apostles tyme. He wrote a notable booke, of preſcriptions againſt heretikes, wherin he ſhewyth that this was a great word in their mouthe. [Seeke and yee ſhall fynd, Searche the Scriptures.] And therin he exhorteth the faythfull, that they would yet make ſome end of their ſeeking, and

therwith all preferryth fayth, before trauail in the ſcriptures. In the end he vſeth theſe wordes.
            
               Of the ſcriptures doo heretikes taulk veryTertulliā. i preſcrip. Cap. 15. myche. To the ſcriptures they counſell vs, as though they could not otherwiſe geue aduyſe touching matters of fayth, but owt of the lettres and wordes of faith. Now therfore come wee to the purpoſe. For to this end, did we direct and bend the entree of our taulke, that euen here, wee may Ioyne vpon that poynt, wher vnto our aduerſaryes ſo earneſtly call vs. Scripture they pretend, and with this their bowld countenaunce, they moue ſome, very muche. But in the very conflict they wery the ſtrong, they take the weake, and the indifferent they ſend awaye with ſcruple of mynd.
            
            Then by and by he addeth, what is to beThe ende of diſputīg▪ vvith heretikes. done to them, whē they ſhrowd them ſelues vnder the ſcriptures. Thus (ſayth he) do wee at the firſt encownter ſtoppe them, that in dede they are not to be admitted, to any diſputatiō at all of the ſcriptures. That if their force lie in ſcripture, we muſt knowe howe they come by it. Therefore muſt wee ſee to

whom of right apperteyneth the poſſeſsion of the ſcriptures, to the end, he be not allowed therunto to whom in no ſorte it belongeth. And leſt any ſhould thinke he wrote thus as hauing miſtruſt in his cauſe he foorthwith goeth forward in this ſort.
            
               This would I not haue browght foorth, for geuing ſuſpicion of diffidence, or of deſier to haue any other the ſtate of the cauſe, if the caſe ſtood not ſo, as heerin we owght obedienceTit. 3. Three cauſes vvhy heretikes ought not to be diſputed vvith by ſcriptures to the Apoſtle▪ who forbiddeth to enter into queſtions, or to lend our eares to newe and ſtraunge voyces. For an heretike (ſayeth the Apoſtle) muſt be taulked with after one Reprehenſion, not after diſputation. For in this did the Apostle forbid diſputation, in that he apoynted an heretike to be rebuked, and in that reſpect only to be taulked with, and that but once becauſe he isThe. 1. not to be eſteemed as a Chriſtiā. Nor ſhould be rebuked after the manner of a Chriſtian,1. Tim▪ 6 Matth. 18. once or twyſe, or by teſtimony of ij. or iij. witneſſes, but is a man therfore and in that reſpect to be rebuked, for that he is ſuche a perſon, as owght not to be diſputed with. AndThe: 2. becauſe allſo conference of ſcriptures with

ſuche a one profitteth nothing, but only ſtirrethThe. 3. So heretikes reiecte novve a dayes ſome the Machabees, ſome S. Iames Epiſtle etc. choler, and troubleth the brayne.
            
            
               Agayne this hereſie admitteth not ſome ſcriptures, and if it allowe ſome, yet doth it peruert the ſame by ſome addition, or detraction, to the defending of that it would proue, or yf it receyue ſome ſcriptures, yet will it not receyue them full, and whol. And if it doo, yet will it turne them by inuēting ſome newe and contrary expoſition. No leſſe ouerthwarteth the Truthe a baſtarde Gloſe, then a corrupted text. Variable preiudices muſt nedes refuſe to acknowledge thoſe things wherby they are ouerthrowen. To thoſe things they leane, which either faulſly they haue patched together, or haue bene occaſioned of ambiguous wordes, and doubtfull texts.
            
            
               VVhat ſhalt thow profit, thowe that art beſt excerſiſed in the ſcriptures, when, what ſo euer thow defendyst he ſhall denye, and what ſo euer thow denyest, he ſhall defend? Thow loſeſt but thy voyce in contending with him, and gainest nowght but vnquyetnes of mynd, in hearing his blaſphemyes.
            
            
               The partye (if any ſuche be) for whos ſake

thow entreſt into diſputation by the ſcriptures, to the end thow mayest confirme him in the trowthe hāging yet doubtfull, is leeke inowgh to faull deeper in to hereſies, when he ſhall ſee thow haſt profitted nothing, the matter remayning in euē termes of defence, and denyall. Surely of this arguing to and fro, he ſhall departe more vncertayn then he was before, not knowing whether of the two is the hereſie. But this argument may they alſo agayn retourne vnto vs. For it is neceſsary for them allſo to ſaye, that by vs the ſcripture is falſefyed, that wee do wrongely expounde them, and they therefore will nedes take vpō them, to defend the trowth.
            
            
               VVe muſt not therfore appeale to the ſcriptures, wherin the victory is none at all, or ells vncertayn, or not very manifest. For albeit we ſuppoſed the conference of ſcriptures ſhould not ſo faull owt (betwene Catholikes and heretikes) that it ſhould ſet vp both ſydes a leeke, yet the order of thinges required, that this pointe, ſhould first be propownded, which now lyeth only inAf
                        •
                     er this very ſorte diſcourſeth S. Auguſt. lib▪ de vtilit. cred cap. 14. queſtion. As, to whom the very fayth belongeth? whoſe be the ſcriptures? frō whom,
               
by whom, when, and to what teachers that doctrine was deliuered wherby wee are made Chriſtians?
            After the ſame ſorte writeth Clemens Alexandrinus, one that liued aboute thatClemens Alexādrin' ageinſt heretikes. time alſo. If (ſayth he) they which followe hereſies dare at any time vſe the ſcriptures, firſt they will neuer vſe them all, nor wholle, nor as the very body and text of the ſcripture ſpeaketh, but chooſing foorth thoſe things which are ambiguous and doubtfull, they turne them into their owne priuat opinion gathering here and ther a fewe wordes as it were flowers, and not conſidering what is ſignified by them, but only abuſing the bare and naked termes. In euery word almost which they bring foorth, you ſhal fynd them ſtickyng in the only names and termes, and quyte ſwaruyng frō the ſignificatiō therof.
            
            VVhat could be written better, or what more aptly to the matter now in hand, then that which we fynd writtē by that moſt lernyd mā Tertulliā? He ſheweth vs that the vſage of heretikes was to talke mych of the ſcripture, to perſuade by ſcripture, and to holde foorth the ſcripture. But in the meane

tyme, he admoniſsheth vs, to ſtop them at that ſtep, and that they bee not admitted to any diſputation of the ſcriptures, for that they haue no intereſt, or poſſeſsion theryn, ſins the Catholikes do preſcribe in the poſſeſsion therof.
            He allſo bringeth for proofe herof, the teſtimony of S. Pawll who forbiddeth vs to waſt tyme in cōtending with heretikes. For that, allwayes debate breedyth debate, and of argumēt groweth argumēt: ſo as ther is lyke to be no end of brauling and cōtētiō, wher a mā hopeth to ouercome obſtinat perſons by diſputatiō. For neither wāt they wordes at any tyme, and their frowardneſſe geueth thē courage neuer to be tyered with cōtention. So as it is farre better to auoyde all occaſiōs of cōtending with them (which is the thing they ſeeke) and to refrayne brawlyng with them by diſputation, for ſo myche as therby is that owld prouerb often verefyed: By to myche altercation the trowth is lost.
            But ſee whether thoſe wordes written by Tertullian that this hereſie admitteth not ſome ſcriptures, and ſo foorth as before, be not very truly ſpoken of the heretikes of

our tyme? The first fownder wher of did heThe levvd practys of the ovvld herētike, Marcion renved in our dayes by Martin Luther In lib. de Chriſt. libert. & in Art ad Leonē 10 Vide Reg. Angl. de ſacram cō-Lutherū
                not (I praye you) opēly vſe the ſame hatchet to cut of the ſcriptures which were contrary to his purpoſe, which Tertullian ſayth, Marciō the heretike did at that time vſe?
            He taught only fayth to ſuffiſe both to our ſaluation, and iustification. And ſeing that this his doctrine could not ſtand, if the canonicall Epistle of Saint Iames remayned in forſe, ſtraight waye taking his hatchet in his hand, he cut the ſame of from his booke, ſaying: This ſhall haue no place in my Bibles. Loe the imperious auctoritee of the man. He caullyth them his Bibles, wherby he ſhewyth they haue no fellowſhip with the Bibles of the Catholyke Churche.
            Hee tawght alſo prayers and ſacrifice for the dead to be ſuperfluous, and herunto ſeing that parte of the ſcriptures, to be directly contrary, which for the more parte all the owld catholyke writers bring foorth of the Machabees, he katcheth ageyne his hatchet and cutetth of alſo that booke.
            He tawght farther that all things came to paſſe by a certayne abſolute neceſsitee, and that wee owght to be certayn, and ſure of

grace, and ſaluation. Againſt this his opinion maketh that which is written in the booke of wiſedom, and in Eccleſiasticus. He therfore with his hatchet cutt of alſo theſe bookes. So wee ſee that thoſe ſcriptures which ſerued not his purpoſe, he receiued not, but taking his hatchet in hand, cut them out of his Bibles.
            Nowe thoſe ſcriptures which he did receyue and allowe, did he not by his additiōs, and detractions peruert them to his owne priuat purpoſes, making of good Latyne, lewd high Dutche? VVhich is layd to his charge not only by the Catholikes, but allſo by theBy the Bre thern of Zurich ſectaryes them ſelues. And yf he did receyue any ſcriptures whole and ſound, did he not deuiſe therunto ſtrange or rather mere contrary expoſitions? which thing we allſo ſee doon by the rest of the heretikes, who be no leſſe diuers among them ſelues, then contrary to the catholikes in expounding the ſcriptures: which thing to haue lykewyſe been doon by the heretikes of his tyme Tertullian remembreth.
            
               From their owne rules (ſayth he) them ſeluesIn praeſcript. haeret. do varye: whileſt euery of them do pype

after his owne volūtary, thoſe things which he hath receiued: euen as he that firſt deliuered thē, framed the ſame by his owne fancye. VVith ſuch therfore as receiue no ſcriptures, but ſuche as they leeke, and thoſe which they doo receyue, wreaſt, by addition and detraction to their owne purpoſe, or ells deuyſe therunto newe and ſtraunge expoſitions, Tertullian willeth vs in no wyſe to enter into diſputation of the ſcriptures: but commaundeth them to be ſett ouer to the Eccleſiaſticall tradition.
            VVhich his mynde euē Luther him ſelf ſemeth to allowe when he hath to do with ſacramētaries and Anabaptiſtes. But you ſhal heare his owne wordes. he ſayeth:
            VVee haue read what the holy fathers didMar. Luther vppō the. 28. pſalme in the councell of Nice: ſo ſone as they heard the hereſie of Arius read, they hiſſed it owt with one voyce, and would not voucheſaſe to heare them that preſented it, nor ſuffer them to defend it, but preſently condemned them withowt any diſputation, as manifeſt blaſphemers. Moyſes allſo in his lawe, commaundedLeuit. 24. that ſuche falſe teachers ſhould be ſtoned to death. Euen ſo in this caſe ther is no diſputatiō to be vſed, but ſuche manifeſt blaſphemers

are to be condemned withowt pleading their cauſe.
            As Pawle allſo commaundeth, in the thirdTit. 3. chapiter of his Epiſtle to Titus that an heretike ſhould be auoyded after one or two warnings. He allſo forbiddeth to Timothee all2. Tim. 2. contentions and diſputations, as things which do nothing ells but trouble the hearers. For ſuche common articles of all Chriſtendom be now ſufficiently heard, declared, and concluded, by the writings and generall cōfeſsion of all Chriſtendom. They are confirmed by many miracles ſealed vp with myche bloud of many martyres, defended by the bookes of al lerned men, and not now needing any mans conning or deuiſe to enlarge them.
            Yet is it not in all pointes trewe that this hyperbolicall doctour reporteth, the holy fathers to haue done in that Councell of Nice, as though they had condemned Arrius vnheard, or his cauſe vnexamined. For albeit there be extant in Socrates and Nicephorus an epistle of the coūcell of Nice to the churche of Alexandria, and to them which were in Egipt, Libia, and Pētapolis, in which they wryte: that they would not indure ſo mucheli. 1. ca. 9. li. 8. cap. 14. as to heare the wicked opinion of Arrius,

the madnes of his mynd, or his blaſphemous wordes: yet is it manifeſt ynough by the epiſtle of Conſtātyne the Emperour, which euen there followeth fast after, that his doctrine was dilligently viewed and conſidered. ForThe vvor des of Cō
                  ſtantin the Empour tooching the condēnaciō of the Arrian hereſie. the Emperour vſeth theſe wordes: All his ſayings and writinges were diligently examined which by their dowbtfulnes or diſagreement ſeemed to brede any pretence or colour.
            
            If all thinges were ſo diligently examined, how was it then, that Arrius was not heard? VVherfore that the fathers write, they would not voucheſafe ſo myche as to heare his blaſphemous wordes, may be more rightly wnderſtanded in this ſence, that after his doctrine was once thoroughly examined, and yet he proceded in redoubling his blaſphemous talke, the fathers would not then voucheſafe to heare him any more, but ſtrake him with the ſentence of curſe and condemnation.
            For, that he was heard, Socrates plainly ſhewyth when in the ſame place he writeth that the Emperour ſignified to the people ofSocrates lib. 1. aap. Alexandria, the determination of the faith

not to haue been ſimply or raſhly made, but with great examination and deliberation to haue been ſet foorth. Not that ſome thinges only were ſpoken, and ſome thinges past in ſilence, but that what ſo euer was needfull to be ſet foorth for the confirmation of the doctryne, were layde open: and that it was not barely determined, but firſt exactly enquired of, and what ſo euer might geue occaſiō of diſſenciō or debate were ſo reiected, that nothing cowld be ſayd against them. Therfore (ſayth he) the Emperour callethThe agreīg ſentēce of Biſſhops in general covvncel is the ſentence of Godd. this concord and agreing ſentence of the Biſshopps in that Synode, the ſentence of God: and yeldeth thankes to the holy Ghoſt for ſo great concord and vnite of mynde among ſo many fathers.
            Sozomenus allſo, when he telleth vs that the Biſſhops there dilligētly aſſembling thē
               ſelues callyd foorth Arrius, and aduiſedlyli. 2. ca. 19. ſearched his propoſitions: (For they were very ware not to geeue an headlōg or raſhe ſentence on either part) dooth ſufficiently declare vnto vs, that Arrius was heard: but in dede after his cauſe was thorowghly examined, it is leekly hee was not thē ſuffred to

prate or talke any more.
            But this in the meane tyme is very true, that as heretikes allwayes prouoked to diſputacionThe duty of Catholikes vvhē herely ſpringeth vp. and browght yn newe faythes, ſo the Catholykes lightly, auoyded argumētes, and gladly repoſed them ſelues in the faith of their fathers, as among the writers of the Eccleſiasticall ſtorie, lib. 5. cap. 10. Socrates, lib. 5. cap. 12. Sozomenus, lib. 2. de perſe. Victor, and lib. 12. cap. 15. Nicephorus, wee may plainly ſee. Looke in what matter ſo euer the decree of a councell had once takē order, that would the catholikes neuer permyt to be browght agayn in queſtion.
            Athanaſius writeth that Germinius, Auxentius, Valens, Vrſacius, Demophilus and Gaius, exhibited a certayn paper of their confeſsion which they would haue had to be preferred before all the auncient councells. But what anſwer therūto made the Catholike fathers aſſembled at Arimino? VVeIn epiſt: de ſynodis Arimini & Seleuciae congregatis. (ſaid they) aſſembled our ſelues hither not becauſe wee lacked a fayth (for that wee haue bothe pure and ſownde) but to confound thē which gayneſaye the trouth, and attempt newe thinges. Yf therfore you now beginning as it were to beleue, haue thus

written, you are not to be accompted as any of the clergy, but ſuche as now beginne to learne the first principles of the faith. And if you came hither, with that minde, as we did, then let vs all agree, let vs with curſe condēne theſe hereſies, and hold fast that we haue receiued of our fathers, to the end we may cut of Vnderſtande of this Arriā hereſy. all occaſiōs hereafter of keping councels, ſince the fathers once already aſſembled in the coūcell of Nice haue by ſure eſtabliſhemēt and ſound determinatiō preuentyd all farder queſtions,
            
            It ſeemed an abſurd thing to thoſe fathers that any newe fayth, or confeſsion of faith ſhould then be brought foorth, and that callyd back into queſtiō, which they had receiued of their fathers: for which cauſe alſo in the Epistle which they wrote to Conſtantius the Emperour he reporteth them to haue vſed theſe wordes.
            
               VVe humbly beſeeche your clemency withNieephorus lib. 9. cap. 14. benigne eares and fauorable countenaunce, to behould our imbaſſadors: and that you admitte not to the reproche of the dead, any nouelty, but ſuffer vs to remayne in the rules and decrees of our forefathers, whō we affirme

to haue doō althinges, with great wiſedō, foreſight and direction of the holy Ghoſt. Soothely theſe newe things which theſe men, attempt, do make the beleeuers to faynte in belefe, and do ſtirre vnbeleuers to contēpt of belefe. VVhat would theſe fathers do if they ſawe now allmoſt euery Citye of Germany bring foorth their ſeuerall faith or cōfeſſion therof: and cōtēd to haue them allowed, reiecting the faith of the fathers, as though they were no Chriſtians? Can any thing be imagined more abſurd or more wicked? As though forſooth our fathers were ignorāt of the Chriſtiā fayth, and now at the laſt Chriſt were to be knowen vnto vs by the meanes of ſome fewe ſuch as be in deed traytors vnto Chriſt? VVherfore the opinion of Luther in this pointe is to be commēded, to witt, that ſuche men are not to be heard, but meete to be condēned without pleading their cauſe.
            Yet looke what lawe he gaue to the Sacramentaries and Anabaptistes, the ſame must him ſelf ſtand vnto: Namely ſynce him ſelf is he, whom thoſe men profeſſe them ſelues to followe as their guyde and capitayne, as the first auctor of this their departure

frō the Churche, and father of ſo many ſectes as are now hard to bee nombred: for lookeAuguſtinus de Agone chriſtiano. cap 29. what S. Augustin writeth to haue happened vnto Donatus, that as he ſought to deuyde Chriſt, ſo was him ſelf dayly deuyded in peecemeles, by his diſciples, the very ſame doo wee now allſo ſee happened vnto Luther.
            
            Hee laboured to deuyde the Churche being Chriſtes myſticall body. And is not he him ſelf leek wyſe deuided oſ his followers by dayly hacking and mangling? But to ſaye nothing of the ſacramentaryes, Anabaptistes and Campanes (whom perhapps Luther will denye to apperteyne to him,) are not Melancthon, Brentius, Oſiander and Illyricus profeſſed Lutherans? But what ſpitefull enmitye is ther emong them? what bitter diſſenſions in matters of weyght?
            Doo wee not heare Melancthō complayneThe enmitie and diſſenſion vvhich is bevveen the heretikes thē ſelues. that where hee wrote the confeſsion of Augſpurg, they now goo about to take from him the name and honour therof? For the Illyricans doo gredely challenge that to them ſelues, and labour to exclude from the ſame the Melācthoniſts with their maiſter: whom as in diuers other things they ſhewe to haue

gone frō the mynd of his maiſter Luther, ſo doo they lowdly charge him in the doctryn of the ſacrament to haue ioyned him ſelf to Caluin his lore. Of which thing Caluin him ſelf alſo dooth not a lytle glory.
            Now yn that matter which they will haue to bee the ſumme of the Goſpell, which is oſ Iuſtification, Lord, how ſore MelancthonSee the Apologie of Frid. Staphylus. par. 3. and Brētius diſſent the one from the other, while Brentius defendeth Oſianders opinion, which the Melancthoniſtes thinke moſt execrable? So amōg the diſciples of Luther there is litle agreement of the principal doctrines of our religion, wherof very contenciouſly they quarrell emong them ſelues, and be as it were heretikes one to an other: ſo as they neede not to be better blaſoned then them ſelues blaſone one an other.By Luther his ovvn ſentence ther muſt no diſputacions be heclde vvith heretikes.
            
            VVherfore of right Luther muſt ſuffer by the lawe which him ſelf gaue to others, that there be no diſputation allowed to the followers of his doctrine, but that ſo ſone as it apperith they be of that ſort, they bee preſently cōdemned vnheard. For it is no more trewe of the Zuinglians, then of the Lutherans, which is ſayd by the diſciples of Luther

that they are to be reſtrayned not by writing, but by the Mace and power of the magistrate: eſpecially ſynce neither theſeThe heretikes of this age bring almoſt nothing but that vvhich vvas a M▪ yeres paſt condemned for hereſy. bringe almost any thing, that was not more then a thouſand yeres paſt condemned for hereſie.
            But wee may ſeeme to haue wandered ſomwhat from our purpoſe. VVherfore let vs returne to the matter frō whence wee haue by occaſion a litle declyned. VVee haue ſhewyd you before, that euē at that tyme when that moſt auncient doctor Tertullian flooriſshed, heretikes vſed to vaūt, to talke, and to holde foorth before them the ſcriptures, and that Tertullian doth vtterly forbid all diſputation with them, or triall of the controuerſies to be referred to the ſcriptures, but would haue thē putt ouer to the tradition of the Churche.
            But dooth not S. Cyprian allſo complayne of the deceyts of the diuell, who transfigurethDe ſimplicitate prae latorum him ſelf as it were in to an aungell of light, and ſuborneth his miniſters leeke vnto the miniſters of iuſtice teaching night for daye, damnation for ſaluation, deſperation vnder the veyll of hoape, infidellite

vnder pretence of fayth, and finally Antechriſt, vnder the name of Chriſt, that while they falſly report thinges not all together vnleekly, they may by their ſubteltie chaſe and driue awaye the very truth it ſelf?
            Nothing could be ſayd more trewly thenCyrillus Epiſt 28. Note vvherein hereſy cō
                  ſiſteth. that which wee fynd to be written by Cyrill: All heretikes gather the occaſions of their errour owt of the ſcripture inſpired by God corrupting thoſe thinges by their owne malice, which by the holy Ghoſt were well geuen, and vttered, and ſo kendling vpon their owne heddes an vnquenchable fier.
            
            
               S. Augustin allſo ſayeth that hereſies andAuguſtinus tract. 18. in 10. peruers doctrine intangling and throwing downe headlong the ſowles of men in to h
                     •••
                   cometh of none other grownd, but whē thinges well written in the ſcriptures, are not well vnderſtanded and when that which is not well vnderstāded, is raſhely and bouldly vtteryd for a truth.
            
            And therfore S. Ambroſe did thinkeAmbroſi in cap. 3. ad Titum good in this ſort to deſcribe heretikes: Heretikes (ſayth he) are they which by the very wordes of the lawe do impugne the lawe: for they adde vnto the wordes of the lawe

their owne ſence and vnderſtanding, that by the authorite of the lawe they may ſett foorth the ſhrowdnes and malice of their owne mynd. For wickedness knowing authorite to weygh muche, worketh her ſnares vnder the name therof, to the end that ſythens an yll thing by it ſelf can not be acceptable, it may be commended to the world vnder the name of a good thing.
            
            VVhen they which in the Councell of Carthage, were by Agrippinus aſſembled, ſayd, it was no trewe baptiſme which wasAuguſtde baptiſ contra do natiſtas lib. 5. ca. 2. geuen by Schiſmatikes and heretikes, did they not ſaye, they ſo found it in the holy ſcriptures, and ſeemed to cōfirme that their ſentence by the expreſſe word of God? This councell yet afterward by the auctoritte of the Churche was diſanulled.
            But let vs heare Vincentius LirinenſisVincētius Lyren. in lib. aduerſus hereſes. talke of that matter: So great excellency of witte (ſayth he) was in thoſe fathers, ſuche flowing vaynes of eloquence, ſuche a number of them that affirmed it, ſo great leeklyhood of truthe in ſo many texts of the ſcripture, (but after a newe and yll ſort vnderſtanded) that me thinke all their great agreement

conſpiring in one, could neuer haue been ouerthrowen, yf only the profeſsion of nouelty, which was the only cauſe of all that great ſtyrre, ſo much then mayntayned, defended and extolled, had not diſcredyted the whole matter. They therfore were deſtitute not of textes, and authoritees of ſcripture, but of the trewe vnderſtanding of them. VVherfore S. Hilary doth very wellHilariu
                     •
                   in lib. ad Cōſtantiquem ipſe ei obtulit. warne vs.
            
               Remember (ſayth he) that ther is no heretike, but faulſly affirmeth that all the blaſphemyes he vttereth are warrantyd by the auctoritee of ſcripture. For hereof Marcion,Marcion. when he readeth the word of God vnderstandeth it not. Hereof Photinus couldPhotinus not fynd by his doctrine Ieſus Chriſt to be a man: Herof Sabellius when he could not vnderſtandSabellius. this text: My father and I be all one: could not fynd God the father, nor God the ſonne: Herof Montanus by his maddeMōtanus. weemen went about to maynteyn a newe holy Ghoſt. Herof Maniche and Marcion hatedManiche the lawe becauſe they found it written: the letter kylleth, and the Prince of the world is the diuell. They vtter all the ſcriptures

without ſence, and pretend fayth withowt faith. For the ſcriptures conſist not in reading, but in vnderſtanding, not in thwarting, but in charitable conſent, and vnitee.
            
            VVhom S. Hierom following in his bookeHieron. contra Luciferianos & in ep iſ. ad Gal. againſt the Luciferians, ſayeth: Let not heretikes flatter them ſelues if they ſeeme to fynd ſomwhat in ſome chapiters of the ſcripture, which they thinke cōfirmeth their hereſies: ſince the diuell him ſelf hath allſo alleaged places owt of the ſcripture: and the ſcriptures cōſist not in reading, but in vnderſtā
                  ding. In leeke ſort wryteth allſo AthanaſiusIn orat. contra Arrianos. of the Arriās. If (ſayth he) mē reading ſome goodwordes of the holy ſcripture written in theſe fellowes bookes, will therfore by and by take blaſphemies for bleſsinges, it will allſo come to paſſe that whē they ſee Iues of this our tyme diligētly to read the lawe, and the prophetes, they will alſo with the Iues denye Chriſt. Perhapps alſo hearing the Maniches vouche certayne places of the Goſpells, they will with them denye the lawe and the prophetes. But if throwgh ignoraūce they do ſo boyll, and babble, let them learne out of the ſcriptures how the diuell him ſelf the inuentour

and deuiſer of hereſies, for feare of beyng bewrayed by his ſtrong ayer, vſurpeth allſo thies wordes of the ſcripture, to the end that ſhrowded therin, hee may deceyue the ſimple, ſo infectyd with his poyſon. For ſo deceyued he Eue: ſo allſo lead he other heretikes into error, and euen ſo dooth he now perſuade Arrius, that, as it were vnder colour of talking leeke an aduerſary against hereſies, he might the better deceyue him in foyſting in his owne.
            
            Chryſostom allſo following AthanaſiusChrysoſ. in ſermo ne aduer ſus hereticos. To. 3. 
               Open o Arrius (ſayth he) the ſepulchre of thy throte filled with dead wordes for thou haſt not yet that liuyng and quickening word, which thow ſeekest to frame to the mayntenaūce of thy reaſons: but he ſo ſoone as he is callyd, maketh the entree of his talke with ſcriptures. But thow that art the faythfull, fear not when thow heareſt him bring in ſcripture, for euen the diuell him ſelf when he came to Chriſt and tempted him, bourded him with ſcripture ſaying: IfMath. 4. Pſal. 90 thow be the ſonne of God throwe thy ſelf downe, for it is written, he hath geuen commaundement to his Aungells that they ſhal

keepe thee in all thy wayes, and ſhall hould thee vp with their handes.
            
            And it is well knowen that ArriusArrius produced xl. texts of the ſcripture to mayntein his hereſye. browght foorth fowrty places of the ſcripture to proue that the ſonne was not of one ſubſtance with the father. And what did he and his followers crake euer of, but of the ſcriptures, the Goſpell, and the expreſſe word of God? To the ſcriptures he appealed and would not otherwyſe be dealt with, but only with the ſcriptures.
            Maximinus when hee ſhould enter inAuguſt li. 1 contra Maximinum. to diſputation with S. Augustin preſcribed this lawe vnto him that he ſhould of neceſſite yeld to what ſo euer he ſhould bring out of the ſcriptures. For thus he ſayth.
            Thoſe wordes which are takē out of the ſcripture faull not to vs by chaūce, ſynce the lord him ſelf hath thus warned vs ſaying: in vayne do they worſhip me teaching the preceptesMatth. 18. and commaundements of men.
            S. Augustin allſo writeth euen the leeke of the Donatistes: As the diuell (ſayth he) againſt the very lawemaker, browght owt the very wordes of the lawe, ſo ye by the wordes of the lawe accuſe the men ye knowe

not, and withſtād the promiſſes of God which are geuen by the very wordes of the lawe.
            
            And a lytle after. You ſpeake (ſayth he) the wordes of the lawe, but againſt whom you ſpeake them youe marke not: No more did the diuell when he vtteryd the wordes of the lawe, knowe him to whō he ſpake them. He would haue throwen downe our head which was aſcending vpward, but ye would contract to one lytle part, the body of that head, which is diſperſed throwgh the whole earth.
            
            
               In leeke ſort alſo dealt Macedonius asMacedonius. may be gathered by the ſermon which Gregorie Nazeanzen wrote of the holy Ghost. And ſo played Neſtorius: for he thowght heNeſtorius was able by the expreſſe word of God, to ſhewe that Mary the moother of Iheſu was deliuered but of a bare man, becauſe in the Canonicall ſcriptures ſhee was ſometymes callyd the moother of Iheſu, but neuer the mother of God.
            Leekwyſe Eutiches, whē he denyed ij. naturesEutiches to be in Chriſt, ſeemed therin to leane to the expreſſe woord of God, and aſked of the Catholykes. In what ſcripture thoſe ij. natures

appeared: I haue not learnyd owt of the
               Concil. Chalde. Act 1. fol 776. In qua ſcriptura iacent duae naturae? 
               holy ſcriptures any ſuche ii. natures: And of ſuche thinges muſt wee make ſearche only in the holy ſcriptures, which are of more force then the doctrines and expoſitions of the fathers.
            
            But what needyth in a manifest thing to vſe moe wordes? when nothing can beAuguſt. more truly ſayd, then is written by S. Auguſtine. Errour could not ſpring cloked vnder the name of Chriſt, but of the ſcriptures not well vnderſtanded: Neither dare the diuell attempt any other waye, but by the diuine ſcriptures as wee reade in Origē. VVho whē he had brought foorth the diuell alleaging thoſe wordes of the Pſalme: [They ſhall hould the vp with their handes, &c.Pſal. 90
            
            
               How comith it to paſſe Sathan (ſayth he)Origen. Hom. 31. in Luca. that thow knoweſt thies thinges to be written? haſt thou read the prophetes? or knoweſt thow the ſcriptures? though thow hould thy peace I will anſwer for the: thou haſt read them, not that, by the reading of holy things thy ſelf wouldeſt become better, but that by the bare letter thow mightest kyll the frēdes therof. Thow knoweſt that yf thowe ſhouldeſt

ſpeake out of any other bookes, thow coul deſt not deceyue, neither could thy allegations haue any authoritee. So did Marcion read the ſcriptures, as did the diuel, ſo Baſilides, ſo Valentinus, that with the diuel theyMath. 4. might ſaye vnto our ſauiour, it is writtē etc. Yf any tyme therefore thou here teſtimonyes browght owt of the ſcripture, take hede thou do not by and by repoſe thy ſelf on the ſpeaker, but cōſider him well what he is, of what mind and diſpoſitiō: leſt happely he faine him ſelf holy, and be not ſo in dede, and leſt the woulſe infectyd with the poyſon of hereſy, lye ſhrowdyd vnder a ſhippes ſkin, or leſt the diuel ſpeake ſcripture out of him.
            
            This admonition of Origen is ſo depely to be layd vp in our mynd that at no tyme it go owt therof, that when wee heare one bring foorth the ſcriptures, or glory of the expreſſe word of God, wee do not by and by beleaue euery ſuche kynd of ſprite. Be the Lutherans only they in this our age (trowe yee?) which ſo confidently beate our eares with their continuall boaſting of the word of God? Doo not the Sacramentaries with as great or greater aſſurednes arrogat the ſame vnto

themſelues? VVherunto doth Caluin appeale but vnto the ſcriptures, when he hath to do with the Lutherans? VVhat can he beare more vnpacyently then when both by the Christians and Lutherans he ſeeth obiected against him the auctoritee of the fathers and Councels?
            VVhen the Magdeburgenſes wrote, wee are coōmawnded from God to heare the ſonne of God, Caluin anſvereth them in this ſort.
            Maliciouſly, and wickedly doo they obiect to vs the auctoritee of Chriſt, as thoughCaluin. our mynd were one iote to declyne from his pure and ſyncere doctryne, whoo haue allwayes ſhewyd our ſelues in very deed with no leſſe reuerence to receiue, what ſo euer hath iſſued out of the diuyne mowth of the lord, then they yn wordes doo boaſt on their part. Lett therfore the ſonne of God be vnto vs without all cōtrouerſy the chieff, moſt perfytt, and only maiſter: in whoſe doctrine it may not bee laufull to alter one worde or ſillable. But the obedyēce of the fayth dooth not lett but that wee may bee attentiue to the ſownd vnderſtanding of his wordes.
            Loo as wicked and blaſphemous as Caluin

is, yet may he indure nothing worſe then to be charged that he geueth not eare to the ſonne of God, or declyneth any thing frō his pure and ſyncere doctrine. But what? Do the Anabaptistes with any leſſe courage ſtande alſo vpon that poynt? No truly. For beholde howe one of them (as we haue read) talked vnto the heauēly father in this ſort?The vvor des of an Anabap. Lutheralſo ſayth. I am ſure, my doctrine is frō heauen In principio lib cō tra Reg. Henr.
            
            Certainly I can not herin be deceiued. Thy word o heauenly father haue I beleued: that receyued I of the holy Ghoſt, as the ſure word of truth: And a litle after: I knowe aſſuredly (ſayd he) that this my doctrine which is the word of God in the daye of vpright iudgemēt ſhall not only iudge lordes, kinges, and the whole world, but allſo the Angells them ſelues.
            Doth not this honeſt man thinke him ſelfe as ſure that his doctrine is the expreſſe woord of God as Luther or Caluin? and yett for all that, both his, Luthers, and Caluines, are in deed the expreſſe worde of the diuell. But whereto in the end cometh this geare? Strawnge and wonderfull it is. For lo: whyle in this ſort, euery ſect ſeeketh to vſurpe vnto it ſelf alone the word of God, and the true vnderſtanding therof, there is ſprong

vp a certayne newe kind of prophets, whichA nue kid of prophetes, ſprōg vp, apon ſight of the diſſen ſiō emōg the proteſtantes feare not euē by the auctoritee of the ſcriptures, to withdraw all auctoritee from the ſcriptures. Lo wher to at laſt Sathan hath brought this reckening. Forſooth to this that he hath drawē wretched men to that paſſe, that looke what doctrine euery of thē hath by chaunce imbracyd, the ſame ſhould he firmly perſuade him ſelfe to be the expreſſe worde of God, and not ſuffer him ſelf by any reaſons to be drawen from it. Now therfore this is apparant that neuer almost was ther any heretike, which did not cōfirme his errour by the ſcripture, and which affirmed not his opinion to be the very word of God. The thing it ſelf ſo ſhe wyth this, that farther demonſtration needith not: but yet the chief of all heretikes of this our age doth alſo testifie the ſame: who writeth: That the holy ſcripture hath now at the laſt obteynid this name to be caullyd the heretikes booke: becauſe all hereſies deryue their courſe and origi nal ſpring frō thence. But to what end is this will ſome man ſaye? Doo you go about to extenuat the word of God, and to withdrawe auctoritee from it? Haue you browght vs

foorth ſo many thinges to the end to ſhewe that who ſo euer vſeth the teſtimony of the ſcripture is an heretike? No: God forbid that wee ſhould ſo myche as thinke a thing ſo ſtraunge and vnſitting for any Chriſtian man: No wee rather ſaye as S. Hillary whilomLib 2. de Trinitate. Note, vvherihe reſie conſiſtcth did: Hereſye is in the vnderſtanding, not in the ſcripture. The ſence not the text is blamed.
            
            Nothing is more holy then the ſcripture nothing of more auctorite, nothing (next God) more worthy of all honour. But what thing cā be ſo holy, which the enemie of man kind abuſeth not to the deſtruction of man? VVee muſt not thinke that God alwayes openeth their mowthes whō wee heare talke of the word of God, and alleage the words of the ſcripture. The moſt learned Origen did wellOrigen. hom 3. in Exodum. note to vs that not ſeldō the diuel alſo openeth the mowth of ſyche as vtter the word of god: [who ſpeaketh alye (ſayth he) it is cerIoh. 8. tayne the diuel openeth his mowth to vtter a lye:] But thow wilt ſaye how may he lye that bringeth foorth the teſtimony of the ſcriptures, which no good man doubteth to haue proceded frō the holy Ghoſt the ſpirit

of truth, and from whom floweth all truthe? Short and redy is the aunſwer hereunto: In the ſcriptures themſelues which we knowe to haue ben inſpired from God aboue, ther can in deed be no lye. But in the ſence which man bringeth (of whom it is written: [euery man is a lyar] hee that will ſaye there canPſal. 115. not be a lye, what doth he ells but denye the ſaying of God, and as it were charge the holy Ghoſt of Vntruth?
            VVhat then, will ſoome man ſaye? yf euery man bee a lyar, dooth it therfore followe that what ſo euer a man ſpeaketh, what ſo euer hee bryngeth owt of the holy ſcripture ſhould therfore be a lye? God forbidd: I ſaye not ſo.
            How ſhall I then knowe when hee vtteryth a lye? This will the very Truth teache vs, which can not lye. For that ſayeth, [whooIoan. 8. ſo euer vtteryth a lye, vtteryth of his owne.] No man hath of his owne but ſynne and vntrouth: But yf a mā haue any point of trouth or righteouſnes, that hath hee of God. Hee therfore ſpeakyth the truth, which vtteryth not that is of him ſelf, but of God.
            But thow wilt ſaye agayne: Speakyth he

not frō God which recyteth the very words of God? and the teſtimonies of the ſcriptures? Yow haue heard now not only once, but often opened vnto yow by me, that the diuel alſo alleageth teſtimonies of the ſcriptures, and yet doth he not therfore ſpeake the truth, becauſe he ſpeaketh of his owne. VVhat is this ſpeaking of his owne? It is when he bryngeth his owne ſence of the ſcripture, and not the ſence and meaning of God. For this is, to bean heretike (as before we taught out of S. Ambroſe) to buyld his owne ſence vpon the wordes of the lawe: and ſo by the wordes of the lawe to impugne the lawe.
            
            But how ſhall I diſcerne when a man bryngeth his owne ſence, and when the true ſence and meaning of God? This will that notableAugust. li. 12. Confeſ. ca. 25. doctour of the Church, S. Auguſtine teache vs: who in this ſort ſpeaketh vnto God: Thy truthe (lorde) is neither myne, norTruthe is not ptiuat ot pſonal but cōmō to al. his, or his, but common to vs all, whom thow dooſt openly call to the communion therof, terribly warning vs that we preſume not to make the ſame priuat, leſt wee be depriued therof. For who ſo euer doth challenge as proper to him ſelf that, which thow haſt

geeuen foorth to bee enioyed of all, and will make that his owne peculiar which is common to all, hee is throwen downe from that which is common, to his owne: that is to ſaye from truth to vntruth, for hee that maketh a lye ſpeaketh of his owne.
            
            Doeſt thow now vnderſtand whoo ſpeakethIoan. 8. of his owne? that is to ſaye whoo ſpeaketh vntrought? Truth (thow ſeeſt) is not his or his, but is common to all. All hath God caullyd publikely to the communion therof. VVho ſo euer therfore maketh priuatt, that is publyke, whoo ſo euer challengith to him ſelf, and cōtenciouſly will make his owne proper, that which by charitee is commō to all, hee ſpeakith of him ſelf, hee ſpeakith an vntrouth. For truth is not any wher ells but amongThrouth is only in the Catho like Chur che. all: that is to ſaye in the Catholike or vniuerſall Churche.
            Therfore whoo ſo euer ſeekith owt any ſingular vnderſtanding or inuenteth any ſtrange and vnknowen expoſitions, or bringeth to the world any newe and ſinguler opinions, though hee ſhewe ſix hundreth teſtimonyes of the ſcriptures, becauſe hee vnderſtādeth them not with that ſence wich

is receiued of the Catholike Churche, but ioyneth therunto his owne proper and priuat expoſition, he ſpeaketh of him ſelf, and therfore ſpeaketh an vntrouth, for the truth is not with any one, but with all, that is to ſaye in the Catholike Churche, wherunto the light of ſownd and true vnderſtanding of the ſcriptures is promyſed of almighty God.
            So as there can be no ſurer argument, that a man ſpeaketh his owne, that is, a lye, then when he departeth from the ſence, expoſition and conſent, of the Churche: For thē althowgh he bring neuer ſo many texts of the ſcripture, hee may vtter in dede the expreſse word of the diuell: but neuer can he in that ſorte bring foorth the expreſſe and pure worde of God. For it is as certayn that the diuel openeth the mowth of them, which teache Gods word, being owt of the Churche, as that God him ſelf openeth the mowthes of them, which beyng of and with in the churche, doo vtter the ſame. And this is the cauſe that when ſo euer ther is in the Church memory made of an Euāgelist, or any other notable doctour, that both in the

entry of the Maſſe, and in the Canonicall howres, this text of Eccleſiasticus is read:Eccleſ. 15. [In the midle of the Churche he opened his mowth:] VVherby is ſignifyed that God openeth the mowth to no mā vnleſſe he be with in the Churche. From the true ſence and vnderſtanding wherof who ſo euer differeth, his mowth, not God, but the diuell doth open.
            How famous ſo euer any doctour of the Churche bee, yet yf he be not with in the Churche, if he conſent not with the ſence of the Churche, it is certayn that God opened not his mowth. But yf any man ſpeake cōtrary to the ſence and conſent therof, wee need not doubt to ſaye that the diuell opened his mowth. VVho ſo euer therfore vttereth his owne, vttereth a lye, and he that ſpeaketh of God, ſpeaketh the truth: but he ſpeaketh of God which vttereth the ſcriptures not at aduenture, or by his owne priuat ſence, but with the ſence that is common to all, that is, with the ſence of the catholyke Churche.
            And that is it which is truly and properlyVVhat is the true vvord of God. caullyd the word of God, when to the wordes of the ſcripture, not our owr owne

ſence, but the commō ſence, that is, the ſence of the Catholike Churche is applyed: which to be the very trewe ſence and meaning of God, is not to bee doubted.
            For thus wee reade noted by Socrates that the Emperour Conſtantine calleth the ſentence of all them which were aſſembled inli. r. hiſt. Eccl. ca. 9. the councell of Nice, the ſentence of God. For the voyce of the Church, is the voyce of GodThe voyce of the churche is the voy ce of God vtterid by her. Ezech. 13. ſpeaking by her. He therfore is a Catholike, and a right beleuer, and ſyche as can by no meanes vtter vntruth, which (being mindfull of that is written, [woo be vnto fooliſhe prophetts which followe their owne ſpirite, and ſee nothing] followeth not his owne, but the ſpirit of the Churche, not his owne imagination or conceyte, but the ſence and conſent of the Churche. Yea thowgh the wordes of the ſcripture ſhould ſeeme not very open and playne, which ſyche a one bryngeth foorth, yet becauſe he produceth them with the ſentence of the Churche, he vttereth the very worde of God.
            But if a man will applye therunto hisVVhat is the vvorof the diuell. owne proper conceyte, if he will temper the ſcriptures with his owne imagination, (for

he ioineth his owne ſence to the ſcriptures, which contendeth ſo earneſtly not for the true vnderſtanding of the diuine ſcriptures, but for his owne) that he will haue that to bee the ſcriptures which is his, when he owght rather to make that his, which is the ſcriptures, yf I ſaye he obſtinatly defendVVho is an heretike. ſyche his ſentence againſt the common ſence and cōſent of the whole Churche, he is an heretike and a ſchiſmatike: And bring he neuer ſo many teſtimonies of the ſcriptures, yet he vttereth not the pure word of God, but the expreſſe worde of the diuell. Ther is therfore no authoritee taken from the ſcriptures, when it is ſayd, that hereſies ſpring not ſo myche of them, as of the lewde and faulſe vnderstanding of them.
            
               This is an owld complaynte made by S.Baſilius in Hexamerum. hom. 2. Baſill that the deprauers of the truth doo not applye their vnderſtanding to the ſcripture, but violentlye drawe the mynd of the ſcriptures to their owne will. But notable is the counſell of S. Clement, that when the lawe of God is read, it bee not read or tawghtLib. 10. Recongnitionū & epi. 5▪
                according to the vnderstanding of a mans owne brayne: for there are many thinges in

the diuine ſcriptures, which may (with force) bee drawen to ſyche ſence as eche man ſhall fancye to him ſelf. And therfore (ſayth he) muſt we learne the vnderstanding of the ſcriptures, of him which keepeth them being orderly deliured vnto him, by his forefathers according to the truth.
            
            VVhich counſell Rufinus writeth, thoſeLi. 2. hiſt. Eccleſ. cap. 9. An exā
                  ple moſt vvorthy to be noted and folovved. ij. lights of Grece, Baſill the Great, and Gregory Naziāzene, to haue followed. VVho whē they gaue them ſelues to the only ſtudy of the ſcriptures, remouing from them al other ſecular bookes of Greke writers, they followed not in ſeeking the true vnderſtanding therof, their owne fanceys, but the writings and authoritee of the fathers, whom they allſo knewe to haue learnyd that rule of trewe vnderſtanding, from the Apoſtolike ſucceſsion.
            But how farre do they differ frō the dealing of theſe fathers, who raſhly faull them ſelues to the wayghing of euery ſcripture, and beleeue it according to their owne iudgement, not paſsing at al vpon the ſence & expoſition of the fathers, to wbom they thinke it iniurious to be put ouer? But what

may bee ſayd more rightly to theſe men by vs, then that which wee reade to haue been ſayde to the Manichees by S. Auguſtin?Auguſt li. 32. contra fauſtum cap. 19.
            
            
               Yow ſee (ſayth he) your dealing tendith to this end that all auctoritee bee takē from the ſcriptures, and that euery mans priuat mynde ſhould tell him what were in eche ſcripture to be allowed, and what to be diſallowed. That is in effect: that the mynde ſhould not by faith, bee ſubiect to the auctoritee of the ſcriptures, but ſhould make the ſcriptures ſubiect to the fancye of the mynd. So as nothing pleaſeth him becauſe it is found written and receiued with high and great auctoritee, but therfore it ſeemeth well written, becauſe in ſome reſpect it pleaſeth his fancye. VVherunto doeſt thow committe thy ſelf thow wretched and frayle ſowle, all wrapped in cloudes of the fleſhe? VVherunto doeſt thow committe thy ſelf?
            
            Maye wee not well ſaye alſo to theſe men, where beſtowest thow thy ſelf thow miſerable and wretchyd ſowlle, wrapped in cloudes of fleſhe? VVhere beſtowest thow thy ſelf? VVilt thow haue, that what ſo euer pleaſeth thee, wee ſhould take for ſcripture and

howld that for the pure and expreſſe word of God? And why not that which hath ſemed good to al, that is, to the vniuerſal Churche?
            VVhat an intollerable pryde is this? VVhat an arrogancy and ſwelling of the mynde?The extreme arrogā
                  ce of heretikes. VVilt thow ſo challenge to thy ſelf alone, the ſpirit of God, and ſo pull it from all others, that what ſo euer ſenſe thow wilt bring owt of the ſcriptures, wee ſhowld bee bound to beleue that, neglecting the ſence and vnderſtanding of the whole churche? can there be a greater arrogancy, or a greater tiranny then this?
            It pleaſed fryer Luther, it leekyd him, thatLuther his decree this or that ſcripture ſhoold haue this or that ſence: VVhat ſo euer therfore hath been deliuered frō the fathers, what ſo euer hath been eſtabliſshed by aucthorite of councells, what ſo euer hath been receyued and allowed by the continuall practiſe of the whole Churche, all that muſt wee deſpyſe, reiect, and howld for vayne. Theſe be Luthers ovvne vvordes in his booke. De ſeruo Arbitrio.
               Neither muſt ſuche a multitude, greatnes, depthe, largeneſſe, miracles, or hollineſſe of ſo many Sainctes of the Churche, mooue a mā one iote: But that ſenſe which hee interpreteth, wee muſt not

dowbt to haue been the very ſenſe and meaning of the holly Ghoſt.
            And that which the Catholikes haue tawght, which the auctoritee of the Churche hath deliuered, which all Chriſtian peopleLuthers vvordes, as before haue ſo many hundreth yeeres imbracyd, which ſchooles defend and mainteyne, all that wee muſt thinke to be the deadly poyſon of Sathan.
            How trewly is it ſayd of S. Pawll, [Knowledge1. Cor. 8. puffith vp and Charitee edifieth?] Thowgh in deed opinyō of knowledge rather puffith vp, then knowledge it ſelf. For if theſe fellowes had but one cromme of charitee in them, could they ſo ſwell with pryde to thinke all men in reſpect of them ſelues to be blynd, fooliſh, blockiſh, and ignoraunt?
            But euē as wyne if it be not delayed with water, dooth trouble the mynd, euē ſo knowledge yf it bee not temperyd with charitee, doth with a certayne pryde and ouerturning make a man, as it were dronke, or rather ſtarke madde-VVherfere S. Pawll doth very well adde thus: [but yf a mā thīke him1. Cor. 8. ſelf to knowe myche, he hath not yett learned

in what ſort he ſhould knowe.] For yf he had, he would neuer with the opinion of his owne knowleage haue growen ſo inſolent, to preferre him ſelf before all others: and as it were from an high to looke downe vpon them. For, the beginning of trewe knowleage, is the knowleage of God, which breedeth in vs humillitie and ſubmiſsion, and dooth rather deiect, then by pryde erect, the mynd of man. And wher ſo great pryde is, as we ſee is in theſe men, what can there be ells in them, then in deed a very ignoraunce, and not knowing of God?
            But S. Pawll teacheth vs in an other1. Cor. 3. place by what meane wee ſhould learne rightly to knowe: [Lett no man (ſayth he) ſeduce you. yf any man among yow ſeeme wyſe in this world, lett him becoome a foole, that he may be made wyſe.] So then by the iudgement of Saint Pawll, a man may become wyſe, yf hee leane not to his owne fancye, yf he condeſcend to ſeeme in his owne ſight a foole, yf he examin him ſelf. And yf he ſeeme to haue any wyſedom, that he reduce and ſubmitt the ſame to the

ſeruyce and obedience of Chriſt, the Head, and his myſtical body, to beleue what he teacheth and rather with feare and reuerence to imbrace the ſame, then to follow that which ſeemeth probable to himſelf. VVhich thing where it is not done what ells followeth then that (as S. Augustin writeth) allAuguſ. li. 32. cap. 19. cōtra fau. ſtum. The race andiſſevv of heretikes in our age. auctoritee be taken from the ſcriptures?
            
            And doo wee not ſee it euen now thus come to paſſe? There is ſproong vp in this our vnhappy age Martin Luther, who hath with violence broken into the ſcriptures, and ſhouldering out all others cōtentiouſly bearyth mē in hād, that the ſenſe of the ſcriptures is euen ſuche, as he will haue it, and as may best accorde with his doctrine: In fine he ſo handleth the matter, that he ſowght to bee reputed not a diſpenſor, but a lord ouer the holy ſcripture. He required obedience ofLuth de Seruo Arbitrio. Non volo Iudicium: ſed obſequium requiro. all in imbracing that ſence of the ſcripture, which he him ſelf hath browght foorth▪
            
            After that ſprāge Carolſtadius, and after him Zwinglius, Oecolampadius and Caluin, and as Luther had reiectyd all the catholykes, and right beleuers, ſo did this man together with the reſt, remoue allſo LutherCarolſtadius.
               
himſelf. And with greate exclamationsZvvingli' Caluin. contenciouſly affirmeth that the ſcriptures doo not meane as Luther ſayth, but as he him ſelf teacheth.
            Then brake owt in an other corner notPacimontanus. long after one Balthaſar Pacimontanus: He in interpreting certayne places of the ſcriptures diſſenteth both frō Luther and Zuinglius, and will nedes haue the ſcriptures to meane as he doth interpret thē, and not as they will haue it.
            The heauenly prophets, ſo called, (wherofSvvēckſel dius Swenckfeldius is now the ryngeleader) eſpied this, that theſe fellowes thus tempered the ſcriptures to their owne ſence, and contēded ſo earneſtly not for the ſcriptures, but for the maintenaunce of their owne priuatt and peruers opiniōs and that (for enſample) they ſet foorth to the people for the pure and expreſſe word of God, not that which Marke or Mathew thought, but that which them ſelues had imagined. So as whyle euery mās mynde was to him ſelf an authour, and teacher what was in euery ſcripture to be allowed, or diſallowed, they did not ſubmitte them ſelues to the authoritee of the ſcriptures,

but thrall the ſcriptures to them ſelues, and as it were vſurpe a rule and maiſtry ouer them: then (I ſaye) begāne theſe diuine prophetts thus to thinke with them ſelues.
            How long in the end ſhall we indure theThe Svvēcfel diās vvordes tyranny of theſe vnhooded and rennagat fryers? Howe longe ſhall we be driuen to adore as the expreſſe word of God; what ſo euer hath lyked them to ſprinckle with a fewe wordes of the ſcripture? VVhen yett in the meane tyme we ſee them ſo fight and diſagree emong them ſelues, while euery of them laboureth that his followers ſhould eſteeme and receiue, not the mynde of the Apoſtle, or the Euangeliſt, but his owne proper expoſition, for the expreſſe worde of God? VVhat? will theſe fellowes now be worſhipped as Gods? what remaineth thē, but that wee ſhould kneele downe to this, or that Archheretike? and preſently worſhip as the very voyce of God, what ſo euer ſhall be ſpoken by any of them?
            Nay: we will for our partes rather harken for the mynd of God out of heauen and Theſe are the vvordes vvith vvhich the Apologie of England ī the firſt editiō ignorantly, in the later obſtinatly and maliciously chargeth Hoſiꝰ vvithal as his ovvne vvordes, and as generally defended of al Catholikes. Thou ſeeſt here (Good reader) they are the Svvēcfeldiās vvordes tomtrolled by Hoſius. Pſal. 93. Matt. 23. Iacob 3. will bidde away both with theſe fellowes thus ſtriuing for the vnderſtanding of the ſcriptures, yea and with the ſcriptures them ſelues, wherof wee now ſee ſo many not only

diuers, but allſo mere contrary expoſitions daily browght foorth. And looke what it ſhall pleaſe that heauenly teacher to reueale vnto vs, that will we receiue with due reuerence as the very expreſſe word of God: and will rather heare him ſelf ſpeake, (according to the ſaying of the prophett: I will heare what the lord ſpeaketh with in me) then turne our ſelues to thoſe bare elementes and naked letters, and in them, (which wee ſee to be turned this waye and that waye) to ſette our ſaluation.
            
            It is not needfull to be cunning in the lawe or the ſcripture, but to be tawght of God. Vayne is the labour which is beſtowed on the ſtudy of the ſcripture. For the ſcripture is but a creature, and a certayn bare letter. It is not meete for a Chriſtian to be to mych addicted to the creature. Yow muſt heare God: his voyce is to be expected from heauen to teache vs: bleſſed is the man (ſayth Dauid) whom thow teacheſt. He dooth as well teache vs now, as in the owld tyme he did the Patriarkes and Prophettes. Chriſt forbadde that wee ſhould haue any moe maiſter, for that wee haue our only maiſter in heauen.
            Thou ſeeſt heerby (moſt vertuous kyng) wher vnto at last the matter is come, and how

truely it was ſayd by S. Augustine that all Auguſtine lib. 32 cōtra fauſtū ca. 19. auctoritee is taken from the ſcripture, when a man will not only not be ſubiect to the authoritee of the ſcriptures in matters of faith, but make them thrall, and ſubiect vnto him, neither will contend for the mynd of the ſcriptures, but for his owne. For what ſo euer him ſelf thinketh, that will he haue reputed for the trewe and expreſſe word of God, though all other men thinke the contrary. By to mych altercation (ſayth one) the truthe is lost. And I pray yow is not▪ the truth now in manner lost? Is not with ſome men the authoritee of the ſcriptures taken awaye Marke here, you Authors of the Apologie, vvhether Hoſius de rogateth from the Scriptures or you are foūde manifeſte Slaunderers, Pride and ſelfeloue the cauſe of al this garboyle in religiō
                in the which only, lyeth all vndoubted truthe? Namely ſince euery man hath ſowght to arrogat to him ſelf the iudgement of the ſcriptures, and remouing the ſentence of all others, hath ſought to haue his owne being wyde and ſtraieng from the Churche, to be worſhipped as the very expreſſe word of God?
            But could this matter euer haue come to this paſſe, yf theſe fellowes remēbring them ſelues to be men, would rather haue choſen to followe the iudgement of the Churche,

and therunto reuerently haue ſubmitted themſelues, then thus inſolently to cōmaunde men to imbrace the viſions of their hartes, for the word of God? VVhen in deed no man lyuing can be of ſo excellent learning, or of ſo ſingular holynes of lyfe, that it can be lawfull for vs to receyue his opinion, for the expreſſe worde of God.
            But on the other ſyde where as is a conſentingThe voyce of the Churche. voyce of the whole Churche, yf a man dowbt that, to be the expreſſe word of God, and a most certayn truth, what doth he ells, but dowbt whether God be true or no? VVhō it is moſt certayne and vndoubted to ſpeake by the mowth of his Churche?
            Thow perceaueſt now (most fortunat king Sigiſmond) that it is not by and by the expreſſe and pure word of God what ſo euer is browght owt of the ſcriptures: From the peruers vnderſtanding wherof, wee ſee all hereſies haue ſproong. Namely that the diuell him ſelf did alſo ſay: [for it is written etc.]Math. 4. VVhen yet the ſence wherwith he browght thoſe wordes, was the diuells owne, and not the pure word of God.
            
               Marke agayne ye Authors of the Apologie. Hereſie is in the vnderſtādīg not in the ſcripture. Hilarius lib. 2. de Trinitate. The ſcriptures (no doubt) are ſacred

and holy: and in them is contayned the very word of God, yf the ſownd meaning and vnderſtanding therof be applyed therunto. But hereſie is in the vnderſtanding, not in the ſcripture, the ſenſe not the text is in the fault. VVee cōtend not for the ſcripture with thoſe that haue departyd from vs, which boaſting them ſelues ſo myche of Gods woord, doo vſurpe the ſame vnto them ſelues alone. For they them ſelues confeſſe, they haue receyued the ſcriptures from none other but from vs, from whom they be departyd: who doo allſo with reuerence receyue all the Canonicall ſcriptures. They on the other ſyde, becauſe they will not in matters of fayth, be ſubiect to the aucthoritee of the ſcripture, doo receyue only that in thē, which by wreſtyng may be framyd to ſerue to their doctryne.
            The controuerſy therfore between vs isVVhat is the cōtrouerſy betvven Cathoikes and proteſtāts not of the ſcriptures, but of the ſence and vnderſtanding of the ſcriptures. Brefely the ſelfe ſame varyance wee reade to haue been in all ages betweē Catholikes and heretikes. Arius brought foorth this ſcripture: [my father is greatter then I:] by which text as

by the expreſſe word of God he ſought to perſuadeA manifeſt example of the preſent cōtrouerſies. to the ignorant people, that Chriſt the ſonne of God was inferiour to his father, and was not of the ſame ſubſtaūce with him. And in deed yf an vnlerned man come to the wayghing of thoſe naked wordes, Arrius may ſeeme to haue ſayde ſomwhat vnto him. But what did hereunto the Catholikes and rightbeleuers? They reuerently acknowleged the text. But that which Arrius gathered therof, they conſtantly affirmed not to be the pure word of God, ſince Chriſt neuer ſpake them in that ſence, as to teache him ſelf not to be equally God, or in any thīg vnequall to his father. For in that he was the ſonne of God, he was of the ſame ſubſtaunce with his father, but in that he was the ſonne of mā, he was inferiour vnto him. And allthowgh the ſectaryes and followers of Arrius, tooke that for the expreſſe word of God, yet the Catholikes▪ doubted not to affirme it to be the expreſſe word of the diuell.
            Euen lyke to this is the contention at this daye of the contrary doctrines between the Catholikes and the heretikes: For we ſtriue

not with them that haue departed from vs, abowt the ſcripture, but about the vnderſtanding therof. And to make the matter the playner, let vs conſyder but this one place of ſcripture which is now a dayes commonly alleaged: It is ſayd to be the expreſſe word of God: [Drinke you all of this.] And doo wee denye this to be the expreſſeMatth. 26. VVhat vvorde of God proteſtāts haue for cō
                  muniō in bothe kindes. woord of God? No: but doo willingly grawnt it: Yet that it is the expreſſe word of God in that ſence, which they that bee departed frō vs doe gather of that text, that is it which wee doo vtterly denye. For what doo they (trowe yow) gather of this place of ſcripture? forſooth that all which communicate, ye euē the laye people ſhould be bownd by the commaundement of God to receyue the ſacrament of the aultar vnder bothe kindes. But that Chriſt ſpake thoſe wordes in that ſenſe, we graunt not. But euē as LutherAgainſt the Bohēs in his reſolutions him ſelf once ſayd, the ſame in this caſe ſaye wee allſo. That Chriſt commaunded nothing in this matter as neceſſary to the laye people: becauſe theſe wordes were ſpoken to none other, but to the Apoſtles.
            
            Yow ſee that here wee differ not abowt

the text, but about the vnderſtanding therof. For with no leſſe, yea and with more reuerence, then they which haue deuided them ſelues from vs, doo we Catholikes receiue this text, as the very worde of God.
            But they would intrude their owne neweThe difference betvvene catholikes and proteſtants. ſenſe forged therunto. And wee ſeeke to defend the ſenſe receyued in the Churche. They looue and leeke the ſenſe which them ſelues bryng, not becaaſe it is trewe, but becauſe it is their owne, and will needes defend that with toothe and nayle: VVee looue and leeke the ſenſe browght by the Churche, not becauſe it is our owne, but for that wee ſtedfaſtly beleue it to be the very trewe ſenſe of the ſcripture: VVhich to be ſo, not one priuattNote. man, but the Churche (being as S. Pawl.1. Tim. 3. Ioan. 14. calleth it, the piller and ſure grownd of truth, and wherunto the ſpirit of truth was promiſed and ſent) hath tawght vs.
            But let vs yet a little more diligently wayghe the very text it ſelf. They ſaye theMatth. 26. expreſſe word of God is: [Drynke yee all of this.] Ergo it is neceſſary that all perſonsThe proteſtants argument ſhould drinke of the cup: and yf any do other wyſe they are giltye (ſay they) of breaking

the inſtitution of Chriſt. VVee will here a litle nerer ioyne foote to foote with them.
            I pray thee, what caliest thow the word of God? The ſcripture. And what meanestVVhat the expreſſe vvorde of God is. thow by this worde, liuely and expreſſe? Clere, playne, and that which is ſo layde opē to all mens eyes, that no man is ſo dull of ſight, which may not plainly ſee it. But yf it be ſo playne and cleere, how cometh it to paſſe that there is now ſuch a doe about it? Of thin ges which are clere and manifest is there any man that will moue argument? As for example. VVhether it be daye or no, when wee ſee the ſonne vp and ſhinyng vpon the earth? Of neceſsite therfore it muſt nedes followe that this is not ſo expreſſe and playne a worde, as to thee it ſeemeth, ſince there ryſeth ſo muche queſtion vpon it. And yf it be ſo playne and expreſſe, it is a great marueill that in al theſe 600. yeres, ſince Polonia firſt receiued, and hath imbracyd the Goſpell of Chriſt, and theſe wordes of Chriſt hauing ben commonly read and reherſed in the Churche, that no man hath ben founde not only in Polonia, but neither in the whole world beſyde, wherin the name of Christ is

profeſſed, who coulde thinke it in that ſence that yow now bryng foorth, to be the expreſſe word of God. That is to ſaye, that therby the laye people ſhould be bound as by the commaundement of God of neceſsite, to receyue the ſacrament of the aultar in both kindes.
            The Grekes themſelues, albeit the layeThe ſchiſmaticall grekes better then proteſtants. people were with them admitted to the cup, did yet neuer ſo interprette theſe wordes: VVho when in the Councell of Florence more then an hundreth yeres past they aſſembled them ſelues with the Latynes, and contendyd with them about ſome other matters, yet did they not beſtowe iij. wordes in altercation with them about the vſe of the Challyce, becauſe they knewe there was no precept of Chriſt wherby the laitye were of neceſsite bounde ſo to receiue the ſame. Doo you then thinke all men to haue been blynde, and ſuche blockheades, and ſtockes that in ſo many ages, yea euē ſynce the tyme that the Goſpell was written, they could neuer ſee this ſo playne and expreſſe a word of God? But wayghe well with thyſelf whether this be a point of Chriſtian pietye and

modeſty ſo to thinke of the fathers, wherof aSee to vvhat point the proteſtat is dryuen by his priuat ſenſe of holy ſcripture. great number neuer being acquaynted with the vſe of the cup to other thē to the Prieſtes themſelues in the ſacrifice of the Maſſe, did yet leaue vnto vs the Goſpell of Chriſt ſealed with their bloud: VVilt thow ſo cōdemne them all of blyndnes or impiete, that either they ſawe not this ſo playne a place of Gods worde, or els that ſeing it (which were more intollerable) they wold wittingly haue gone against it?
            But thow ſayest what ſo euer is become ofObiection Matth. 26. the fathers, the wordes be cleere: [Drinke yee all of this:] he that ſayeth [all] excludeth none.
            VVith what impudency then doſt thowAnſvver. make of [all] not all? But yf he exclude none, whic ſayeth [All] wilt thow then haue infidels alſo to drinke of the cup? God forbid thow ſaiſt, for the participatiō of the ſacramentes pertayneth only to the faythfull. VVhy? But a lytle before, thow ſaydeſt, he that ſayeth [All] excludeth no man. VVith what face then doſt thou now exclude the infidels? and ſo of [All] make [not All?] But in this poynt (ſynce thow thinkeſt rightly) we will

gladly agree with thee, and will not be vnwilling to allowe this thy reſtraynt.
            But now tell me of good fellowſhipp: whether thinkeſt thow children that be chriſtned to be of the number of the faythfuii orAll aud not all, is as it pleaſeth proteſtants no? Thow ſayeſt, yea: How thē? VVilt thow cō
               maund them allſo to drynke of the cupp? no: why? but a litle before thou ſaydſt that all the faithfull muſt of neceſsite drynke of the cupp. VVherfore doſt thow now agayne of (al) make (not all?) VVhy doſt thow allowe to thy ſelf that, which thow wilt not allowe laufull to the church of God? Thow thinkeſt it laufull to keepe children from all ſacramentall participatiō of the body and bloud of Chriſt: and yf to laye perſons being past their childhood, the one kind be not geuen (when yet in that other which is geuen, all and whole Chriſt is receyued) then complayneſt thow that great ſacrilege is committed.
            But here thow wilt ſaye. As touching infantes, that I thinke them well kept fromReplie. the communion of the Sacramente of the body and blood of Chriſt, the auctorite of S. Pawll moueth me, whoo wryteth: [lett euery mā trye himſelf and ſo eate of that bread1. Cor. 11.
               
and drinke of the cupp.] But how ſhall an infant trye him ſelf? and how ſhall he iudge our lord his body which is not yett come to reaſon and vnderſtanding?
            But what (I praye the) if it be ſuperfluousReyondre. that they ſhoold trye themſelues, whom wee knowe to be cleane, being purified by the holy ſacrament of baptiſme, and newly entryd ynto the howſehold of Chriſt? VVhat yf litle ones can iudge the body of our lord which they receyue, by their God fathers and God mothers, who before they be baptyſed, doo in their name profeſſe to beleaue, yea and that the chyld him ſelf beleaueth and renounceth Sathan? Yf the faith of the ſuertyes, and of the churche ſuffiſe the infant to the receiuīg of baptiſme, why ſhould not their triall and iudgement allſo ſuffiſe him to the receiuing of the ſacramēt? Verely Ruardus Tapper a learned man, bringeth none other cauſe, why childrē are kept from the ſacramentall participation of the body and bloud of Chriſt, but only that they doo not allwayes ſwallowe that is put into their mowth, or yf they doo, yet do they often putt it vp agayne.
            
               But God forbidde, I ſhould reprehend, that you doo therin allſo, farther reſtrayne this word [All] and denye allſo the communion to infantes.
            For this is in deed the mynd of the churche, althowgh wee reade it was otherwyſe in the In the time of S. Cyprian and S. Auguſtin expreſſely. Cypr. in ſer. de lapſis. Auguſt. de peccat. mer▪ & re. li. 1. ca. 20. primitiue churche. But yf thow thinke it is with good reaſon doone that the churche keepeth infantes from all ſacramentall participation of the body and bloud of Chriſt, why doeſt thow not allſo perſuade thy ſelf that in forbearing to geue the cupp to the laye people it was leekewyſe led therunto by iuſt reaſons, and waighty conſiderations?
            But let vs yet wayghe and examine farther theſe words of Chriſt: which yf wee will rightly vnderſtand, it behoueth vs to haue regard to thoſe which went before, to the end we may therby knowe to whom theſeMatth. 26. wordes were ſpoken. S. Mathew deſcrybing the ſupper of our lorde, ſpeaketh thus: [But when euening was come he ſate downe with his twelue diſciples.] S. Marke thus: [ButCap. 14. when the euening was come he came withCap. 22. his twelue.] And S. Luke thus: [And when the hower was come, he ſate downe and his

twelue Apostles with him.] In the former place, the word [All] ſeemyd to yow very playne and cleere: How cometh it then to paſſe, that this word (Twelue) ſhould not ſeeme vnto yow as playne and cleere? VVould there be any matter of ſtryfe yf you would as ſharply behould this word, as you doo that which went before? Is not either of them the word of one and the ſame God? both (All) and (twelue)?
            This therfore is the true ſenſe of ChristThe true ſenſe of Chriſtes vvordes his wordes: [Drinke ye of this all ye twelue which are ſet doune with me] It is wel knowē there were diuers others in the howſe of Symon the Lepre, where the ſupper was made, yet only the twelue Apostles ſate downe:1. Cor. 11 Luk. 22. VVhō after he had instituted newe prieſtes of the newe ſacrifice, ſaying: [Make or doe this thinge for remembraunce of me,] He commaunded them only to drynke of the cuppe, which they did as S. Marke writeth ſaying: [And they drāke all therof.] MightMar. 14 you not as laufully gather herby, that albeit the ſacramēt of the body and bloud of Chriſt, pertayne vnto al, yet theſe words [Drinke yeMatt. 26 Mar. 14. all of this] pertayne only to the Apoſtles, and

to ſyche as ſucceede them, to wyt, biſshopps and Prieſts? And ſo the expreſſe word of God in that point to be this, that ſo often as Prieſts make that, which Chriſt then made and commaunded them to make, that is to ſaye, when ſo euer they conſecrate the body of Chriſt, and offer the ſame in the remembraunce of his paſsiō, it is neceſſary for them to vſe both kyndes, both in conſeerating, offering, and receiuing: ſo as yf therein they leaue owt that one kynd, they may iuſtly ſeeme to committe great ſacriledge?
            But ſhewe vs now one word, I will notThe heretikes cānnot ſhevve one vvord to proue, that it vvas at any tyme commaunded, that the laytee; ſhold of neceſsitee receyue the Sacra mēt in bothe formes Manna and the paſchall lab vver the figures of the Sacramēt. ſaye cleer and playne, but how darke ſo euer it be, wherof wee may with any reaſon coniecture, that euer Chriſt commaunded the laye people to drynke of the cuppe, or at the leſt where Chriſt gaue them his bloud to drynke. And yet ye obiect against vs the expreſſe word of God, and with open mowth charge vs therwith, when ye can not fynd ſo myche as any ſhadowe therof in the ſcriptures. But wee, whether ye will regarde the ſhadowe and figure, or the trouth and thing it ſelf, can out of the very ſcriptures, ſhewe you the contrary of your doctrine.
            
               Ye are not ignorant that Manna geuen to the lewes from heauen, was the ſhaddow and figure of this ſacramēt of the body and blood of Chriſt: So was the paſcall lābe allſo: Of theſe all did eate, but lyquors neuer came to the vſe of any others, then of the Prieſts, neither did the laye people vſurpeNote. to themſelues any porcyon therof,
            Lett vs nowe come to the truthe and the thinge it ſelf. Chriſt drawing nere vntoLuke 24 thoſe ij. which went to Emaus wēt with them, when they came to the Caſtell, he taryed with thē, and ſitting downe with thē, tooke bread, bleſſed it, brake it, and gaue it vnto them. And their eyes were opened and they knewe him: and then he vanyſshed owt of their ſyght. This bread the holly Auguſt. lib. 3 de cō ſen. Euangel. cap. 25 Beda lib. 6 in Lucam Chryſoſt. hom. 17 in Matth. Theophilact. in Lucam 24. fathers interprett to haue been the ſacrament of the body and blood of Chriſt: Here is no mē
               cyon made of the Cupp. Doo yee now ſee this expreſſe word of God that Chriſt gaue the Sacrament vnder forme of bread alone to them, which were no Apostles? But that hee commaunded to geue, or that him ſelf gaue to the laye people his bloud to be dronke owt of the challyce, that is ſo farre from

being the expreſſe word of God, that ye can not ſo myche as fynd any ſhadow therof in the ſcriptures.
            This did the Boemians well vnderſtande that of theſe places of the Goſpell, where the Supper of our Lorde is deſcribed, they could not defend their errour wherby they had with priuat auctoritee vſurped to them ſelues the Challyce: VVherfore this text of S. Iohn ſeemed to them a playner word of God, to buyld their errour vpon: [Except ye eate the fleſhe of the ſonne ofIohn. 6. man, and drynke his bloud, ye ſhall haue no lyfe in you.] VVhich word they which in this our age haue deuyded themſelues from the Churche, denye to appertayne any thing to the ſupper of our lord, but will haue them vnderſtanded not of the ſacramentall, but of the ſpirituall eating. So, that, which ſeemed to the Boemians the plaine and cleere word of God, to the Lutherās was not ſo cleere. VVho whē they had takē away owt of the Churche both priesthod and ſacrifice, which yet the Boemians did not: (for theſe will haue all men Prieſtes) they will alſo haue theſe wordes to be ſpoken vnto all: [Drinke

ye all of this.] But to this which the Bohemians bring owt of the ſixth of Iohn, a good and learnyd mā hath very well aunſwered more then an C: yeres past.
            No faithful Catholike ſayth, that the ſaying of S. Iohn: [Except ye eate etc.] or ells that any other the commaundements of Chriſt owght not to be kept: but the Catholike ſayeth, that the vniuerſall Church of Chriſt, better vnderſtandeth which be the commaundemēts of Christ, and how they owght to be kept, then Huſſe or his followers: TheHuſsitani varyance therfore is not of the wordes of Chriſt (which euery good man doth receyue with all reuerence) but of the ſence and vnderſtanding of his wordes.
            But the heretikes of our tyme (as we ſaidThe heretikes of this age. before) denye thoſe wordes to be rightly taken of the ſacramentall eating of the body and bloud of Christ, for which cauſe allſo they forbeare to vſe the authoritee of this text to the affirming of the vſe of the challyce.Tho Catholikes But wee (who doo willingly follow the mynd of the fathers) doo not denye, but they maye be well vnderſtanded of bothe kyndes, and yet do conſtantly affirme that when the

only forme of bread is receyued, both the body of Chriſt is eatē, and his bloud is dronke. They did eate (ſayth S. Cypriane) and drākeIn ſermone de Coena domini. of one ſelf bread, according to the viſible forme. Here thow ſeeſt it reported, they did not only eate, but allſo drinke of one bread: yea and in the ſcriptures wee reade, that bloud was allſo eaten. The body of Chriſt isLeu. 
                     •
                  . 17. therfore eatē, and his bloud is dronke, when the only forme of bread is receyued: yea thowgh nothing be powred owt of the challyce into the mowthes of the faithfull. For allthowgh it be neither grinded with the teethe, nor ſwallowyd, yet is it eaten and dronke by faith and charitee,
            But it is a wonder to ſee that the Bohemians laboured to proue their purpoſe byThe folye of the Bohemians. Ioan. 6. that place of the Goſpell, where no mention is made either of the cuppe or of the wyne, but only of bread, which allſo alone to ſuffiſe vnto ſaluation the wordes of Chriſt do declare, ſaying: [If a man eate of this bread he ſhall liue for euer: and the bread which I will geue is my fleſhe for the lyfe of the world. Hee that eateth this bread ſhall liue for euer.] You ſee how the promiſſe of eternall

lyfe was made to the bread and not to the cuppe. And in all that ſixth chapiter of S. Iohn, is made no mencion in any one word, either of the cuppe, or of the wyne.
            VVhy doeſt thow therfore complayne O Sathan, why doeſt thow ſo often dull our eares, with thy vayne boaſting of the expreſſe worde of God? VVhē, what ſo euer is browght foorth of the ſcriptures, if it be rightly vnderſtanded, ſeemeth muche more to make to the allowing of the receyued order of the Churche, then to the maintenaunce of this. thine errour?
            But there is no cauſe why a Chriſtē man ſhould thinke that Sathan paſſeth ſo muche for the cuppe. For he knoweth wel inowgh, it is no whyt materiall to ſaluation, whether a mā vſe the cuppe or no: ſynce by his lymmes, Luther, Bucer, and Philipp Melancthon he doth manifeſtly confeſſe, nothing touching the vſe of the cuppe, to be commaunded by Chriſt as neceſſary to ſaluation. Full well (knoweth he) that it was very trewe which by the fathers in the Coūcell of Baſill (whichThe decre of the councell of Baſill councell wee knowe in this matter to be receyued, and allowed) was fully decreed, that,

whether a man cōmunicate in one or bothe kyndes, ſo it be done by the ordinaunce and obſeruaunce of the Churche, it profiteth the worthy receyuer to ſaluation. Therfore this offendeth him not, that a man ſhould communicate vnder one forme, neither dooth he force to haue him communicate vnder bothe. But that it ſhould be doone accordingVVhy Sathā requireth ſo earneſtly the cōmunion vnder bothe kindes. to the ordinaunce and obſeruaunce of the Churche, becauſe in that ſorte (and none otherwyſe) it profitteth the receyuers to ſaluation, that is it Lo, that chiefflly offendeth Sathan. And that they ſhould not cō
               municat in that ſort, that is to ſaye, according to the ordinaunce and obſeruaunce of the Churche, that, is it which he is ſo earneſt abowt.
            VVell: Sathan will be Sathan: for in the Hebrew Sathan is as myche to ſaye as an aduerſary. He therfore will ſtill be an aduerſary both to Chriſt the head, and to his body. It is an ordinaunce and obſeruaunce of the Churche, which is the mysticall body of Chriſt, that wee ſhould communicat vnder one forme: he will haue it doone vnder bothe.
            
               But ſuppoſe the ordinaunce and obſeruaunce of the Churche (which is the mysticall body of Chriſt) were ſo, that we ſhoulde communicatt vnder bothe formes? Then wil you haue it done either vnder one alone, or vnder neither of bothe. But wil you heare the beaſt vtter his owne wordes? VVe recited them before, but it ſhall not be a myſſe to heare him agayne: Thus he ſpeaketh by his choſen veſſell Luther.
            If perhapps the councell ſhould ſo decree,The vvordes of Sathā by the movvthe of his choſen veſſell Martyn Luther. in lib. de formul. miſſae then would wee not receyue in both kindes, but then chieffly in deſpight of the councell, would we vſe either the one, or neither of both, and not both: and playnlie hould thē accurſed which by auctoritee of ſyche councell ſhould vſe both.
            See you now, to what end Sathan tēdeth? He ſeeketh not ſo myche to haue the vſe of the cuppe permitted to the layetie, but that all things in deſpight of the Church ſhould be doone contrary to the decrees therof. He is a right Sathan. He is the enemye of ChriſtSathanas in the hebrevv toūg ſignifieth an aduerſary. the head, and of his body. He is Antichriſt. VVherfor what ſo euer it hath pleaſed Chriſt to decree by the mowth of his churche, allbeit

he knoweth the ſame to be right and agreable with the worde of God, yet dooth he all wayes with toothe and nayle earneſtly withſtand it. And looke what ſong he being the head of his body and lymmes, did once ſynge to our head and maiſter Chriſt, the ſame by his members, doth he now recorde to vs being the members of Chriſt: [ThroweVVhat is ment by thiſe vvordes, Throvve thy ſelf doune thy ſelf downe.] That is to ſaye (as wee haue before heard Vincentius Lirinenſis interprett it,) Lett thy ſelffawll downe from the doctrine and traditiō of this high churche, which is reputed the church of God. Followe not that which ſeemed good to the churche, but that which leeketh me: Imbrace the vnderſtanding of ſome priuatt man, who being inſpired with my ſpirit ſhall not doubt to arrogat any thing to him ſelf, and to derogatt all thinges from others, and followe not the ſence and cōſent of the whole chriſtian worlde, wherunto it is certayne the Spirit of Chriſt wanteth not.
            Therfore ſo often as you ſhall heare Sathan ſaye owt of the Goſpell: [For it is written, Drinke ye all of this,] ſo often thinke you heare him ſaye nothing els, but that

which he ſayd to Chriſt. [Throwe thy ſelfVVhat Sathans intent is by heretikes his miniſtres. downe.] For this is it which he ſeeketh to perſuade wnto men that they ſhould deſpyſe the churche which is the grownde and piller of truthe: that in the interpreting of the ſcriptures they ſhould geue more auctoritee to their owne priuatt iudgement, then to the decree of the churche. That they ſhould howld for nawght her ordinaunces and cutt them ſelues of from the body of the churche. VVherfore as touching the vſe of the ſacramēt wee may well ſaye to theſe men as S. Augustine ſometyme ſayde to the Donatiſtes.Auguſtin 
               The faulte is not in the ſacramentes, but in the ſeparation. The fault is not in communicating vnder one or both formes: but yf thow communicat contrary to the ordinaunce and obſeruaunce of the churche, in that only is the faulte: And doubtles ſo great a faulte, as that all wickednes compared with this, is as a ſtrawe in reſpect of a beame.
            Then what a kynde of religion is this of ſome men, that ſaye they are moued with the feare of God and loue of his lyuely word (for that is their maner of ſpeache) to thinke it

neceſſary for them to receyue the cuppe? As who ſhould ſaye that in the ſpace of this 600. yeres (wherin Polonia with the countries adioyning hath receyued and helde the faith of Chriſt) there hath been no man that hath feared God, no man that louedThe odious arrogance of ꝓteſtāts. his lyuely worde, no nor is at this daye in the whole Chriſtian worlde, but only ſyche as hath been inſpired with the ſpiryt of Luther.
            VVhat an arrogācy? what a deuilif he and odious pryde is this, ſo to arrogat vnto thy ſelf alone the feare of God, and the loue of his lyuely word, that thow wilt vtterly pull the ſame from all others, were they of neuer ſo ſingular pietye and godly lyfe? VVhat be theſe men ells then degenerated childrē and as the prophett caullyth them: [the ſeed ofEſai. 57. the harlott and adultereſſe,] that dare thus charge their holy elders and bleſſed forefathers, of ſo extreme impietye, as that none of them ſhould feare God or loue his word, and that ſyche fathers, from whom they haue receyued both the rules of well liuing, and the doctrine of true belefe? VVhich many of them allſo haue left vnto vs ſealed with their

bloud, by whoſe trauayll it came to paſſe that wee first heard the name of Chriſt, that being drawen out of moſt thick clowdes and darknes of idolatry, wee are ſett in the bright and ſhinyng light of the truth. Theſe are they forſothe, which ſo religiouſly embrace the expreſſe word of God, ſaying vntoExod. 20 Matth. 15. vs [honour thy father and thy mother.]
            But let vs waygh a litle what feare of God this is, wherwith they ſaye they are ſo ſtrykē that they may not forbeare the cuppe. Sure this is ſyche an other feare as the IuesVVhat kind of feare it is that proteſtants be ſtreekē vvith. loan. 18 ſemed to be in, when they doubted to enter into the place of iudgement, leſt they ſhould be defyled. They had a great conſcience to enter into the place of iudgement, thinking that by entring therinto, they were greuouſly defyled: but to deliuer vp Chriſt to the gentills to be ſcornyd, whipped, and crucified, therin had they no religion or conſcience at all: but rather thought it an offence of conſcience and religion to haue done otherwyſe. For they perſuaded them ſelues that they fulfilled the commaundement of God in deliuering the ſonne of God to the Gētills to be done to death. [VVe haue a laweIoan. 19
               
(ſayd they) and by that lawe he owght to dye, becauſe he made him ſelf the ſonne of God.] They ſeemyd to them ſelues, by the expreſſe word of God to ſhewe that they rightfully deliuered Chriſt to the Gentills to be put to death: and theryn were ſo litle troubled with any ſcruple of conſciēce, that they thowght they ſhould haue committed a wycked act, yf they had done otherwyſe. But what? ſhould they not with myche leſſe fault for any cauſe haue entred in to the iudgement place, then haue crucified Chriſt the ſonne of God?
            But euen ſyche is their religion, which ſaye they are forbidden by their conſcience to content them ſelues with receiuing the ſacramēt in one kynd: Very rightly are they touched with the place of the Pſalme: [TheyPſal. 13. trembled for feare, where was no cauſe of feare,] and that which Chriſt him ſelf ſayth in the Goſpell [They ſtraine a gnat, and ſwalloweMatth. 23▪
                downe a camell.] They will ſeeme to feare God: They knowe the churche by the expreſſe word and precept of God, is to beMatth. 18. 1. Cor. 11. 2. Theſ. 2. heard, and that the cuſtome receyued and allowed by the ſame, is to be receyued and

kept: yet when the holly catholike Church the mysticall body of Chriſt, which he ſo loued that he gaue his true and liuing body to death for the ſame, when that (I ſaye) is in daunger to be deuyded in to many partes, and to be no leſſe cruelly torne and rēt, then the true and liuely body of Chriſt was of the Iues, there ſhewe they no feare or ſcruple of conſcience at all.
            But euen as the Iues when they deliuered the true body of Chriſt to be rent of the tormentors, affirmed they did it according to the expreſſe word of God, ſaying: [VVeIoan. 19. haue a lawe and by that lawe he owght toNote. dye:] Euen ſo theſe men when they are entred into the leeke councell, againſt the myſticall body of Chriſt, when they ſeeke all the wayes and meanes they can to deuide, and cut the ſame into many partes, which their attemptes (greate is the pittye) haue had to ſpeedy ſucceſſe, taking their entry with the matter of the cuppe, will needes ſeemes to do it according to the expreſſe word of God, ſtill cryeng allſo. VVe haue a lawe, drinke yee all
               Note. 
               of this: and by this lawe the myſticall body of Chriſt the Churche muſt be deuyded and

cut in ſoonder. How wonderfull are theſeVVōderfull are the ſloughetes of Sathān. ſleightes of Sathan? How great is the ſubteltie of his crafty deuiſes? Of that very thing which Chriſt would haue to be a ſacrament of pietye, a tokē of vnitee, a bond of charite, he ſeeketh to make a cauſe of diſſencion, a matter of deuiſiō, and a fyreſtone of hatred. For what ells is there done in this ſacramēt,1. Cor. 11 but (as S. Pawll ſayeth) [the death of our lord is ſhewyd?] And for what cauſe dyed he? Verely [to gather in to one (as ſ. Iohn ſayeth)Ioan. 11 the children of Iſraell which were diſperſid.] Chriſt therfore dyed that he might gather together vnite, and make vs one body, of which matter he allſo would this ſacrament to be a token. [For wee which be many, be1. Cot. 10 one bread and one body, in that wee participate of one bread.] But here Sathā the true Antichriſt not only in word, but in deed, the very enemye of Chriſt, did therfore caſt in this contention about the cuppe, to ſeparat, deuyde, diſperſe and cut in pieces the church, which Chriſt by the ſheading of his precious bloud, hath gathered together, ſo as therby he might make voyd the benefitt of the croſſe and death of Chriſt, to them that

ſhould followe this wicked and ſacrilegious counſell of ſeparation.
            
               Our lord (ſayth S. Auguſtine) did in thisAuguſtin ſacrament marke and ſeale vs: by this he would vs to appertayne vnto him: in this table did he conſecrate the myſtery of peace and vnitee: he that receiueth this myſtery of vnitee, and howldeth not the bond of peace, he taketh not a myſtery for him ſelf, but a wittneſſe against him ſelf.
            
            But will you knowe how great a wickednes he committeth? then harken to S. Pawll,1. Cor. 11 who telleth the, [that he is giltye of the body and bloud of our lord:] that is to ſay he hath committed no leſſe wickednes, and ſhall be gilty of no leſſe crime, then euen they who with their owne hādes, whipped Chriſt, ſhed his bloud, crucified his body, and put him to greuous death. And this is the thing which Sathan ſeeketh, that diuiſiō may be wrought in this ſacrament of Vnitee, ſo as therby Chriſt may be crucifyed agayne, and as it were ſcornyd and mockyd at. But ſhall it be thus euen with him which calleth it the ſauing word? Deſerueth this to be called the ſauing worde which cōdēneth to euer laſting

death? Verely, this is no ſauing word: Drinke of the cuppe: for Iudas dranke of the cuppe and was condemned: many heretikes, many falſe bretherne, many confeſsing Chriſt, and yet denying his power haue dronke of the cuppe. But how? To death, and euerlaſting damnatiō: not to lyfe and eternall ſaluation.
            But wilt thow knowe what is this ſauingNore. Charitee is the very liuely, and ſawing vvor de, word? It is a ſhort worde and an eaſy: Looue. Charite is this ſauing word, which who ſo hath not, lett him drynke of the cuppe ſo myche as he will, yett ſhall he gayne euerlaſting death: eternall ſaluation he ſhall neuer atteyn therby. For it is trewe that is writtē, [he that loueth not, dwelleth in death, but1. Ioan. 3. he that loueth his neighbour, hath fulfilledRom. 13. the lawe.]
            And can he poſsibly ſeeme to loue his neighbour which doth ſo iudge of them that haue auctoritee ouer him, and whom he is commaunded to obey, that they neither haue nor euer had, any feare of God, or loue to his ſauing word? but allwayes endeuoured them ſelues to oppugne and withſtand the ſame? Surely theſe are not ſignes of loue, butHeretikes voyde of charitee of hatred. Seemeth he to loue his neighbour

which doth not only ſeparat him ſelf from one perſon, but from all which truly profeſſe Chriſt, and from the vniuerſall catholyke churche, condemning his fathers and elders of impiety as men that had reſisted the holy Ghoſt, and would not embrace a knowē truth?
            The property of charitee and (Loue) is to vnyte and knytte together, and not to ſeparatt and deuyde. This word therfore, Drinke ye of the cuppe, is not that ſauing or liuely worde. But the ſauing word is Loue: That is to ſaye. Separatt not thy ſelf from the vnitee and knot of the body of Chriſt, frō the agreement of his churche, but obediently and reuerently heare the ſame: humble gladly thy ſenſe and conceyte, to the ſenſe and conſent therof: and neuer arrogat ſo myche to thy ſelf, as to preferre thyne owne iudgement before the iudgement therof.
            It is very well written by S. Auguſtine.Aug. tractatu 7. in epiſtolam Iob. 1. Loue and doo what thou wilt. VVhether thou drinke, or drinke not of the cuppe, (ſo thy drinking or abſteyning be in loue and vnitee according to the ordinaunce and obſeruaūce of the churche) it proffiteth thee vnto ſaluation:

And contrary wyſe whether thow drynke, or drynke not of the cuppe, ſtanding in deuiſion, thow ſhalt be gilty of the body and bloud of our lord: becauſe there thou ſeekeſt diſcord where Chriſt chieffly cōmended vnto vs vnitee and concord.
            VVhich thinges being ſo (moſt fortunatt Kyng Sygiſmond) who can ſufficiently commend this your Acte, that when to your ſelf it hath allſo been often ſayd, [Throwe thy ſelf downe,] that is to ſaye, let thy ſelf fall from the doctrine and tradition of this high churche, or at the leſt in this only communion of the ſacrament of the aultar, ſuffer that to be done which is contrary to the decrees of the churche, and differing from the rest of Chriſtendome: yet coulde your highnes neuer be induced to yelde to theſe ſedicious counſells of ſeparation.
            But when more then once or twyſe youThe aunſvver of the king of polonia to the ambaſſadors of the proteſtantes. had openly profeſſyd, it appertayned not to your perſon to determyne any thing in matters tooching religion, (for ſo myche as the Emperour being allſo a chylde of the Churche, and within the Churche, not aboue the Churche, is bound reuerently and obediently

to heare his moſt holy moother, and not to preſcribe vnto her:) your highnes therfore thought meete to referre the matter to the next generall councell, or to the iudgement of the holy Apostolyke See. VVherin ſuerly you did a thing which was well ſitting to your woorthines, and to the vertu and pietye of your renoumed Auncetors. For what thing is there that can woorſe become a chriſtian and Catholyke kyng, then to take vppō him to meddle in thoſe thinges which are proper and peculiar to Prieſtes and Biſſhopps? which wickednes when ſo euer any Prynce hath commytted, wee reade that God hath moſt greuouſly puniſshed him.
            But I doo not denye that the vſe of the cuppe vppō iuſt cauſes ſhewyd and appering to a generall coūcell may by the ſame be permitted to the laye people: But yf any one kingdom will vſurp the ſame vnto it ſelf, diuiding it ſelf therin from the reſt of the chriſtyan world, what dooth it ells, but willingly and wittingly ſpott it ſelf with moſt wicked ſchiſme?
            And that is it wherunto Sathan tendith.Satan paſſeth not on the cupp ſo he may Induce the ſchiſme. He paſſeth not for the Cuppe, but ſeeketh

to worke the ſchiſme. For yf the cuppe ſhoold by an agreing conſent of the churche be permitted, thē would he (as before by the wordes of Luther his member doth appere) thinke meete vtterly to refuſe it. So ſeeketh he none other thing, but ſeparation and diuiſion in that ſacramēt, which is the pledge and knot of vnitee: for it is he (of whom the prophet ſpake) which ſetteth diſcord emongOſe 13▪ Matt. 12. brethern, of whom Chriſt him ſelf alſo ſayd: [He that gathereth not with me; ſhattereth.] And on the other ſyde: [Our God is1. Cor. 14▪
                not a God of diuiſion or diſſenſiō, but a God of peace, loue, and charitee:] ſo as no good man ought to doubt, but that it is the expreſſe word of the diuell, wherin nothing is ſought, but diſcord and diuiſion.
            Yet are there ſome which labour to perſuadeThe ſubtelt ie of Sathan. vnto the people, that this is the waye and only meane to ſtay the diſſenſiō in matters of religion, and that herby only, it might come to paſſe that in your highnes kingdom, cōſent and vnitee of doctrine and fayth myght be retayned, yf the cuppe, might be permitted to the laye people. But theſe men ſeeme not as yet to haue ſufficiently

learned to knowe the ſleightes of Sathan. Can any wyſe and good man beleue, that byThe vvay to auoy de errours, is not by per miſſiō of any. permitting an errour, errors be takē awaye: or that ſeparation being graunted, vnitee can be reteyned? I call it an errour, if the cuppe be challenged as neceſſary to ſaluatiō: And a ſeparatiō I meane, yf it be permitted to any one countrey apart from the reſt of the Chriſtian world.
            And ſuerly to me this waye ſeemeth contrary to reaſon and common ſenſe. The fathers haue been of farre cōtrary opinion: They thought not the meane to quēche hereſies,Note, hovve hereſies haue bene quē
                  ched by the olde Fathers to be permiſsion, but by making of contrary decrees, and conſtitutions.
            VVhat iniquitee ſeemed to be in that matter that Neſtorius would haue our lady to be called the mother of Chriſt? Did not ſhee in deed beare Chriſt? Doo we not fynde her in the ſcriptures commonly called the mother of Ieſu, and neuer termed directly the mother of God?
            Yet ſeemed it good to the holy fathers aſſembled in the councell holden at Epheſus toConcil. Epheſ▪ Can. 2. make this decree, that yf any man ſhould call her the mother of Christ, and not the

mother of God, he ſhould be accurſed.
            And litle did it moue them that Neſtorius ſtill cryed out, he leaned to the expreſſe word of God, or that in all the canonicall ſcriptures it could not be founde that euer ſhe were termed the mother of God, and that they owght to receiue nothing which were not expreſly contayned therin: for they ſawe well ynough that the hereſie of Neſtorius (wherby he laboured to proue that our lady when ſhee bare Chriſt was deliuered but of a bare man only) could not any other waye be ſooner quenched then by a decree and generall conſtitution to the contrary. Neither was their opinion fruſtrat therin. For ſoo deepe a roote in the myndes of men, did this decree of the holy fathers take, that euen to this daye (In the yere of our lorde 435. as long as it is ſince that councell) ther is no natiō found (wher the Goſpell of Chriſt is receyued) in whoſe vulgar tong the virgin Mary is not more commonly called the mother of God, then the mother of Chriſt.
            Agayne wee knowe there is a Canon ofCanō. Apoſt. 50. the Apoſtles that ſuche as be Chriſtened ſhould be thryſe dypped. Yet for auoiding the

ſclaunder of ſchiſme, and the vſe or allowing of hereticall doctryne, we reade it was decreed in the iiij. Councell holden at Tolledo,Concil. Tolet. 4 Cap. 5. they ſhould be but once dipped, leſt by thryſe dipping, following the manner and cuſtome of heretikes, they ſhould ſeeme to allowe their aſſertion.
            Neither are wee ignorant that Chriſt made the ſacrament of his body and bloud in vnleauened bread, which cuſtome was alſo a whyle obſerued in the churche, and is agayne at this daye. But ſo ſone as the Hebionytes begāne to ſprynge (who would needesIrenaeus lib. 1. cap. 26. & Epiphan. lib. 1. haer. 30. haue all the ceremonies of the lawe alſo, as precyſely obſerued and kept, as the very Goſpell, and therfore vtterly denied that this ſacrament might be made in leauened bread, becauſe all oblation offred to our lord ought by the lawe to be with out leauē:) the contrary was decreed: that is to ſaye: That the ſacrament ſhould be made of leauened bread: VVhē yet the thing in his owne nature is indifferēt, neither ſeemeth it muche materyall whether you make it in vnleauened or in leauened bread. But after the hereſie of the Hebionites ceaſed, the Latyn churche

thought good to returne agayne to their intermitted manner of conſecrating in vnleauened bread. Thus wee ſee our holy fathers thought not good by permiſsion to nooriſhe hereſies, but by meere contrary decrees to ſuppreſſe them.
            But ſomwhat they ſaye is to be graunted to the multitude which require this. VVhat yf the multitude ſhould propound this pointe of doctrine: that only God the fatherA truthe receyued by the churche is not to be aboliſhed for ſatisfiēg the fond requeſt of a multitud. were to be adored, and called vppon, but Chriſt to be holden only for an aduocate? Shall we ſay that this is ſtraight wayes to be graunted, becauſe the multitude required it? The matter goeth yll, when we ſhall rather choſe to followe the vnlearned multitude, then the iudgement of thoſe, who are properly called to this office: Namely ſynce it is truly ſayd: that the multitude is theChryſoſt. ho. 1. oper. imperfect▪ in Matt. mother of ſedition and contumacye, and the ſmall nomber the miſtreſe of diſcipline. The multitude ought to be gouerned, and not to gouerne: ought to obey, but not to preſcribe lawes: That kingdom is in an hard and pittefull caſe, where the Rule and gouernemēt ſtandeth in the multitude. As in all other

thinges, ſo chieffly in matters of religion it is diligently to be conſidered, not who, or how many, doo requyre, but what the thing is, that is required.
            The multitude requyred of the Apostles and their followers that they ſhould denye Chriſt, and offer incenſe to idolls: The power and auctoritee did alſo earneſtly aduyſe thē therunto. But what did they to this? [VVeeAct. 5. muſt (ſayd they) obey God rather then men.] And ſo they were ready to indure al kynd of puniſhemēt, yea & to laye downe their neckes vnto thē, rather thē they would do that they required: yea and by their martyr dome they ꝑformed in deed that they had ſpokē.
            VVhat your part is to doo (most vertuous kyng) in the ſuppreſsing of hereſies you are not ignorant: You are taught this alſo by the lawes of your contrey, to the keeping wherof you bound your ſelf by an othe, when youNote▪
                were inueſted in this your kingdom. Verely all men which will be accompted Chriſtiās, eſpecially wee that be biſshops and guides of religion, muſt rather deſire a thowſand deathes, then once to denye Christ.
            But he denyeth Christ, not only which

confeſſeth him not to be God, and acknowlegeth him only for an aduocat, or he which dooth not beleue euery poynt and article, which the infallible auctoritee of the canonicall ſcriptures preſcribeth vnto vs, either of his diuinite or of his humanite: but allſo he, which dooth not in all pointes communicatt with the vnitee of his churche. For Chriſt is both the head and the body: The head is the only begotten ſonne of God, and his body is the Churche: they be as huſbandVVhat is to denye Chriſt. and wyfe two in one fleſhe. VVherfore he dooth as myche denye Chriſt which dooth ſo diſſent from his body the Churche, that he thinketh the communion therof not to be ſpred ouer all, but to be found ſeparat inDe vnita te eccleſiae ca. 4. in 1. Ca. nonic. Iohānis. tract. 6. & ſetmone 31. de verbis a. poſt. Li. 6. Eccleſ. hiſt. Cap. 45. ſome one part: as he which diſſenteth from the holly ſcriptures in any point touching Chriſt him ſelf the head therof: as S. Auguguſtine teacheth vs in many places.
            There is extant in Euſebius an epiſtle of Dionyſius Alexādrinus to Nouatus, wherin he writeth that martyrdome indured for not deuyding the Churche, is as glorious, as that which is indured for refuſing to committe idolatry: Yea and ſurely in my iudgement

(ſaieth Dionyſius) it is ſo myche more glory. For there he ſuffreth martirdome, but for his owne ſoule: but here for the whole churche. VVherby wee may ſee it is no leſſe greuous offence to deuide the Churche, orNote. by aſſent to allowe a ſchiſme, then to offer incenſe to idolls.
            Let it therfore be farre from a chriſtian man, and namely from a Biſshopp, by and by to geue his aſſent whē a multitude or power requireth a ſeparation from the Churche of God. It is to be wiſhed that it may pleaſeThe devtye of a good Biſſhop. God to geue vs this mynd, rather to ſuffer our bodyes to be deuyded from our ſoules, then by our aſſent to allowe any ſacrilegious deuiſe of ſeparation from Christ or his body the churche. Of this mynd as it becometh all Chriſtians to be, ſo chieffly vs that be biſshopps, yf wee will duely execute the office of good paſtors.
            It is well remēbred (moſt vertuous kyng) how when your highnes came first to the gouuernement of this Realme, and that ſome thing was then requyred of you, which partly tended to ſeparation: your highnes curteouſly (as your manner is) and yet well

and flatly denyed their requeſt, ſaying you could not without offence of your conſcience graunt the ſame: vſing farther in the preſence of your councell, and a very notable aſſembly of the people, this ſaying of Chriſt.Matth. 16. [VVhat auayleth it a man yf he gayne the whole word, and ſuffer his ſoule to periſhe? or what exchaunge may a man make for his ſoule?]
            Your princely crowne, the empyre of your large and populous kingdome and of ſo manyNote. dominions adioyning therunto, were not ſo deere vnto you, that the loſſe, or hazard of any of them could once moue you to do any thing, that ſhould ſeeme to be againſt your faith and religion. And why ſhould not the lyke wordes now allſo ſerue for anſwer? Vnleſſe perhapps this ſeparatiō ſeeme of leſſe importaunce then the other, being now required to permitt a deuiſiō to be made from the holly Catholike Church being the body of Chriſt?
            But ſome what is to be graūted (ſay they) in reſpect of a publyke tranquillitie. And (I pray you) was not then allſo the publyke tranquillite of the kingdome pretēded? VVas

it not ſaid that great troubles would ryſe, yf the requeſt were not graunted? Yet God did forſee and prouyde for the tranquillitie of your kyngdome. And yf tranquillite and quyet be to be bought with ſo great loſſe of ſuche a number of ſowlls: it were better (as the Prouerb ſayeth) that heauen and earth ſhould meete, and a thouſand tymes to indure the loſſe of this mortall lyfe, then being deuided from the body of Chriſt to lead a whyle a happy lyfe heare in yearth (in the iudgement of common men) and ſoone after to change the ſame with euerlasting death, and hell tourments that neuer ſhall haue end. Lighter is the loſſe of goodes and lyfe, then of the ſoule, the loſſe wherof is not to be recouered.
            I reaſon not as though it were true which they ſeke to perſuade, that it ſhould myche perteyne to the preſeruation of the tranquillite of your Realme, yf the vſe of the cuppe were graunted to thoſe which require it: to whom it may well be ſayd, [you wotc not what ye aſke.] But it is in deed moſtMatth. 10 certayne, and vndoubted, that yf the thing they require be graunted, that ſhall bryng

to your kyngdom mycbe greater troubles.
            The wyſe and pollityke men of this worldPlato li. 7. de legibus which haue written of common welthes, haue taught vs how perillous to euery common welth is innouation, and chaunge: Namely of lawes or auncient manners. VVhich they haue proued by a ſimilitude taken of the body of man: In ſo myche as they which leaue their accuſtomed manner of diet, and choſe vnto them ſelues a new, hardly andAriſt. li. 2. poli. 6. very ſeldom doo it without hazard of their health. VVherfore they thinke it better to tollerat ſome faultes of the lawe makers, and magistrates. For that it is often ſeen that in diuers caſes there cometh not ſo myche good of correcting an errour vnorderly, as hurt, in that therby, men are by lytle and lytle accuſtomedVVhat harme cometh of innouation and change of lavves. not to obey the magistrat: So as ofte to chaunge lawes ſeemeth to be none other thing, but to withdrawe all the force and credit from the lawes: and to accuſtome men by litle and lytle to the attempting of moe, and greater alterations: And ofte we ſee that thinges which in them ſelues ſeeme ſmall, do proue cauſes of great miſchieffes.
            And doo wee not euen preſently before

our eyes ſee, thoſe thinges thus to haue happened; both emong our neighbours, and euen emong them allſo which in this your realme applyed their myndes to innouatiōs? I could touche ſoome by name which at the beginning requyred but the cuppe, which allſo ſoone after, they vſurped to them ſelues. But did they reſt there? No: but after receyued and imbracyd the whole confeſsion of Augſpurg.The variable alteration of Polonian he retikes And within a whyle reiecting that, tooke the Picardican religion: And after that the Gehennian (I woold haue ſayd Geneuian, but that Gehennian and Geneuian be all one) which Lyſmaninus the Apostata, bānyſhed by your highneſſe (king Sigiſmōd) dooth now openly profeſſe. VVhat they will doo in the end I knowe not: perhapps theyOur cōtre is fallē by ſuch ſchiſme frō lutheraniſme to Caluiniſme will faull to Suenckfeldius. I woold any man coulde ſhewe me, any one contrey where the cuppe hath by priuatt aucthoritee been begoonne to be vſurped, where very ſone after many other and moſt horrible hereſies haue not followed.
            VVithin the memory of our Grandfathers, in the kingdō of Bohemia our next neyghbour firſt fell this cōtentyon about the cup,

which ſoome Cittyes of their owne aucthoritee vſurped to themſelues. But what mō
               ſtrous hereſies did not preſently enſue? How few townes coold yee find in Morauia or Bohemia (where the vſe of the cuppe was receyued) in which you might not ſee ſixe or ſeuen ſectes at once, and all miſerably deuidedHovve he reſy hath creped on in Germany. one from an other? But in Germany (which with owt great ſorrowe and woōder wee cānot behould) wherof did this Sathaniſme take beginning but of the cuppe?
            Theſe ſleyghtes which by the members ofA very ꝓper and apte ſimilitude. Sathan are vſed and framyd againſt true pietye, ſeeme myche lyke, vnto a wedge: which being very thīne at the edge, ſemeth ſcarce entryd into the wood, whē ſoone after it throwghly cleaueth and deuydeth the ſame in ſoonder. But albeit the firſt edge be but thinne, yet maketh it a waye to the growing thicknes that followeth, ſo as when the firſt part is receiued, and edge entryd, of neceſsitee the reſt followeth vntyll at the last the whole peece be ſoondered. And yf a man woulde ſaye the cuppe to be the thinne and ſharpe edge of this deſtroying wedge, he ſhall no whit erre frō the truth. For where

the ſame hath been receyued wee ſee the thicke parte of the wedge hath followed.
            First the Auguſtane confeſsion, which tokeThe Auguſtā Confeſsion. away both prieſthood and ſacrifice, and brought God him ſelf as it were in to an equallite of degree, ſo as he ſhould haue no more honour doō vnto him, then to mortal men. Thē entryd by and by a thicker part, which was the Tigurin and Laſcan cōfeſsiō:The Tigurin and Laſcan cō
                  feſsion which tooke away thoſe ij ſacramentes, to witt of the ſupper of our lord and of baptiſme, which yett the Augustane confeſsiō had of curteſie left vnto vs: to the end that as that confeſsion had left their followers with owt priesthood or ſacrifice: ſo this, would farther allſo leaue theirs, withowt ſacramentes. And this ſecte findeth no leſſe fault with the Lutherans, then it dothe with vs that be Chriſtians. But cōdemneth both of idolatry: becauſe we both are perſuaded (though after a diuers ſorte) that the very body and bloud of Chriſt is conteyned in the ſacrament: And therfore as by their iudgemēt wee made of that a certayne ydoll, ſo doo we alſo (as they ſaye) of the ſacrament of baptiſme, in that wee attribute therunto

remiſsion of ſynnes and beleue our ſelues to be ſaued thorowgh the fonte of regeneratiō. Looke therfore what we ſeeme to the Luthe rans, the ſame do the Lutherās ſeeme to the Sacramentaryes, that is to ſaye, idolaters.Suenkfeldius
            
            At laſt foorth cometh Suenckfeldius, who taketh away not only the whole ſcripture, but allſo all outward miniſtery of the word, and maketh the Sacramentaryes, Lutherans,Note. and vs Christians, idolaters all a leeke: who hauing regard to the bare letter (meaning the canonicall ſcriptures) ſeeke there in to fynd our ſaluation. And this was the last but, or end of the wedge, whoſe firſt part being entred and receyued, how thinne ſo euer the edge therof ſeemed, wee ſee how by litle and litle all theIn the hachet of he reſyes reſt of this Sathaniſme brake in, as more largely wee haue opened in an other booke.
            Thus doo you ſee (moſt vertuous kyng) wherunto the matter is now brought: How after that in deſpight of the churche the cuppe in the beginning had encroched, how greate a forwardnes, and ſwaye grewe therby to the reſt of the Sathaniſme. VVho

ſo euer is a Chriſtian man, at the leſt yf he be of any pietye, can not eaſely be induced to depart from the ſenſe and conſent of thePrincipijs obſta. vniuerſall churche. But ſo ſoone as a beginning of departure in any one thing is made, now is it more hard to fynd the end, then it was to ſee the beginning: So as not without cauſe it hath been taken for an old prouerb, the beginning is more thē the halfe of the whole: which wee may ſee manifestly verefyed in them which at the first by the only vſe of the cuppe wowned thē ſelues out from the knot of the churche, who ſone after receiued if not all other ſectes, yet at the leſt the whole Lutherā hereſie owt of hand,
            Haue wee not to good proufe of this matterThe diſordered Alteratiō of Germanie in Germany? There was ſet forth a certain Interim religiō (as muche to ſaie, as religion put to daying) how well I will not ſaye, but at the leſt by auctoritee ſuffred, and receyued allmost of all, ſauing only a few: But I pray you with them that receyued it, was the lawfull prieſthood and ſacrifice reſtored agayne according to the forme preſcribed in that booke? No. Nothing leſſe. But the Interimiſtes be, and were a like with the other

Lutherans, but that ſome where they abſteyned from fleſhe in the lent, and on the fridaye: and in their diuine ſeruice, or rather prophane, (to forbeare the calling of it by the right name, Sacrilegious:) they vſe in ſome places ſurpliſes, and other prieſtlyke veſtiments.
            But in your owne kyngdom doo wee not ſee the like, wher the cupp by great ſacrilege is vſurped? Is not there both the prieſthood and ſacrifice leekewyſe abrogated? Doo not Hovve many mere laye mē committe this ſacrilege in England? laye men arrogat to them ſelues the office of Prieſtes? Do they not take on them power, which they haue not, to make the body of Chriſt? and ſo geue vnto the communicantes mere bakers bread? For how can he make the body of Chriſt to whom power is not geuen ſo to doo?
            In fyne Sathan ſayth nothing ells (when cōtrary to the ordinaunce and obſeruaunce of the churche he commaundeth the layety to drinke of the cuppe) but euen that which he ſomtyme ſayde to Chriſt him ſelf: [Throwe thy ſelf downe] that is to ſaye. Leaue the tradition of the churche. Caſt away all obediēce therunto: Make none accompt of the auctoritee

of the councells. But a Chriſtian man feareth yet to throwe him ſelf downe, becauſe he ſeeth great perill therin, and therfore long deliberateth with him ſelf, whether he were beſt ſo to doo or no. But yf he haue once begōne to throwe him ſelf downe, then is it not in his owne power to ſtay him ſelf, but that without recouery he falleth hedlong downe to the bottome.Auguſt. in Pſal. 103.
            
            S. Augustine writing vpon that text of the Pſalme: [He builded the earth on a ſure foundation, which ſhall neuer be remoued, but continew from generation to generation:] Interpreteth the earth to be the churche, and the water which runneth byPſal. 77. and cometh to nothing, in an other Pſalme, he expoundeth to be hereſies. And for prouiſionDecrees of coūcels the Bakes of the Churche, that waters flowe not in to the churche, that is to ſaye, that hereſies may not drowne the ſame, great cliffes and bākes are ſet against the ſayd floudes. VVhich bankes may well be interpreted to be the decrees of councells. But though the bankes be neuer ſo ſtrong, yet yf there be neuer ſo litle a hole made into the ſame, ſtraightAn apte ſimilitude waye the whole waight of the waters lyeth

there vppon, and ſoone breaking downe the banke farre and wyde ouerfloweth whole fieldes, paſtures and villages, ſo as nothing may then ſtay the violent courſe thereof.
            This hole therfore is then opened, when againſt the ordinaunce and obſeruaunce of the churche the cuppe is permitted to the laytie. For who may let why, by this hole (how ſmall ſo euer it be) all kynd of hereſies breaking downe the bankes, that is to ſaye, violating the decrees of councells may not violently breake into the churche? VVhich conſidered, it is a wonder to ſee that there want not ſome, which are not aſshamed to promyſe tranquillite vnto the church, and to your highnes kyngdom: if againſt the ordinaūce and obſeruaunce of the churche the cuppeNote. might be graunted vnto the laye people.
            Yf the peece of wood may be preſerued whole and ſound, which the firſt part of the wedge (ſeeme the edge therof neuer ſo thinne) is driuen and entred into: yf it may be prouided that the thick part therof driuen with many blowes ſhall not yet at all cleaue the peece: yf the corne fieldes and meddowesNote. may be preſerued where into the flouddes,

by breache made in the banckes, doo with great force flowe in, and can not eaſely fynd a waye owt agayne: yf a man may be preſerued who hath throwen him ſelf downe hedlong from an high tower: yf he may ſtay him ſelf in the middeſt of his faull ſo as coming hedlōg to the ground he breake not his neck, or bruſe ſome other part of his body: thē may in deed that kingdom be ſafe, ſownd and quyet, wherin the cuppe is vſurped in deſpight of the churche and councells.
            Many ther be which require a councell, but to what end? or to what effect may it be, yf after thinges therin well determyned, it be laufull to the most abiect kynd of men, to doo all thinges contrary in deſpight therof? VVill the auctoritee of councells be more regarded and feared then dyettes and parlamentes? But haue not wee ſeene before ourCouncels and parliamentes in like regarde vvith heretikes. eyes in deſpight of the kyng and the parlament, many thinges done contrary to that, which hath in thoſe aſſemblies been decreed? yea and ſyche thinges as before the decrees made, they durſt not haue done? And ſhall wee there hoape for tranquillite and quietnes, where no auctorite of

councells, aſſemblies, Biſshopps, or princes is regarded? VVhere it is ſought that we ſhould be without lawe, without kynge, without priesthood, ſacrifice, ſacramentes, yea and without a God to? VVhere it is ſo earneſtly laboured to buyld and make of that Citye, which hitherto hath been of one toūge and one language, a new found Babylon, wherinGen. 11. The building of Babilon that is to ſaie of cōfuſiō
                is ſo great confuſion of tounges that no man can heare the voyce of his neighbour?
            But what nedeth more? Your ſelf know (moſt vertuous king) how whē ſome thought good to graunt the cuppe to ſome clamorous perſons, ſo that they would rest there, they refuſed to accept it, with that condition. Fewe there are in your kingdom that will be contented only with the cuppe: no not many which will ſtaye vpon the confeſsion of Auſpurge. Moſt of them that are departed from vs, are either Picardines, Caluiniſtes, Laſkaniſtes, Neſtorians, or Seruetiās, of which ſectes no one will be ſatisfied with the only permiſsion of the cuppe. VVho ſo readeth theThe Apologie of picardes Apologie of the Picardines, ſhall therin fynd that they ſeeme only to follow the Boemians, being willing to reſt only vpon hauing the

communiō in bothe kyndes, and in all other thinges ſhewe them ſelues in māner as catholyke, as they which are in deed true and perfyt catholikes in all poyntes.
            Againe Petrus Paulus Vergerius who the laſt yere came into your kingdō for none other cauſe, but only to ſtirre ſeditiō therin, brought foorth letters written to certayne perſons, which letters he allſo cauſed to beMalice the mother of he reſy, maketh her children forget cō
                  mon humanyte. printed. But was this firſt the part of an honeſt mā? Verely yf he had had any ſhame, yf any ſperk of honeſty had been in him, he would neuer haue attempted any ſyche matter. But herein he ſhewed him ſelf a man voyde of all humanitee, and ignorant of the honeſt courſe and trade of lyfe emong men, ſynce to publiſhe letters priuatly written, is none other thing, but (as Cicero ſayd) toCicero. 2. Philip. take from this lyfe the ſocietye of lyfe, and the commodite of ſecret and familyar talke between abſent frendes. He publiſshed allſo in print ij. letters of Paulus Quartus the Biſshop of Rome, and not content therwith he wōderfully darkened and deformed with his owne Gloſes, and wrong interpretations, thoſe thinges which were therin godly and

vertuouſly written. Heare what he writeth in his notes vpon the firſt epiſtle.
            Some man will ſaye thus: yf we mightNote the Sacrilegius vvordes of this Goſpeller. dryue the Pope to this, that he would but aſſent that the miniſtres of the churches might haue wyues, vſe the vulgar toung in the adminiſtration of the ſacramentes, and geue the ſacrament vnder both formes to the lay people, and in all other articles and doctrines to conſent with the Churche of Rome, as hitherto wee haue doone, would ye not thinke good we ſhould there reſt for a tyme? And laying vp that gayne in ſtore, by lytle and lytle in proces of tyme deuiſe for the winning of the other poyntes?
            
               I anſwer, ſaith Vergerius.
            
            I lyke it not: For the matter conſiſteth notThe aunſvver of Vergerius to his ovvne obiectiō. only in that the miniſter ſhould haue a wyfe, vſe his vulgar toung in the Churche, and deliuer the ſacrament in both kyndes: but in that he haue a liuely faith, that he be a member of Chriſtes Churche, and be of a right iudgemēt, ſhewing vnto the people that pure doctrine which our lord Ieſus Chriſt the ſonne of God brought out of his fathers boſome. VVhat a defyling of our doctryne, what a ſtraunge thing ſhould it be, yf we ſhould geue our conſent that the paſtor of our ſoules ſhould

be a maſsing prieſt, annoynted and allowed by ſome Biſshop and mēber of Antechriſt? etc.
            Here Sathan by this his champion goeth to his matter more opēly, then by thē which contend ſo earneſtly for the cuppe, and ſyche other things as ſeeme of leſſe waight: VVhoſe wily deceytes alſo herein he diſcloſeth, and thinkyng it ſuperfluous to vſe any more circumſtances, he fleeth euen ſtraight to the throte: to the end that withowt any more delaye God may be brought in order andThe heretikes goe about to bring God ī to order. equallite of degree, with mortall men, hauing left vnto him neither any priesthood, nor externe ſacrifice, wherby he ſhould be acknowledged to be God. This is the thing which Sathan by his lymme and truſty ſeruaunt Vergerius thought good euē at the firſt brunt to attempt: And ſuerly it hath been truly ſayd: In vayne is that doone by many, whichAriſt. in Phyſ. li. 1. may be doone by fewe. For what ſhould a man go about the buſ he yf he may eaſely get thorowgh?
            But heare what after a fewe wordes he addeth farther: For after that this man (being ouer curious of the ſtate of forreyn common welthes, wherunto he is a ſtraūger,

and euen borne (as it ſeemeth) to ſtirre vp ſeditions) had exhorted the Polonians, that yf theſe iij. thinges were graunted them, they ſhould conſtantly refuſe them, he hath theſe wordes.
            VVote thow well Polonia, this matterBeholde here an open and plaine pro teſting proteſtāt. which now lyeth in controuerſy touching religion may indure no moderation or concord. Marke well what I ſaye and laye it in thy remembraunce. For there be ſome that ſay, were it not trowe we poſsible that ſome meane migt be found to appeaſe this controuerſy? I anſwer (ſayth he) that none can poſsibly be fownd. For yf the papacy remayne in force, the doctrine of Ieſu Chriſt can not be free. And againe yf the doctrine of Ieſu Chriſt which wee profeſſe doo preuayle, then of neceſsitee muſt the whole papacy be rooted vp, ſo as ther is none other meane of concord or eſtabliſshing of the true churche of Chriſt, but that the whole papacy with all the tiranny and wicked doctryne therof, be cleerly taken away.
            And ſure as for that Vergerius writeth that the ſtate of religion may indure no moderation, or concord, I can not well denye, but he writeth truly. For either a man muſt be a whole Chriſtian or a whole Lutheran.

There is no haltyng on either ſyde. As well ſhalt thou be dāned yf thou be a half Chriſtian or a half Lutheran as yf thou were a whole Lutheran.
            I call him an half Chriſtian, which beleeuingVVho is a demye Chriſtiā. all thinges as he ought to doo of Chriſt the head, dooth yet by his owne priuat fancye in certayne rytes deuyde him ſelf from the body. He thinketh he houldeth fast the head and yet deuideth him ſelf from the body. Therfore he will be halfe a Chriſtiā and half a Lutheran: that is to ſay a Sathanist: For Chriſt him ſelf ſayth, [No man can ſerue ij.Matt. 6. Luke 16. 2. Cor. 6. maſters: what participation can ther be between righteouſnes and iniquitee? or what ſociety (ſayth Pawll) betweē light and darcknes? or what agreement between Chriſt and Belial?] And in the Apocalips wee read: [IApoc. 3. knowe thy workes that thou art neither hot nor cold. I would thou were either hot or cold: but ſynce thou art luke warme, and neither hott nor cold, I will by vomyt caſt the out of my mowth:] The luke warme is euen in lyke ſort caſt foorth, in lyke ſort vomyted out of the mowth of God, as he which ſinneth in the contrary part. Therfore they

are in dede very muche deceyued which thinke to contriue a concord by mediocriteEſai. 28. in matters of religion. [The bed is ſtraight (ſayth the prophet) ſo as the one muſt nedes fall out, and a ſcant cloke cā not couer both.] They can not be together in one bed, that is to ſay Chriſt and Luther may not ioyne in one mans hart, the one of them muſt nedes faull out: they can not be both couered with one cloke. VVherfore in ſome part of rytes and ordinaūces to profeſſe Chriſt, and in an other part Luther, is nothing ells, but to denye whole Chriſt. That is therfore ſo true as may be, that matters of religion admyt no concord by that meane.
            VVe profeſſe in our crede that wee beleue the holly catholyke Churche. From her who ſo euer departeth, and harkeneth not to her teaching and preceptes, but geueth more credit to his owne iudgement, then to hers, though he beleue all the reſt which is cōtayned in the crede, though he beleue and receyue all the ſcriptures: though he honour them as the very word of God, (as in deed they are being rightly vnderſtanded) yet hath he nothing to do with Chriſt the head,

which hath ſeparated him ſelf from the bodyHe cā not be accompted a chriſtian that diuideth him ſelf from the miſtical body of Chriſt. of Chriſt. He is an Ethnik and a Publican not deſeruing in any part the name of a Chriſtian.
            How often did the Arians attempt to come to ſoome agreemēt with the Catholikes? VVherūto to ſhewe them ſelues willing, they ſayd they woold not ſtick to permytt that 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                ſhould be beleued to be the ſonne of the father, ſo he were not callyd 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               . There was but one poore letter Iota (.i.) inTher vvas only one letter in queſtiō betvveen the Chriſtians and the Arrianes. queſtion or difference between the Chriſtiās and the Arrians. Yet could not the Chriſtiās thinke meete to graunt it vnto them. For vnder this one letter they ſawe them hyde their hereſie, wherby they were content to allowe the ſonne to be leeke vnto the father in fulnes of grace, but not in propriete of nature.
            VVith what ſleightes did the goouernour of Ceſaria ſeke to perſuade vnto S. Baſil, that he ſhould yeeld to the tyme and not bryng ſo many Churches in daunger, by ſtanding vppō the ſifting of ſo nyce a point of doctryne?Theodotet lib 4 ca. 19. hiſt. But what ſayd S. Baſil therunto? Suche taulke (ſayth he) may ſerue yoong men: for they

and ſyche lyke gape after ſych toyes. But they which haue been trayned vpp in the holly ſcriptures, can not ſuffer to haue one ſyllable therof brought in queſtion or haſard. But vſe rather to offer them ſelues to any kynd of death, yf the caſe ſo requyre. And therin Baſill ſeemed to the heretikes to be froward, as before him Athanaſius and Hilary were allſo reputed. But that which the heretikesConſtācy of the Catholike fathers. iudged frowardnes, that the Catholikes and right beleuers, eſteemed for great conſtācy.
            VVherby I find my ſelf allſo the leſſe greued, if to ſoome I ſeeme ſtubborne in ſayeng ther can be no concord between Catholikes and heretikes, onles they which haue departyd frō vs retourne agayne to the place they went from, that is, to the lap of our mother the holly Churche: onles they beleeue her, commytt them ſelues to her, and ſubmytt their iudgementes to hers. I had rather be counted ſtyffe and ſtubborne with Athanaſius, Hilary and Baſill, thē lyke a vayne reed to waue with euery wynd: But theſe procedinges which I haue remembryd, were of long tyme paſt.
            Lett vs ſee how oftē in this our age there

hath been practyſe for concord, between the Lutherans and the Suinglians. But how hanſoomly fell that out to the Lutherans? VVhat a concord was it that was made between Martin Luther and Martin Bucer?The gētle agreemēt betvveen Bucer and Luther. In Synod. Conſtant. habita▪ An. 1534 & iterum Iſenaci. An. 36. Martyn Bucer in fauor of Luther was cō
               tent to graunt the body and blood of Chryst to be ſubſtancially in the ſacrament, ſo that Luther would agayne to pleaſure him, graunt that the body and blood of Chriſt was not there, but at the very inſtant when it was receyuid.
            VVhich of theſe Martyns (I pray you) drewe the other to his opinyon? VVhether became Martyn Luther a ſacramentary, or Martyn Bucer of a ſacramentary a Lutheran? Verely Iohn Caluin dooth not any other way make a more effectuall argument thatCaluin his cheefe argument of deniēg the real preſence in the ſacramēt. the body of Chriſt is not ſubſtancially in the ſacrament, then of that graunte of Luther confeſsing a reall preſence only, when it is receiued. VVherof alſo he gathereth that the body and bloud of our lord are geuē vnto vs only by vertu and efficacy, but not by their ſubstācial preſence: and none otherwyſe then they be preſent and geuen vnto vs in baptiſme

and penaunce, or when ſo euer the death of Chriſt worketh any effect in vs. Of which opinion he gloriouſly ſayeth Phillip Melancthon allſo was.
            Is not this a proper concord wherby they which are allredy heretikes become greater heretikes? And by their ſacrilegious bouldnes growing ſtronger in blaſphemies and errours, wexe daily worſe, and worſe, not2. Tim. 3. only erring them ſelues, but drawing allſo others into errours? But let vs paſſe ouer the Sacramentaryes: whoſe impietye the Lutherans them ſelues though they differ not myche frō them, doo yet ſo abhorre and2. Iohn. 
                     •
                  
                deteſt as they may not afoord any of them, ſo myche as a good morowe, or indure theirNote, the ſtate of proteſtāts in the free Cytes of Germany. fellowſhip or company, or once to receiue or harbour them: but ſo ſone as it is knowen that there is a ſacramentary emong them, they ſtraight way banniſh him out of their Cittyes.
            How often hath there been concorde intreated between the Lutherans and the Chriſtians? VVhereupon was the Interim Religion agreed vnto, but that there were ſome gaue great hope that concorde

by this meanes might growe betwen the Chriſtians and Lutherans? But hath that ſucceded according to their expectation? No God wot: But looke what was with full iudgement of all (except only a fewe) allowed at the dyetts of the Empyre, and with their good willes ther determined, that, ſoone after was not obſerued by them ſelues, which had receiued it.
            They of Lipſia leſt they ſhould ſeeme notThe Lypſians. to be wyſer then the reſt of the whole Empyre, though at thoſe aſſemblyes they had agreed to many thinges, touching the Interim religion, which was there preſcribed, yet thought they many things of their owne and of their maſter Martin Luthers deuiſe meete to be kept: and therfore ſet foorth aInterim vpon interim. i. daying vpon daying. dooble Interim which in ſome things agreed, and in ſome diſagreed from the former Interim agreed on at the aſſemblyes.
            But they of VVittemberg though theyThe VVit tēbergers. were neer neyghbours to them of Lipſia and ſubiects to the ſame Prince, who had ſubſcribed to the Interim religion, ſet out allſo in writing an other deuiſe of theirs, wherin they would not be caulled Interimiſtes, but

               Adiaphoriſtes, and therin departed from theAdiaphoriſtes, as ye vvoulde ſaie: indifferents. doctrine of their maiſter, Luther, in fewer thinges then the Lipſians hadd done.
            But the Cittyes of Saxony when Mathias Flaccus the Illyrican had kindled fyrebrandsThe Zelous or Rigorous Lutheranes. amongeſt them, would not goo one heare bredth from the deuyſes of their M. Martin Luther: but thought what ſo euer was ſpoken or written by him, meete to be receyued and adored as the expreſſe word of God.
            VVe ſee therfore that after concord attempted and thought to haue been in manner brought to paſſe, there is growen greater diſcord then before. For as the Lutherans moſt wickedly deuided them ſelues from the Catholike vnitee and the mysticall body of our Sauiour Chriſt, ſo did they ſoone diſperſe their owne vnitee, with helliſh diſcordes among them ſelues. VVhat a reuell was ther,The reuel that vvas emōg the Lutherās about the ſurpleſſe how many and how bitter contentions between the Zelous Lutherans (for ſo they would be accompted that follow Flaccus Illyricus) and between the degenerat diſciples of Luther, whom Flaccus calleth Adiaphoriſtes and Interimiſtes: of which ſort

they be that follow Melancthon, what a doo (I ſay) hath there been between theſe only about the ſurpleſſe which of auncient tyme the Prieſtes haue vſed to weare in the churches? But what was the cauſe that they thus purſued one an other in ſyche ſmall matters? Sure none other but for that the Theſe are the Zelous or Rigorous Lutheranes. Germayne Lutherans feared lest yf any of the auncient cuſtomes and ceremonyes were reſtoryd againe to the churche, it might ſeeme in parte an inclinyng from Luther to Chriſt and doubted leſt they might ſeeme therby to open a wyndow agayne to the papacy.
            If they then which reioyce to be caulled true Lutherans, tooke ſyche ware and carefull heed, leeſt by reſtoring the auncient ceremonyes of the church, they ſhould open a wyndow to the papacy, with how myche more diligēce ought wee that glory in no name, but in the name of Christ, to forſee that ther be none opened for Sathan to enter at? To whom without doubt they are opened, when men are accuſtomed not to geue eare to the churche, and to ſet at naught her ordinaūces preferring their owne priuat iudgementes before the iudgement therof.
            
               It is moſt certayne and vndoubted thatThe Originall of this great ſchiſme and hereſie grevve only of contempt of the churche this whole Sathaniſme which now (with teares I ſpeake it) floriſsheth in Germany and buddeth euen in your kyngdom (moſt vertuous Prince) hath chieffly growen heerby, that euery mā diſpiſing the iudgemēt of the churche, hath thought it lawfull for him ſelf to interprett the ſcriptures and of his owne head to alter the rytes and ceremonyes therof. VVherfore wee are not vnwilling in this poynt to agree in opinion with Vergerius that the matter of religion now in controuerſy may not admyt any moderation or concorde: namely ſyche as they would haue, ſynce it is ſo truly written of the bleſſed martyr S. Cyprian: There can be no ſocyeteeCypr. Lib. 1▪ epiſt. 3. between faith and infidelitee. He that is not with Chriſt is agaynſt Chriſt. He that is enemy to his vnitee and peace can not ioyne with vs: If they come with ſubmiſſion and ſatisfaction lett them be heard. If they come with curſes and threates, let them be refuſed.
            
            But where that lewde fellowe Vergerius writeth there is none other meane or hope of concord, except the vniuerſall papacy be

ſuppreſſed, ſee for Gods ſake what ſleyghtes theſe be of Sathan: and to what end he tendeth in ſeeking ſo earneſtly to ouerthrowe the papacy: But that our ſaying may be the better beleeued, wee wil rather bryng foorth his teſtimony of the papacy, who ſo long as he liued, held mortall warre againſt the ſame: and whoſe word Vergerius adoreth as the very word of God, then vſe our owne wordes. For thus writeth Luther in a certayne Epistle to ij. pariſh prieſtes of the Anabaptiſme.
            I heare (ſayth he) and ſee rebaptiſing takenThe vvordes of Luther touching the papacye x▪ yeres after he vvas ſtrayed from the churche in hand of ſome, vpon this grownd that they would doo it in the deſpight of the Pope, as men that will haue nothing of Antechriſt. Euen as the ſacramentaries will haue in the ſacrament, but meer bread and wyne in deſpight of the Pope thinkyng them ſelues able by this meanes to ſuppreſſe the papacy. Verely this foūdatiō is friuolous and vayne, wherupon they can build no good thing: For by that reaſon wee muſt denye al the holy ſcriptures, and the office of preaching: For all this haue wee from the Pope. And then muſt wee make allſo a newe ſcripture. Then muſt wee forſake alſo the ould Teſtamēt, leſt we ſhould ſeeme to haue any thing frō the infidell Iues.

All this is but fooliſhnes. For Chriſt allſo found in the Iuiſhe nation abuſe emong the Scribes and Phariſees, yet did he not therfore reiect al things which they held and tawght. But wee confeſſe that vnder the papacy isSee vvhat Luther graunteth to Papiſtes. myche good Chriſtianitee, yea and all good Chriſtianitee. And that from thence it hath come vnto vs. Yea truly wee graunt that vnder the papacy is the true ſcripture, the true baptiſme, the true ſacrament of the aultar, the true keyes of remiſsion of ſynnes, the true office of preaching, the true Cathechiſme which is the lords prayer, the x. Commaundementes, and the Articles of the Crede. I ſay farther that vnder the papacy is the trueNote. Chriſtianitee: yea and the very true kernell of Chriſtianitee.
            And leſt any man ſhould thinke thatAn obiection putt of. Luther wrote this when as yet the light of the Euangelicall veritee (wherof he ſo myche vaunteth) had not ſhyned vpon him, let him knowe that this Epistle was writtenAn. 1528. by him the x. yere after he had cut him ſelf of, from the Churche of God, at what tyme his name was very farre ſpred by the fame of his hereſies. Thus ye ſee how the truthe brake foorth from him againſt his will, euen as it did thorowgh the throte of BalaamNume. 22.
               
the prophet, all be it he were an enemy of the truth.
            See you now (moſt vertuous kyng) wherunto the deuyſes of Sathan tend, when by his ſowldyar Vergerius and by others of that kynd he ſeeketh to haue the vniuerſall papacy taken away? For he ſeeketh therin (by the verdit of Luther) to haue taken away the true ſcripture, true Baptiſme, the true Sacrament of the Aultar, the true keyes of remiſsion of ſynnes, the true office of preaching, the true Catechiſme, true Chriſtianitee, yea and the very true kernell of Chriſtianitee. And haue not theſe his deuiſes ſucceded as he would haue them?
            Firſt Luther ſowght to take away the papacy,The foundaciō layd by Luther and therunto he layd certayne foundations as we haue before ſhewed. For firſt in deſpight of the Pope and the councell, he graunted the cuppe to the laye people. Then he abrogated aunciēt rytes and ceremonies, and inſtituted newe. Not long after of theLuthers procedinges. number of the vy. ſacramentes he tooke away v. And laſt of all, he ouerthrew together both ſacrifice and priesthood. But what came herof? VVith in a ſhort tyme after, vp

ſprang Sacramētaryes, and Anaptiſtes, who tooke from vs thoſe ij. ſacramentes allſo, of the aultar, and baptiſme, which ij. Luther had yet (of his curteſy) left vnto vs: And that did they not, more in hatred or deſſpight of the Pope, then of Luther him ſelf, if wee may beleue Philip Melancthon. ForThe ſucceſſe thereof. they ſeing Luther thus to play the Pope, yea and more then a Pope, could not broke this intollerable tyranny of the man.
            After this, foorth came the heauēly prophetesThe heauēly prophetes. which tooke from vs both the ſcriptures, and all externe miniſtery of preaching. At the laſt (owt of what darke caues I know not) iſſued Campanus and Seruetus,Cāpanus and Seruetus he retikes which ſowght to pull from vs our Sauiour Chriſt ſpeaking very blaſphemouſly of his diuinitee. This end at the laſt they attayned which laboured to ouerthrow the papacy, and to do all thinges in deſpight of the Pope.
            I vſe ſomtyme (moſt vertuous kyng) to reade the triffles of thoſe heretikes which are of no great name, that I may knowe the better how things goe amongeſt them. My happe was (emong others) to hyt vpon a certaine Germayne Luther an named Eraſmus,

and not only by ſyr name, but in deed rightly caulled (Albertus. All beere) who wrote a booke againſt Carolstadius and other Sacramentaries, Anabaptistes, and image breakers. Therein he telleth of one Iames Schēck, howThe Impietee of a Lutheran only for that he vvoold contrary and ouerth vvart the order of the churche. One other of the ſame bacche. when at Berlin he preached to the people the word of Luther for the word of God, he could not by any meanes be induced vpon the ſolemne feast day of Eaſter to preache of the Reſurrection of our Lord, but vpon Easter daye he would nedes preache of the Paſsion. And of an other at Francfort that would in no wyſe kepe the feast of Chriſtmas daye. And why I pray you? Forſooth in deſpight of the Pope: leſt they ſhould ſeeme in any thing to impart with the papacy, that is to ſay with Chriſtianitee: they had rather all the memory of Chriſt his benefits, were extinguiſshed, then they would celebrat the ſame with thoſe Chriſtians that acknowledge the Pope.
            You ſee (most vertuous Kyng) what thinges haue followed wher the papacy hath been taken away. And this very ſtate of thinges Vergerius or rather the diuell by Vergerius his ſolliciter ſeeketh now to bring allſo into

your kingdom: For this hath allwayes been an owld practyſe of Sathan: as wee reade written by the holy martyr. S. Cyprian to infestLi. 1. epi. 3. and perſecute, in all he may the head ruler of the churche to the end that hauing taken away the maſter he might with the more violence, and owtrage, ſpoyle and ranſacke the churche.
            
               Neither haue hereſies or ſchiſmes (ſaith S. Cyprian) riſen of any other occaſion thenCyp. lib. 1. Epiſt. 3▪
                   of that, the prieſt of God is not obeyed, and that one Priest for the tyme in the churche, and one iudge for the tyme in ſtead of Chriſt, is not thought vpon. To whom yf the whole brotherhood would be obedient according to Gods teachinges, no mā would make a doo againſt the Colledge of Priestes: No man would make him ſelf iudge not of the Biſshopp now, but of God after Gods iudgement, after the fauour of the people declared by their voyces at the election, after the conſent of his fellow Biſshopps: no man thorough breache of vnitee, and ſtryfe would deuyde the churche of Chriſt. No man ſtanding in his owne conceyte and ſwelling with pryde would apart erect abrode a newe

churche. VVhom S. Hierome following teachethHiero. cō
                     tr: Luciferianos. vs, that the ſaftye of the churche dependeth of the dignitee of the high Priest, to whom yf there be not geuen a certayne peerleſſe power, and ſupereminent ouer all others, there will become in the church ſo many ſchiſmes as ther be Priestes.
            
            Heerby may you gather (most vertuous Kyng) wherabout Vergerius goeth when he would haue the papacy taken away: For he would haue taken away what ſo euer remayneth of Christianitee with in your kingdome or dominions: he would haue ſchiſmes brovght in, hereſies ſpred abrode, Chriſt bā
               niſhed owt of all your dominions, and that farre and wyde thorowgh owt all the ſame, might creepe, this whole Sathaniſme, which wee ſee hath taken ſyche depe roote among your neighbours of Germany to the great hurt and ſpoyle of that nation. And to ſtop that this his enterpryſe take not effect, nothing more auayleth, then Vnitee. This Vnitee therfore, dooth he aſſaut with all his ingenſe and deuyſes and earneſtly laboureth to diſplace him, by whoſe authoryte it cometh to paſſe that vnitee is reteyned in the

churche of God. For he ſeeth that ſo long as his dignitee and auctoritee remayneth in force, he can proffit nothing.
            But weygh with your ſelf (Right renoumed Kyng) how after ſome had taken away the papacy, whether the ſame men did not ſoone after deuyſe and attempte allſo to remoue the Emperour. VVhere wee ſee that emong them it is no leſſe reproche to be caulled a Caeſarist then a Papiſt. VVhat hath paſſed not many yeres ſynce in Germany yourVVherū
                  to thedeuiſes of heretikes tend. highnes is not ignorant. But thoſe odious matters I had rather paſſe ouer with ſylēce. It ſhall be expediēt for you to remember alwayes this verſe which is ſo common in euery mans mowth.
            
               Happy is he, that taketh good vewe,
               By other mēs harme, his owne to eſchewe.
            
            Take heed therfore lest ſhortly it come to paſſe that it be counted no leſſe ignominious to be called a That is. to holde of the kinge then to holde of the pope Regist, then a Papist. For to this tendeth all their deuyſe to take away all order, to bring the auctoritee of princes in hatred and contempt, and ſo to induce a confuſe popular gouernement without a Prynce. VVher of ſynce Vergerius is a

certayne brand, and kindleth nothing, butPaulus Vergerius a fierbrād of ſeditiō. ſeditions and broyles, and for that he caulleth him ſelf an exile of Ieſu Chriſt, and that truly, for he hath in deed nothing to doo with Chriſt, euen as he hath made him ſelf, an exile of Ieſu Chriſt, ſo ſhall it be very well that your highnes make him an exile and banniſshed man out of your whole kingdom and dominions.
            He ſayeth, this doctryne of Iheſu Chriſt which he profeſseth can not ſtāde in ſurety, yf the papacy remayne in force: as though ther were any one of all the heretikes of this our age (who yet in this one thing doo maruelouſly agree that the papacy muſt be taken away) which did not as ſtoutly vaunt him ſelf to profeſſe the doctryne of Iheſu Christ, not withſtanding that all and euery of thē doo both diſagree emōg them ſelues and ſtād in a mere oppoſite, of the doctryne of Iheſu Chriſt. And yf you ſeeke narrowly in his pack, which doctryne of Iheſu Chriſt it is, that he profeſſeth, ſuche is the ignorāce and vnſkilfulneſſe of the man, that I beleeue he woold be myche to ſeeke of a direct awnſwer.
            
            For ſo farre as we may gather of his otherThe incō
                  ſtācy and Incertainty of vergerius his doctryne.
               
writinges, he is ſoōtyme with the Swingliās, ſoomtyme with the Lutherans, and ſoomtyme with the Picardines. As for the confeſsiō of Auſburge no man can well iudge him to be of, in ſo myche as he preferreth the confeſsion of Brentius (whoom he hath in eſpecyall admiration) before all other confeſsiōs. And that Brentius dooth allowe the doctryneThe doctryne of Oſiander. of Oſiandre touching iustification (which is the ſomme of the whole Goſpell) it is well knowen. But how myche they which would be accomptyd of the confeſsion of Auſburge doo deteſt that doctryne, it is alſo cleer, both by the cenſure of the doctors of VVittēberg and by the writinges and dooinges of Mathias Flaccus and Ioachimus Merlinus.
            For what reckening Merlinus made of them whoo being of his flock harkened to Oſianders doctryne, it is not vnknowen: forThe impietie and crueltie of Merlinus the heretike againſt the follouers of Oſiader his doctrī. neither woold he allow them buryall when they were dead, nor be perſuadyd to affoord Baptyſme to their children. And can there be any man found that will ſuffer him ſelf to be perſuadyd that this doctryne of Vergerius is the doctryne of Ieſu Chriſt, which not only the Christyans deteſt, but allſo the Germayne

Lutherās doo ſo excedingly abhorre, that with ſyche as profeſſe the ſame they will neither whill they be alyue nor after, haue any communion or fellowſhip.
            But I will taulke no more of Vergerius: whoom in this place I thought not amyſſe to remēber, to the end that eche man may perceyue how myche more openly Sathan hathSathā did more opē
                  ly bevvraye hīſelf by Vergerius, then by any of the other heretikes. layed foorth his mynd by him, then by thoſe which by certayne vnderminynges, labour to blowe vp and ouerthrowe the vnitee of the churche, in ſeeming at the firſt to requyre nothing but the cuppe: And that they are farre wyde whiche thinke that cō
               cord may growe between the Chriſtians and Lutherans yf the cuppe might be graunted to the laytee, and wyues to the Prieſtes. A goodly concord ſuerly wherin not the vyces of the papacy (which men would leeke well ynowgh) but the whole papacy ſhall be taken away, that is to ſay, all Chriſtianitee aboliſshed. But becauſe wee haue now ſpoken ſufficiently of theſe thinges, let vs retourne to our principall matter.Epilogus.
            
            Our purpoſe was to wryte chieffly of the1. expreſſe word of God. VVherof wee haue

ſhewed you that the heretykes do as myche, or more glory and vawnt as do the catholykes and right beleuers.
            VVee haue alſo ſhewed that we contend2. not with them about the expreſſe word of God, or the Goſpell, but about the interpretations and expoſitiōs of them, which are departed frō vs, to whom we may well vſe the ſame wordes, which S. Augustine ſometymeAuguſt. epiſt. 62. vſed against the Donatiſtes: that against Chriſt, they beare the enſeigne of Chriſt, and againſt the Goſpell they glory of the Goſpell which they vnderſtand not.
            
            VVe haue allſo ſhewed this, that wereuerently3. receyue all the canonicall ſcriptures: and that they on the other ſyde for ſo muche as they will not in faith be ſubiect toHeretikes vvill not be ſubiect to the ſcriptures but thravvll them vnto their ovvne myndes the auctoritee of the ſcriptures, but ſeeke to make the ſame thrawl vnto them, do not receiue in thē, but that which ſeemeth to accord with their owne doctrine: that they frame to the wordes of the ſcripture their owne priuat ſence: And that they contend not with vs about the ſence and mynd of the ſcripture, but about their owne ſence & vnderſtādīg therof, which rather thē we would

adore as the pure word of God, againſt the cō
               uiō ſence and cōſent of the whole church, we are redy to do and ſuffer all thinges. For wee are perſuaded that ſo to do were right idolatry. Synce therfore wee haue at large ſhewed why wee can not agree with the enemyes of the Goſpell which by the wordes of the Goſpell aſſault the ſame, and contend with vs about their owne mynd, and not the mynd of the ſcripture, wee will brieffly diſcourſe the cauſe why we can not ſo do.
            First the moſt ſeuere commaundementsThe cauſe vvhy the catholikes may not conſent to the heretikes. Galat. 1. Matt. 12. Ezeeh. 14. 1. Cor. 10. of God, forbid vs to geue eare or conſent vnto them according to theſe wordes: [If any man preache vnto you any other Goſpel then that which ye haue receyued, let him be accurſed: If any man ſpeake blaſphemie against the holy Ghost it ſhall not be remitted vnto him. Flee from idoles.] Seeing therfore theſe men be ſyche as preache vnto vs a Goſpell which wee haue not receyued: and ſyche as ſpeake blaſphemy againſt the holy Ghost: and ſeeke to be adored of vs as certayne idolls: wee obeying the commaundements of God are iustly feared frō conſenting with them.
            And lest any man thinke wee applye

theſe ſcriptures to our owne proper ſence, we will in fewe, ſhewe, how the auncient catholyke fathers haue expoūded them, to the end euery man may plainly perceiue, that wee doo very truly vſe them against theſe enemyes of the Goſpell.
            And first who is ther to whō the name of Athanaſius is not knowē and wel thowght of? VVho (as S. Cyrill writeth) adorned heauenCyrill. ad Reginas de recta fide. it ſelf with the workes he. wrote as it were with a moſt fragrant oyntment: This father therfore in his booke which he intituled of the incarnation of Christ (as it is by Cyrill cited) vſeth theſe wordes: VVho ſo euer beſyde theſe thinges teacheth out of the holy ſcripture, that there is one ſonne of God, and an other ſonne borne of the virgin Mary: and adopted for a ſonne only in ſuche ſorte, as wee men be, ſo that there be two ſonnes etc. Or yf any mā ſaye that the fleſhe of our lord came from aboue, and not of the virgin Mary, or the whole diuinitee to haue been cōfounded or chaunged into the fleſhe: or the deitie of our lord to be paſsible: or that the fleſhe of our lord as of man, is not to be adored: this man dooth the holy and

Catholyke churche accurſe, following therin the holy Apoſtles ſaying: If any man preacheGalat. 1. vnto you any other Goſpel thē that which ye haue receiued, let him be accurſed.
            
            Behould this good Father (whoſe memory in the churche is holy and immortal) ſayth, he is accurſed of the catholyke churche, who ſo euer ſhould go about to teache (yea though it were owt of the holy ſcriptures) any of theſe poyntes. But (o holy father) by what auctoritee thinkeſt thou that may be done, yf he teache the ſame owt of the ſcriptures? For ſooth (ſayth he) by the auctoritee of S. Pawll, who ſayd: [If any man preacheGalat. 1. vnto you any other Goſpell, then that which ye haue receiued, let him be accurſed.
            A marueilous matter: The ſame ſentence which the heretikes of our age haue allwayes in their mowthe, wherby they thinke as with a ramme of Iron to aſſault, and ouerthrow the whole auctoritee of the fathers and coūcells, thou bringeſt foorth on the cōtrary ſyde. To wyt, yf any man ſhal goe about to ſaye (yea though it be out of the ſcriptures) the cōtrary of that, which hath bene defyned in lawfull councells, of the fathers,

eſpecially generall, and by them deliuered to vs, from hand, to hād, thou thinkeſt him not only, not to be harkened vnto, but allſo to be accurſed: and that wee muſt firmly remayne in that, which wee haue receiued: though a man bring neuer ſo many textes of ſcripture in apparence to the contrary.
            Athanaſius will not that the childrenAthanaſius. ſhould iudge of the decrees of the fathers. He will not that ſyche thinges as hath once been tryed by the rule of the ſcriptures, ſhould agayne be caulled back to the ſame, vnleſſe they will ſhewe them ſelues not toEſai. 57. Oſee. 3. be laufull children, but the ſeed of the harlot and adultereſſe, which if they dare do, let them crye tyll they be hoarſe, [For it is writtē] (as the father of heretikes attempting Chriſt once did) yet maketh he no doubt by the doctrine of S. Pawll to hould them accurſed: becauſe they preache a contrary Goſpell to that, which they receiued.
            But did holy Athanaſius when he wrote thus, teache vs to contemne and holde for nawght, the expreſſe word of God? No: God forbid: It was neuer any part of his thought, but he would haue taken for the pure and

expreſſe word of God that, which the Catholikes, and not which the heretikes browght foorth: that ſenſe (I ſaye) which the Catholikes, not which the heretikes drewe foorth of the ſcriptures.
            VVe fynd notably written by S. HieromeHier. in c. 1. ad Gala. 
               that the Goſpell ſtandeth not in the wordes of the ſcripture, but in the ſenſe, not in the ſuperficiall face or ſhewe, but in the marye: not in the leaues full of wordes, but in the roote of reaſon. You ſee now how the most earneſt defender of the Catholyke and ryght faith, produced theſe wordes of S. Pawl: with whoſe only auctoritee (namely ſynce he ſtandeth in place of many) we will for this tyme be content lest we ſeeme to long.
            But yet agayne (though perhapps wee maye herein doe otherwyſe then becometh vs) to the end the truth may the more plainly appere, wee thinke it not amyſſe to bringe foorth euen an heretikes expoſition of theſe wordes of S. Pawl, and of that heretike whoſeNote. mynd touching the ſacramēt, Melancthon is ſayd to haue followed. He therfore ſpeaketh in this ſort, intreating vpon thoſe very wordes of S. Pawll.
            
               
Note this worde of the Apoſtle: Accepiſtis,
               Caluin in commēt. ad Gala. 1. 
               Ye haue receyued: For ſtyl the Apoſtle laboureth to this end that they ſhould not hange as it were in the ayre vpon an vnknowen Goſpell only by way of imagination, but ſhould hould for a certayne and ſure definition therof that, that was the true Goſpell ofNote hovve Caluin defineth the Goſpell: Quod accepiſtis. Chriſt which was deliuered vnto them, and which they had receyued. He commaundeth therfore that they ſhould be reputed for diuells, which would preſUme to bryng any other Goſpell, differing from his: calling that another Goſpell, wherunto other mēs inuentions are ioyned.
            And ſurely this his ſentence (though he were an heretike) we can not but in this poynt very well allowe. For he will not haue any vnknowen Goſpell receyued, but that which hath been deliuered vnto vs, and which we haue allready before receyued. But nowe, that which is of theſe men termed the Goſpell: and the expreſſe word of God, came to light in manner but yesterday, and was to our fathers vtterly vnknowen. May we not therfore with S. Hierom aptly ſay thus vnto theſe fellowes that ſo earnestly labour to obtrude this new fownd Goſpell vnto vs?
            
               
               VVhat ſo euer thou be, thou teacher ofHiero. in Epiſt ad Pamachiū & Oceanum. new doctrynes, I pray the forbeare the Romaine eares, forbeare the faith which hath been recommended vnto vs from the mouth of the Apostles. VVhy doeſt thow ſeeke after iiijc. yeres (but wee may now ſay after fourtene c. yeres and more) to teach vs now that wee knew not before? VVhy doeſt thow bryng foorth that which Peter and Pawll would not ſhewe? The Chriſtian world hath been withowt this doctrine vntill this daye. I will for my part being now an owld man, hould that fayth wherin being a chyld I was borne and bred. VVhat a madnes then were this yf wee ſhould now receyue a ſtraunge vnknowen Goſpell, and reiect that which wee hould by deliuery vnto vs from thoſe holy fathers? For yf they meane the name of the Goſpell thoſe bookes which wee haue written by the Euangelistes and Apostles, and before them by the Prophettes, that Goſpell hath Polonia had and receyued And vve Engliſh men almoſt theſe M. yeres. almoſt this vic. yeres past: neither is ther any amōg vs that doubteth, but that in the ſame is the expreſſe word of God: VVherfore as touching the ſcripture, it is none other

Ghoſpell which the heretikes would at this daye obtrude vnto vs, but the ſame which we profeſſe allredy. Yea (and that is more) they openly confeſſe that they haue receyued the whole Canonicall ſcripture from vs.
            VVhat Goſpell then (I praye you) is that, which they preache vnto vs? Forſooth ſuchVVhat nue Goſpel it is by Caluins fentence vvhich heretikes ſeeke to obtrude vnto vs. Galat 1. a Ghoſpell, wherunto (as Caluin writeth) other mens inuentiōs and deuyſes are ioyned, wherof they bring a ſtraunge ſence hitherto vnheard of in the churche of God. And this is it, wherof S. Pawll geueth warning ſaying: [Yf any man preache vnto you any other Goſpell then that which you haue receyued, let him be accurſed.] That is as myche to ſaye: If Luther, Caluin, or Melancthon, come vnto you, and preache the Goſpell to any other ſence or meaning, then that which you haue receyued of the bleſſed fathers: yf he tell you any thing contrary to that, which they haue deliuered vnto you: let him be accurſed.
            Be wee not thinke you by theſe wordes of S. Pawll iuſtly fearyd from taking the inuentions and deuyſes of theſe men for the true word of God? Namely ſynce this is truly ſayd

to be a ſynne against the holy Ghoſt, and to blaſpheme the ſame, when by contempt wee violat thoſe thinges which haue been deliuered vnto vs, by the fathers. VVhich thing that bleſſed Biſshop Damaſus teacheth vsDamaſus in epiſt. ad Aureliū Cartha. Epiſ. in theſe wordes.
            
               Voluntary breakers of the Canons (ſayth he) are greuouſly iudged of the holy fathers and condemned by the holy Ghoſt, by whoſe inſtinct and gift they were decreed. For Rightly ſeeme they to blaſpheme the holy Ghoſt which against thoſe holy Canōs do any thing voluntarely, or frowardly not cōpelled by neceſsitee: or preſume to ſpeake againſt them: or willingly conſent to any, that attempt ſo to doo. For ſyche preſumption is manifeſtlyThe breache of the Canons is one kinde of blaſphemy againſt the holy Ghoſte. one kynd of blaſphemy againſt the holy Ghoſt. Yow ſee how this holy man telleth vs, it is one kynd of blaſphemy against the holy Ghoſt, yf a man preſume to do or ſpeake frowardly or malapertly against thoſe thinges which are deliured vnto vs from the fathers. Therfore leſt wee ſhould become giltye of this kynd of blaſphemy, wee dare by no meanes conſent to theſe men, who thinke it a matter to be fled frō, as a pestilēt poyſon

of Sathan, which the Catholikes and right beleuers haue taught by the ſpace of ſo many hundreth yeres, which the ouctoritee of the churche hath deliuered, all Chriſtian people imbraced, and the ſchooles of the diuines mayntayned: And on the other ſyde would haue vs to eſteeme the dreames of their owne brayne as the very pure and expreſſe word of God: eſpecially ſynce wee are twyſe warned by theſe wordes of S. Pawll in one epistle that yf any man preache vnto youGalat. 1. any other Goſpell then that which ye haue receyued, let him be accurſed.
            But chieffly that feareth vs which isEzec. 14. 1. Cor. 10. ſpoken by the prophet [depart ye frō idolls:] VVhich thing allſo S. Pawll dooth itterate vnto vs cryeng out, [Flee from the worſhipping of idolls,] which S. Iohn the Euangeliſt1. Ioan. 5. dooth allſo repete vnto vs: Concluding that his notable Epistle with theſe wordes: [My children keepe ye from idolls.] But what? beNote vvho be the idols vve muſt flee frō. not trow you Luther, Caluin, Melancthon and Brencius very idolls? Is there not in theſe menne, a wonderfull heygth, lifting it ſelf vp againſt the knowledge of God? Doo they not reſist and withſtand? And (which2. Cor. 10
               
is the property of Sathan) doo they not extoll themſelues aboue all, which is ſayd or2. Theſ. 2. worſhipped as God, ſhewing them ſelues as it were God, and ſeeke to haue worſhipped of all men as the expreſſe word of God, what ſo euer they wryte, or ſay?
            But here leſt wee ſeeme to apply theſe thinges according to the viſion of our owne hart (as heretikes vſe to doo) let vs in fewe, lay open what the holy fathers haue taught to be ſignified in the ſcriptures vnder the names of idolls. S. Hierome expounding that place of Zachary: [I will deſtroy the namesHier. in 13. Zachari. of idolls from of the earth:] ſayth that by theſe wordes are ſignifyed not only thoſe idolls wherof we read in the Pſalmes: [ThePſal. 113. images of the Gentills made of ſiluer and gould being the workes of mens handes] but allſo thoſe wherof Pawll ſpeaketh ſayeng.1. Tim. 4. [But the ſpirit telleth vs manifestly that in the latter dayes ſome ſhall depart from the faith geuing eare to ſeducing ſpirites, and to the doctrine of diuells, teaching faulſe vnder hipocriſy, hauing their conſciences marked with an hot yron.]
            
               For euen as idolls (ſayth he) are made by

the hand of the worke man, ſo the peruerſe doctrine of heretikes what ſo euer it ſelf deuyſeth it turneth into an idoll, and maketh Antechriſt to be worſhipped for Chriſt. Leekewyſe intreating vppō that place of theCap 2. Prophet Eſay: [Their land is full of idolls: The workes of their owne handes haue they worſhipped, and that which their owne fyngers haue made, hath man bowed vnto, andIdolls are doctrines contrary to the trouthe Cap. 8. humbled him ſelf:] Idolls he interpreteth to be doctrines contrary to the truthe. Neither will he haue otherwyſe vnderſtanded that which is written by the prophett Oſee: [They made their ſiluer and gowld idolls to them ſelues that they might periſhe.]
            S. Auguſtine allſo after he had ſpoken manyAuguſt. de v
                     ••
                  a religione. Cap. 38. thinges of idolls made with handes: Ther is (ſayth he) a worſe and more baſe worſhipping of idolls when men worſhip their owne fancyes, and honour with the name of Religion what ſo euer they haue imagined, in their erring myndes puft vp with pryde and vayn glory. Of which kynd of fanceys, and vayne viſions, he interpreteth Ioſue allſo to ſpeake in that place, where he ſayeth: [Take1▪ Reg. 7. away ſtraunge Gods from emong you and enclyne

your hartes to the lord your God.]Ezech. 16 Leekewyſe that place of Ezechiell: [of my gould & of my ſiluer haſt thou made to thy ſelf images.] But the images of their fanceys Aug q 25. ſuper Ioſue cap. 23 (ſayth he) wherin their carnall ſoules delight to wallowe, ouerturne both all the ſacramentes, and all the wordes of the holy bookes. But yet it followeth not, becauſe thoſe images be faulſe, that therfore the ſacramē
                  tes and ſcriptures ſhould be ſo myche diſhonoured, that they ſhould be thowght to be theirs, becauſe our lord ſayd, of my gowld and of my ſiluer, &c.
            
            Vincentius Lirinenſis allſo a writer of that tyme ſayth that the owld Teſtament caulleth ſtraunge Gods, ſyche doctrines as are ſtraunge and diuers from the churche: becauſe heretikes make no leſſe a doo to the mayntenance of their owne opinions, then the Gentills did for their Gods, wher allſo it is written in the Deuteronomy: [If thereDeuter. 13 ryſe emōg you a prophet that foretel you any ſigne or wonder which cometh to paſſe as he hath ſpoken, and he ſayeth vnto you: Let vs go after ſtraunge gods, whom you knowe not: thou ſhalt not harken to the wordes of

that prophet, for the lord your God proueth you that it may appere whether you loue him with all your hart, and with all your ſoule or no.]
            
               Here (ſayth he) by ſtraunge Gods are ſignified,Straunge Gods Vincētius expoundeth to be nevve doctrines▪ 1. Cor. 11. ſtraunge, newe, and vnknowē errours, which God ſomtyme ſuffreth to be ſpred that he may trye our constancy in louing of him, and in cleauing to his ſound doctrine: according as it is allſo written by S. Pawll: [there muſt be hereſies:] For this cauſe (ſayth Vincentius) the auctors of hereſies are not by and by rooted vp, to the end that they which are tryed may be ſeen how faithfull, and conſtant, and how ſtedfast a louer he is of the catholike fayth. And in deed (ſayth he) when any nouelty boyleth vp, by and by is ſeen the wayght of the Corne from the lightnes of the chaffe. Then very eaſely is blowen away with the ayre that, which by no wayght was kept in our lordes barne flower. For ſome are blowen quyte away, ſome only ſtreeken, and being wounded as perſons half dead, and halfe a lyue, are affrayed to periſhe, and aſshamed to retourne, as men which had only receyued ſyche quantite of poyſon as

neither would kyll, nor be digeſted: nor force them to dye, nor ſuffer them to lyue.
            
            Heerby, it may eaſely appere what the auncient fathers thowght to be ſignified in the ſcriptures, by the name of idolls: to wyt heretikes and their faulſe doctrine. For to imbrace as the very word of God, the ſaying of any one man, teaching in māner all thinges contrary to the receyued doctrine of the whole Churche, and to adore and inclyne vnto what ſo euer he hath ſayed, or writtē, what can be a kindly idolatry, yf this be not? VVhich who ſo doeth, what doeth he els, but adore Antechriſt for Chriſt?
            Luther ſayth: that which I teache is the word of God, and the pure Goſpell. By and by they adore and inclyne vnto it, as before an idoll. The ſame ſayth Zuinglius, and Caluin, the Anabaptistes, and the Picardines, Suenckfeldius, Seruetus, Campanus, and diuers other heretikes: They brynge foorth certayne textes of the ſcripture wreſted into aNote. wrong ſence, and by and by, this word of men or rather of the diuell ſpeaking by men, ſimple perſons doo imbrace, and adore as the word of God, and the very Goſpell of

Christ. Horrible is this idolatry and to beHeretikes are to be fledd frō as the vvorſt kind of Idolles. Ezech 14. 1. Cor. 10 fled from, with full ſayle (as they ſay) according to the warning geuen vs by the Prophetes and Apostles. For what other thinge can follow herof, but that, whyle euery ſect vaunteth his owne word to be the expreſſe word of God, their ſectaryes and followers must nedes haue ſo many Gods as there be archheretikes?
            Doo you now marke (moſt vertuous kyng) to what end Sathan dooth by ſo many his diuers members, make ſo great vaunt and bragging of the expreſſe word of God? There is no one heretike of this our age, which hath not allwayes that in his mouth, which dooth not glory therof, and ſo particularly challenge the ſame vnto himſelf alone, as that he will exclude all others from the poſſeſsion therof. The mynd therfor of SathanSathans full intēt and final perpoſe. is, that wee ſhould bowe downe, now before this man, and now before that, and that we ſhould imbrace nowe his word, and now an other mans as the very word of God, and ſo inſtead of one God, worſhippe many idolls, and in place of one Chriſt, bowe downe to many Antechriſtes.
            
               But lett vs harken to the voyce of the Prophets and Apostles crying vnto vs: [Flee frō idolls, flee frō idols:] Flee frō the peruers doctrines of Luther, Caluin, Melancthon, and Brentius, flee as many, as be of them, which wil haue their owne fanceys worſhipped for idolls, and labour to haue what ſo euer they ſaye or thinke to be adored as the pure word of God, and the very Goſpell.
            But ſee (most gracious kyng) how theſe Germayne Gods can not abyde one an other, but euen lyke Homer his Gods make warre emong them ſelues. I ſpeake not in this place, of thoſe deadly bataylles and innumerable ſlaughters wherewith vnhappy Germany hath been miſerably afflicted, ſynce they beganne to worſhip theſe Gods, and to receyue what ſo euer was by them ſayd or written as the expreſſe word of God. But harken how the Gods them ſelues (which doo thus ſet to ſale to the vnlerned multitude their owne word for Gods word) do quarrell and braule emong them ſelues.The ciuill vvarre emong the heretikes thē ſelues
            
            Did not Luther as an enemy inuade and ſet vppon Zuinglius and his followers? And leekwyſe vpon the Anabaptistes? Did he not

labour as myche as he could, to cut the throtes of both thoſe wicked ſectes? VVhom he thought meet not only to be brydeled by his writinges, but allſo to be kept vnder, by the mace of the magistrate. Therfore not only emong Chriſtians, but allſo emong the LutheransLutherās ageinſt Zuingliās etc. them ſelues is ſo ſore deteſted the name of Zuinglians, and Anabaptistes, that they are (as the Prouerb ſayeth) forbidden fyre and water emong them, and yf any LutheranNote. receyue or harbor any of them, he is by order greuouſly puniſshed.
            And I pray you be the Zuinglians anyZuingliāt againſt Lutheranes. more mylde to the Lutherans? In deed they doo not perſecute them with the lyke cruelty. Not, that they lacke any good wil therto, but becauſe they fynd them ſelues vnable. For they well perceyue their ſtrength is not yet ſyche that they be able to matche them. But of what mynd they be toward the Lutherans, it is by their wrytings manyfeſt to all men: for they make euen the lyke accompt of the Lutherans, as the LutheransCaluin & Alaſco againſt VVeſtphalus. doo of them. The wrytinges of Iohn Caluin and Iohn Alaſco againſt Ioachimus VVestphalus and againſt the Cityes of Saxony doo

well witneſſe this. Bucer allſo wrote that Luther was accuſed of all men to be a man to full of wordes, very imperious, and ouer bitter, not hauing the pacyence to be contraryed by any man: which fault the Tigurins allſo charge him with. If he looke (ſayth Bucer ſpeaking of Luther) that no man ſhould in any one thing diſſent from him, then let him proue him ſelf to be a God: Couertly meaning therby, that he ſought to be reuerenced as a God, and to haue his word adored of all men as the word of God: brefly that it were no more laufull for any man to diſſent from his mynd then from the ſentēce of god. Thus you ſee his very fellowes thought intollerable this his exceding pryde, wherby he preſumed to ſytte in the temple of God, euen as he were god himſelf.
            But dooth not Caluin allſo cōplayne thatCaluin his complaynt of Luther. the churche of god is to imperiouſly bownd to the deuyſes of Luther? How greuouſly dooth he take it, that they dreſſe him vp with the ſpoyle of S. Iohn Baptist, and call him Helias by whom all thinges were to be reſtored? VVith which falſhed they did no leſſe diſtayne the name of Luther (ſayth he)

then the Egyptians did the body of Hieremy, by worſhipping his ſepulchre.
            And yf (ſayth he) the name of Helias were to be graunted to Luther, yet was it a poynt of ſacrilegious temeritee to affirme him to be the laſt Helias: as though the hand of God were ſhortnyd, that he could not hereafter, ſend a better, or at the leſt an other as good as he. For by what oracle was it oppened vnto them that the treaſures of the mighty power of God were ſo myche diminiſshed and waſted, in the perſon of one man, that out of ſo great, and incomprehenſible a number, the lyke of him might not be found?
            Here Caluin could not diſſemble the grudge he had cōceyued, in that Luther was thus caulled the last Helias: wherby no place was now left for him, who thought himſelf in no poynt inferiour, but rather ſuperiour to Luther.
            But Ioannes Alaſco who dooth ſeeme almoſtIoannes Alaſco to conſent with Caluin, beſide that in many places he ſhewyth himſelf to thinke very yll of Luther (as it is noted by Eraſmus Albere) he writeth thus allſo of the Lutherans, that when all their ſtuff is ſpent, then they vſe to flee to the Confeſsion of

Augſpurg, as to their ſhooteanker, and make (ſayth he) ſo myche a doo of that, that there want not emong them (yea and not of the meaneſt ſort) which ſay they had ratherSome Lutherās profeſſe that they vvill ſooner dought of S. Pavvl his doctri then of their M. Luthers. dowbt of the doctrine of the Apostle Pawll, then of Luthers, or of that which is contayned in that Confeſsion.
            You ſee how the ſacramentaryes themſelves can not beare, that the contentes of Luthers bookes, or of the Augustan confeſsion ſhould be receyued as the word of God: though with ſome for all that, it be of more pryſe then the word of God. And ſhall wee Chriſtiās beare that, which the lewde Zuinglians can not beare? And ſhall wee ſuffer that to be obtruded vnto vs for the expreſſe word of God, which wee moſt certainly knowe, and haue proued to be the expreſſe word of the diuell?
            But ſome there be perhapps that will in this caſe geue the leſſe credyt to the iudgement of the Zuinglians, for that the world ſeeth they diſſent from the doctrine of Luther. Let vs ſee therfore what iudgement the Lutherans them ſelues haue one of an other. I thinke no man will denye, but the

Confeſsioniſtes be Lutherās: VVherof thoughThe Confeſsioniſtes. Andreas Oſiander were himſelf one, yet dooth he not complayne, that with his followers the Confeſsion of Augſpurg is more regarded then the word of God? And that they which procede maſters of art and profeſſors of diuinitee at VVittemberge, abiure the word of God, and ſweare to be ſubiect to the worde of Melancthon? Marke yee how this fellow condemneth the diſciples of Melancthon of idolatry, and warneth them to flee from this idoll.
            But to come to Melancthon himſelf, didMelācthō him ſelfe againſt▪ Luther. not he at the first, with tooth and nayle, defend and eſteeme no leſſe then the very word of God, theſe doctrines of Luther? That man hath no free wyll: that all thinges happen by abſolute neceſsitee: that man feelith no more what God dooth within him then the Anuyll feelith what the hammer dooth: that workes are not neceſſary to ſaluation: that no rytes or ceremonyes owght to be admitted into the Churche.
               Melācthō cōplayneth that he hade follovved Luther to ſeruilly.
            
            Yet afterward complainyng that he had been to ſeruilly bond to Luther, he reiected theſe his toyes, and came to a better mynd.

For which cauſe yet he bred to him ſelf ſo great hatred yea euen of his owne diſciples, that they pittefully reuyled him, and ſought to exclude him from the Confeſsion of Augſpurg, wherof it is knowē he was the Author.
            But Mathias Flaccus is not affrayed to arrogat yet more vnto him ſelf, and ſticketh not to pronounce his maſter Melancthon (to whō he was behoulding) and all the adherentesMatthias Flaccus condemneth his M Melancthon and his follovvers. of his doctrine, vnworthy to be accōpted other then very Ethnikes and Publicans: And to make his meaning playne he thus interpreteth him ſelf, that no good mā
               ought to haue any familiaritee, freendſhip, or cōpany, with them: And to him (which not being eſpecially bound to them by neceſſitee of lawe) ſhould doo any of theſe thinges, he pronounceth the contagion of their lepre: and ſo without all doubt the wrath of God. And that (I thinke) was the cauſe thatiiij Lutherā doctors ageinſt Melācthō Luthers ovvne der linge. at the laſt conference at VVormes, Schneppius, Merlinus, Strigellius, Sa
                  ••
               erius, and certayn other Illiricans departed thence without doing any thing, for that they thought the fellowſhip of Melancthon and Brentius (both whom Flaccus had excommunicated

from his congregation) was of them to be auoyded. Namely ſynce none of them gaue any ſhewe of inclination to any ſyche retourne or amendment, as they requyred.
            VVho therfore is there, which dooth not now ſee as cleer as the day light, that theſe be the idolls which the Prophetes and Apoſtles ſo earnestly exhort vs to flee from? The heretikes I ſay of this our age, Luther, Caluin, Melancthon, Brētius, Flaccus, they commaund vs to flee, as from the vyper and Cockatryce: for ſo doo they emong them ſelues and by their owne iudgement one of an other, condemne them ſelues. But may not wee myche the more iuſtly accompt them for ſyche as they are become, not only by the iudgement of the Catholike Church (whichMatth. 18. wee are commaunded to harken vnto) but allſo by their owne iudgement one of an other? And ſhall there now be any man that may perſuade vs (which acknowledge and honour only one God) to adore the word of theſe heretikes as the expreſſe word of God?
            O Christ which haſt allmoſt this 600. yeres

ſhyned ouer this countrey, with the lightNote the vertuous and godly prayer of the Author. of thy Goſpell, rather take from vs all our worldly goodes, the ſweet fruition of this lyght, yea all thinges which are in this world moſt dere to mortall men, then once to ſuffer vs to be remoued frō this mynd, wherin wee are determyned rather to doo and ſuffer all thinges, then to depart from that thy holly word, which allmoſt. 600. yers past was by thy goodnes deliuered and impartid to our nation: and in ſtead therof to receyue their word, which ſet them ſelues in the Temple as Gods, and ſo thrall our ſelues to the most greuous cryme of horrible idolatry.
            But to retourne wher wee leeft: I trust wee haue ſufficiently ſhewyd that the word which is now by heretikes ſet to ſale to the vnlerned multitude for the expreſſe word of God, is not in deed the word of God, but the word of the diuel, frō the which the mindes of all good men ought to abhorre and to flee from, as a deadly poyſon, according to the wordes of the Prophets, and Apostles, which ſtyll crye vnto vs [Flee from idolls.] NoweEzec 12. 1. Cor. 10 is it tyme to blowe the retraict, but that we meane first a litle to diſcuſſe vnto you what

is the expreſſe word of God: to the end that when you knowe the ſame, the expreſſe word of the diuell may the better be diſcerned.
            There are truly in the ſcriptures manyHere the Author teacheth in fevve vvhat is in deed the expreſſe and liuely vvorde of god Gal. 5. Matt. 22. Rom. 13. 1. Tim. 1. Aug. in prologo Pſal. 140 wordes of God, but they all make, but one word of God: which is (Loue:) for [al the lawe (ſayth the Apostle) is fulfylled in this one word.] And in this dependeth not only the whole lawe, but allſo the prophetes: as Christ him ſelf witneſſeth: The fulnes of the lawe therfore, and the end of all the commaundements, is Charyte. For therunto is referred euery one of the commaundements.
            
               Seeke none other thing (ſayth S. Auguſtine) in any of the ſcriptures: let no man geue you any other precept. VVhat ſo euer is darke in the ſcripture, Charyte lyeth hiddē therī: and what ſo euer is playne in the ſcripture, there allſo is Charyte open and playne. ThisIn Pſal. 130. ſermone. 1. precept of Charitee is aboue and ouer al the heauens, and ouer al bookes: All bookes are ſubiect, and vnder this: euery toung of holly men, and euery mocyon of the diſpenſors of God, and of the mynde and body▪ ſerueth vnder this onſigne: what ſo euer thou haſt, and haſt not this, it proffiteth thee nothing:

Other thinges yf thou haue not, yet haueThe force of Charitee. this, and thou haſt fulfylled the lawe. If this alone be abſent, all is emptye▪ yf this alone be preſent, all is full. This only it is which ſuffiſeth to ſaluation, and is ſo neceſſary to ſaluation, as ther is no meane, wherby a man may hope to atteyne the ſame without charitee.
            
            This word therfore which dooth conſummatRom. 9. and abbreuiat, this liuely and ſauing word, this word of Charitee and Loue is ſo expreſſe, and playne, that Clemens AlexandrinusLi. 3. pedagogi. ca. 21 ſayth. It may be learned euen without the ſcriptures: for that it is a certayn lawe of the ſpirite written in the hartes of the faythful, be they neuer ſo ſimple and vnlerned. No man therfore can be ſo dull, as not to vnderſtand this word, neither ſhall any man be excuſed thorough ignoraunce therof. This is that word wherof the Pſalmiſt ſpeaketh ſaying: [Thy word is a candlePſal. 11S. to my feet, and a light vnto my pathes.] VVherof he allſo ſpeaketh wher he ſayeth: [Thy precept is cleer geuing light to thePſal. 18. eyes.]
            In deed the eyes of our hart are lightned by Charitee, as on the other ſyde they be

blynded by coouetouſneſſe. VVhither the coouet ouſneſſe or deſyer be of the fleſh, or of the eyes, or of prayſe and glory: VVher that is, there is nothing, but meer darckneſſe, nothing but a fowll dimneſſe. On the other ſyde, wher Charite is, ther is a ſhining light, yea ſo cleer and bryght, that nothing can be darke to him that hath charite: Therfore it is very well ſayd of S. Augustine: Let himAuguſt. loue and haue charite that will come to the knowledge of God: In vayne cometh he to reading, meditation, preaching, or praying, which loueth not: But becauſe loue and charite can not be perfect in any other place, then in that heauenly contrey of the bleſſed ſainctes, therfore the knowledge of him ſhall in the end ther allſo, and no wher ells, become perfaict. Here in the meane tyme in1. Cor. 13 part wee knowe: and in part wee prophecy.
            
            VVherfore yf any man marueyll why (as emōg other heretikes) ſo allſo emōg the Confeſsioniſtes them ſelues, ther is ſo great a myſt and darcknes, that after the manner of the Andabates they fyght wyncking, or in the darke, and can not atteyne to the knowledge of the truth: let him now ceaſe wondring,

ſynce he hath learned this to be the cauſeVVhy ther is ſuche a miſte before the eies of heretikes that they ſee not the▪ trouth. Ephe. 4. Coloſſ. 3. therof, that they be deſtitute of that Charitee which only geueth light to the faithful. For they would neuer haue deuided vnitee, yf they had not firſt lost Charite which is the bond of peace and vnitee. But for this cauſe are they deſtitute of Charite, for that they be full of couetous deſire, as of many other thinges, ſo chieffly of prayſe and vayne glory. According to that is written by the Poet: he is a rare mā that can geue ouer and renounce his owne wyt.
            Nothing ſo myche hindreth the fyndingPride is the greateſt hinde rance to the attchi uing of knovvledge. Prouer. 13. out of the truth, as pryde, which is the moother of all hereſies: For ther are euer brawles emong prowde men. But to attayne to the truth, ther is none other waye but humillite, by the which Charitee is nooriſshed, and vnitee reteyned. And that humillitee is (ſayth S. Augustine) the first, ſecond, andEpiſtol. 56 thyrd vertue, and ſo foorth, how often ſo euer you ſhould aſke of me, that aunſwer would I ſtyll make, as it is writtē, Demoſthenes ſomtyme ſpake of pronunciation. By this way ſynce heretikes walke not, who can myche marueil though they can not atteyne

to the knowledge of the cleer truth? VVhat a reuell kepe they both with vs, and emong themſelues about the expreſſe word of God? Yet in the meane tyme can they not ſee that, which is the moſt expreſſe, clere and playne thing in all the ſcriptures and as clere asCharite is the ſcope and end of the holy ſcripture. the ſunne ſhinyng, and which alone to haue lerned doth abundantly ſuffiſe vs to ſaluation: to wit Charitee. For that is the ſomme and end of the whole ſcripture, as is very wel written by S. Augustine ſaying.
            
               VVho ſo euer thinking him ſelf to vnderſtandLi. 1. de doctrina chriſtiana ca. 36. t. Tim. 1. the holy ſcriptures, and euery part therof, and yet by that vnderſtanding doth not buyld vp this dooble Charitee, toward God, and his neyghbour, he vnderſtandeth nothing. But who ſo euer draweth out therof ſyche an vnderſtanding as is proffitable to the building vp and working of Charitee, though he ſpeake not the very ſame, which he whom he readeth may be proued to haue ment in that place: yet for ſo myche as he is deceyued by ſyche an vnderſtanding as yet worketh Charitee, he is not hurtfully deceyued: neither dooth he therin alltogether lye: but he is ſo deceyued, as a man which (hauing

loſt his waye) dooth yett by coaſting, co me to that place, wherunto that direct waye would haue brought him. S. Augustine aduyſeth in reading of the ſcriptures ſo to vnderſtand them, as Charitee be wrought therby, yf wee will not erre to deſtruction.
            But doo theſe men (which now a dayes haue nothing more in their mowth then the ſcriptures, and the expreſſe word of God) apply their vnderſtanding to this end, that they labour to worke and buyld vp nothing, but Charitee? Nay: whoo ſeeth not that they doo vtterly all that euer they doo, to the contrary? VVhich may well appere by theſe their wordes, then the which none are more common emong them. Trotz, a name of vncleaneſſe and fylthe. 
               Trotz, Trotz, in deſpight of the Pope, and in deſpight of the Councell. Is this to buyld vp Charitee?
            But wherof growe ther emong vs ſo many debates, contentions, ſeditions, warres, hereſies, and ſectes, wherby wee ſee the churche myſerably torne and deuided, but of this only, that whiles euery priuatt man cacheth vnto him ſelf the expreſſe word of God, and ſeeketh to vſurpe and appropriatt

vnto him ſelf the right vnderſtanding therof, nothing is leſſe ſought in reading the ſcriptures, then the edifying of (Loue)The intollerable pride of the vnlerned multitude and of ſome vayne vveem
                     •
                  n allſo. and Charitee? VVe ſee the rude and vnlerned multitude, with an intollerable pryde, and without waſshing their handes or feete (as they ſaye) come vnto the reading of the holy ſcriptures: Yea wee ſee fooliſhe and fond woomen arrogat ſo myche vnto them ſelues, that condemning their fathers, diſpiſing their biſshops, and teachers, ſetting at naught the ſence, and conſent of the whole Churche, they are not affrayed to preferre their owne expoſitions, before all others: VVhom yet they know to haue been conuerſant in the ſcriptures many yearesPſal. 1. both day and night, and to haue omitted no ſtudy, labour or diligence, to atteyne vnto the trewe vnderstanding therof: whom they allſo knowe to be ſet ouer them, and that they owght in thoſe matters to be ſubiect vnto them, in ſo myche as they haueHeb. 13. the Carke and care to make a iust and good accompt of their ſoules. Is this to buyld vp Charitee? Yet thus hath it ſeemed good to the Archeheretyke of our age, who first preſumed

to geue that was holly vnto dogges, and to throwe pearles before ſwyne, vnderMatt. 7. whoſe feete how filthily they be troden, who can without teares behould.
            Notable is that ſaying of Gregory Nazianzen:Li. 1. Theologiae. 
               that it is not for all men to talke of diuine matters, no nor lauful at all tymes, and in all companyes to diſpute of all thinges. But good regard is to be had, when, to whom, and to what end, that is to be doone: which matter he purſueth at large.
            
            Nothing is better, then the reading of the ſcriptures: nothing more proffitable. But there is a certayn tree caullyd RhododaphneDioſcorides li. 4. Plinius li. 24. cap. 11. (in Engliſhe Oſiander) whoſe leaues are to beastes poyſon, and to men medicynable, against ſerpentes. Euen leeke vnto this, is the ſcripture, which as to ſober and wyſe men it geueth holſome nouriture, ſo to fooliſhe and wycked perſons, it miniſtreth occaſion of hereſy and of more wickednes. But were it not better to keepe theſe brute beaſtes (to whom Chriſt forbadde to geue that which was holy) frō the reading of the holy ſcriptures, then to ſuffer them lyke ſpyders to drawe nothing therof, but deadly poyſon?
            
               But as for wemen how myche better ſhould they be occuped in ſpinning on their distaff, at ſyche tyme as they take on them to diſpute of the word of God? [Be all Apoſtles, be all Prophetes? be al paſtors and teachers?] ſayth the Apostle. But now all will be Apoſtles,1. Cor. 12. all Prophetes, al Paſtours and teachers, yea wemen and all. Chriſt would not that his [body ſhould be only one member, but that ther ſhould be therūto many mēbers:] Now theſe folke on the other ſyde will haue that all, ſhould be one member and one groſſe ſubſtaunce, all of a facyō, not diſtincted with any varietee, but a certayne vnfrutful heape and confuſed Chaos, without apte proportiō or meaſure. By which meanes not only the body is weakened and the order of nature peruerted, but the auctoritee of God is allſo manifestly ſhaken, whyle euery man vſurpeth to him ſelf more then is geuē him.
            Hereof groweth the diſſencion, ſectes and quarrelles, wherwith the Chriſtian world is now tormoyled, while neither the hand nor the foote will voucheſaff to doo his duety, but euery member will take on him the office of the eye, and the toong, and ſo neglecting

his owne, impudently intrude him ſelf intoNote. the office of an other.
            But theſe perhapps may ſeeme ſoōwhat frō the matter which I haue now taken in hand. Yet is it not alltogether frō my purpoſe and matter. But now to returne to my eſpecyall poynt, will yow know (most vertuous Kyng) what is the expreſſe word of God, and what isOne ſelf ſcripture taken vvith the right ſence may be the vvord of Godd, and being peruerted may be the vvord of the diuel. the expreſſe word of the diuell? For both (as I haue before ſufficiētly, ſhewed at large) may be drawē out of one, and the ſelf ſame ſcripture: But yet learne in a fewe the differēce.
            If a man ſo vnderstand the ſcripture as he doo therby, edifye and buyld vp Charite, then is it the word of God. But yf by his vnderſtanding therof, he buyld that which is contrary to Charitee, then is it become the word of the diuell. Yea and that is more, marke this. If a mā out of the holy ſcripturesThe difference betvvene the vvord of God and of the diuell. drawe that ſence which may be proffitable to the increaſe and edifying of Charitee, all be it he ſaye not the very ſame, which 
                  •
               e whom he readeth as Mathewe, Marke, Luke or Pawll, may be proued in that place to haue ment, yet is he not hurtfully deceyued, neither dooth he erre from the word of God: but

he is ſo deceiued as a man which ſtrayeth ſomewhat out of his direct waye, and yet by coaſting in a fayre playne champion cometh to the ſame place wher vnto that other way would haue brought him.
            As therfore they which by ſailyng cut the foming ſeas, haue eſpeciall regard to theThe vvoord of God aptly compared to the lode ſtarre. Pole, and the lode ſtarre, called Cynoſura and Vrſa minor, ſo they that trauayll in reading of the ſcriptures muſt direct the eyes of their myndes to none other thing, but only to Charitee, wher vnto yf they bend their vnderſtanding, they can neuer ſwarue from the word of God: ſeing (as I ſayd a lytle before) all the wordes of God, are but one word of God: which is, Loue. Then the which word nothing is, or can be in the ſcriptures more playne and cleer.
            VVhat a fury therfore is this? what a madnes? VVhat a blyndnes of mynd? The expreſſe word of God is ſought: Myche ſtryuing ther is about the ſame: and yet when the ſame ſoThe marueilous blindnes of heretikes. expreſſe and cleer word of God dooth offer it ſelf before our eyes, it is not ſeen. VVhen it dooth inculcate, it ſelf into our eares, it is not heard. VVhen it offereth it ſelf willingly

as it were to be handled with our handes, yet is it not acknowledged or receyued. But wretched men they ſuffer the ſame lightly to paſſe away, from their eyes, eares, handes, and hartes, while they falſely perſuade them ſelues, that their ſaluation conſisteth in knowing and reaſoning, and not rather in louing and beleuing. Doth not that place ofPſal. 113. the Pſalme rightly tooche thoſe men. [Eyes haue they and ſhall not ſee, eares and ſhall not heare, handes and ſhall not fele?] Charitee, Charitee, Charite, doth in euery place of the ſcriptures come toward vs, and offreth it ſelf vnto our eyes: it is of al other the cleereſt word of God: and without that, who ſo euer thinketh knowledge will bring him to ſaluation, he is farre wyde.
            Very truly ſayth a vertuous and lernedHugo de S. Victore li. 1. par 10 ca. 6. de ſaciamentis man. The Clemency of God regardeth not, with how great knowledge wee beleue, but with how great deuotiō we loue that which we beleue. And an other vertuous mā alſoGerſon in li. an Monachus pro ſtudiis, neglige re poſsit diuina cō ſiderat. 9. ſayeth: In the laſt day wee ſhall not be aſked how myche, how ſharpe and how lerned our vnderstanding was, but how great our affection and zeale to our lord God: that is,

how ſimple, how right, how vertuous, humble, and deuout, and how willing and faythfull our ſeruyce toward him hath been.
            
            VVhich thinges being ſo, why doo we not rather ſpend our whole ſtudy and labour in this poynt, which only and alone we knowe to be neceſſary to our ſaluation, to reteyne among our ſelues mutuall loue and brotherly charitee, which is the very proper marke of the childrē of God? In ſo myche as the vnderſtāding of the ſcriptures is not to all men a leeke neceſſary. The ſimplicitee of beleuing,Auguſt. contra Epiſt. Mani chaei quā vocāt fun damenti li. r. ca. 39. de doctrina Chriſtiana. not the quicknes of vnderstanding, keepeth ſafe the vnlerned multitude. And as the ſame S. Augustine ſayth. The man which truſteth to faith, hope, and charitee, and faſt reteyneth them, hath no need of the ſcriptures, vnleſſe it be to teache others. And therfore by theſe three many lyue well in deſertes, and ſolitary places without bookes.
            
            Now contrarely all men will ſearch the ſcriptures and diſpute of the ſence and vnderstanding therof. But that wher vnto as to a certayne marke al the ſcriptures are referred: and that which thoſe ſcriptures labour to inculcate in euery place into the

eyes, eares, and myndes of men: that Charitee (I ſaie) which only bringeth ſaluation, no mācareth to reteyne. And verely looke how myche the oftener and more feruent diſputation is made of the ſcriptures, and of the expreſſe word of God, ſo myche the more dooth Charitee (which all the ſcriptures doo with one voyce ſounde out vnto vs) wexe could in the mindes of men.
            And is it leekly that the ſound vnderſtanding of the ſcriptures, and the expreſſe word of God is there, wher Charite is wexenHeretikes can not poſsibly haue the expreſſe vvoorde of Godd. ſo could, and hatred ſo hot? VVhere beſides rayling, reuyling, ſkofing, and contumelyes, a man can allmost read or heare nothing? And where they them ſelues, which are departed frō vs (who had rather be called Goſpellers, then Chriſtians) doo not only fight against vs, but allſo one against an other, with ſyche infest, rāckorous, and vnchriſtian myndes, that no cruell Barbarians or enemyes of Christ his Croſſe, could deale more leeke enemyes?
            Truly before this Goſpell ſprang vp (which is proceded from none leſſe then frō Christ) wee neuer ſawe any ſyche bitternes of myndes,

or cruell contentions. Namely emong thoſe, whoſe office was to teache, and open the Goſpel of Chriſt. And ſhall wee cal this the Goſpell? ſhall we call this the expreſſe word of God, from the which all Charitee, the thing most expreſſly commaunded in the Goſpell is ſo vaniſhed, that euen they (which glory to haue been the Note this vvell firſt, which (as them ſelues ſay) haue of late brought to light the buryed Goſpell) doo ſo hatefully contend emong them ſelues, burne with ſyche mutuall enuy, and ſo byte one an other thatGal. 5. it can not be long, but wee must nedes ſee them conſumed one of an other?
            This is ſure the expreſſe word of the diuell, not the expreſſe word of God, ſeing as I haue allredy ſo often ſayd, the expreſſe word of God is only Loue and Charitee. That is it that imbraceth Vnitee, that ioyneth vs allAmbroſ. in Ca. 3. ad Coloſſ. in one body, that geueth peace, and with pure hart keepeth the ſame. And Christiā charitee can not be kept, but in the Vnitee of the churche: ſo that in vayne doth he vaunt him ſelfe to haue charite, which doth not imbrace Vnitee. But yf this expreſſe word of God, Charitee, be not kept any where

but in the vnitee of the church, who is there that can thinke that the expreſſe word of God can be found any where out of this vnitee?
            And this is it that in this treatyce I ſhewed before, that ſomtyme when two men bringe foorth one ſelf text of ſcripture, yet God openeth the mouth of one, and the diuel of the other. For he which hauing deuided him ſelf from the churche, alleageth it not with the common ſence and vnderstanding of the Churche, but with his owne priuat and wreſted interpretatiō: (for ſo myche as S. Iohn ſayeth [VVho ſo euer ſpeaketh of himHovve to knovve vvhen the true vvoord of God is vttered Ioan. 8. ſelf, (yea though he ſpeake ſcripture) yet vttereth he a lye) the mouth of that man doth the diuell open, and that which he ſpeaketh is the word of the diuell.
            But allthough following S. Ambroſe wee ſayd, that Charite is the thing which imbra cyth, and conteyneth vnitee and which makyth vs all one body, wee would not be vnderſtanded in that ſence as though we mēt therby, that euyll and vniuſt men were excludyd from the body of Chriſt, which is the churche. For allthough Charitee which the

ſcripture chieffly commendyth vnto vs, be the proper marke of them which doo truly honour God, wherby the children of God are diſcernyd, from the childrē of the diuel, and that thoſe be only they, which appertayne to the coompany of the Elect: yet is there a certayneDe vnita te Eccleſiae ca. 2. 1. Cor. 13. vbi ſupra ca. 5. other congregacyon or churche of thē that are called, from the which they be not excluded which are deſtitute of true charite, ſo they reteyne that, which S. Auguſtine calleth, the loue of vnite: by the which he ſayeth the members of Criſt are couppled vnto him. The working wherof is to ſuffer al thing. That ther may be (as the ſame S. Auguſtine writeth) a certain force of ſuffring, houlding the ſure handfaſt of vnitee, which was ſignified by the pytche, wherwith theGen. 6. Arke (being a figure of the churche) was faſtned and ſodred, both within, and without: for euill men are to be ſuffred both with in and without, leſt the knot of peace be diſſolued.
            
            Of which charite allſo S. Auguſtine writethLi. 1. contra Creſ. ca. 29. in an other place ſaying: I do not thinke any mā to be ſo vnwyſe, as to beleue that he, which hath no charite, doth appertayne to

the vnite of the churche, whē it is certayne that they doo belonge to the vnitee of the churche, ſo long as they be not cut of from the ſame: yea though they be deſtitute of the other effectes of charitee, ſo that reteyning that force or vertu of ſuffring they be emōg them of whom S. Pawll writeth: [ſupportingEpheſ. 4. one an other in charite: carefull to preſerue the vnitee of the ſpirite, in the bond of peace.]
            
            But here theſe fellowes will denye that to be the churche of God which we profeſſe, and wherof we glory and reioyce to be the hūble children, and wil go about to challenge that name to their congregation. But I would fayne haue them ſhewe vs their churche. I ſpeake not now of the Sacramētaries, Anabaptistes, heauēly prophetes, nor of the Campanians, or Seruetians (all which ſectes they haue allredy throwen out of their congregation:) but let the Confeſsionistes or Lutherans ſhewe vs their Churche.
            Melancthon and his followers, Brentius alſo with his bande, are throwen foorth of that Churche, which would be counted of the Auguſtan (not Chriſtian) confeſsion: as

wee may plainly ſee by the writinges of Mathias Flaccus, and Ioachimus Merlinus, who glory themſelues to be vpright perfect Lutherans. But yf any man will geue more credyt to the iudgement of Melancthon, or of his diſciple Iustus Menius, then ſhal he fynd that they geue the like iudgemēnt of Flaccus, as Flaccus doth of them.
            VVhere then ſhall wee now fynde thisThe Conflict emōg heretikes about their priuat churches churche of Luther? Melancthon will not graunt it to be emong the Illiricans: The Illiricans on the other ſyde, ſay it is not emong the Melancthoniſtes or Brentiās, whom they haue allredy throwen out from the communion of their Churche. And haue not thus the very followers of Luther by helliſ he diſcord deuided allſo their owne vnitee, euen as their maiſter before did by most impious ſacrilege diuide and ſeparat him ſelf frō the catholyke vnitee, as from our lordes barne flower? VVhere then ſhall wee ſeeke this church of theirs, which neither of themſelues wyll graunt to the other? VVho is there ſo deſtitute of all reaſon, that will not rather choſe to remayne in that Churche wherin he was borne, and allſo regenerat in Christ

(which was the greater benefyt) then forſaking this, to betake him ſelf vnto that, which to them ſelues is ſo vncertayne, and vnknowen?
            But God forbid that a Chriſtiā catholykeThe true churche of Godd. and right beleuing man, ſhould haue any doubt, whether that churche, wherin not only him ſelf, but his parentes, his graundfathers, and great graūdfathers, haue been entred into the faith of Chriſt be the true church of God or no. For what were this ells, but to doubt whether he be a Chriſtiā man, or borne of christian parentes, and (as it is written by the Prophet) [to ſtumble at noneEſai. 59. Pſal. 18. Matt. 8. daye: as in the darke?] God hath placed his tabernacle in the ſunne. He hath planted his churche as a citye vpon an hill, which can not be hidden.
            But of that matter our purpoſe is not to taulke any more in this place, for that it apperteyneth not properly to this treatyſe, and for that as well in our chriſtian confeſsion, as in our writing which we haue late pubbliſshed againſt the prolegomena of Brētius, we haue at large treated of that matter: wher we haue taught you which be the markes

of the true churche: To wytte, that it be one, holy, catholyke and Apoſtolyke churche, wherof except one haue the chiefrule whoſe auctoritee all do acknowledge, it can not be caulled the churche of God.
            Now therfore we wyll not tary any lenger vpon this matter: For that I trust wee haue ſufficiently ſhewed that the expreſſe word of God, wherof thoſe mē brag ſo myche, is not the word of God, but the expreſſe word of the diuel. For the cleer and expreſſe word of God is Charite. VVhich that it may pleaſe God by his holy ſpirite to power into our hartes, and once to geue ende to thies ſchiſmes and hereſies, and to reſtore to his churche the deſired tranquillite, wee humbly beſeeche his infinite mercy. VVhich no doubt he will do, not for our merites (wherunto moſt greuous puniſhementes are dewe) but of his owne exceding great goodnes, ſo that we amend our lyues, and with confidence adreſsing our ſelues to the throne of his grace, inceſſantly contine we in feruent prayer.
            
               THE CONCLVSION.
               THis myche I had to write vnto your highnes (moſt vertuous Kyng) of the

expreſſe word of God, at what tyme I was preparing to take my iourney to Rome, and by that occaſiō letted with myche and mani folde buſynes. How be it the faithfull hart I beare your grace, enforced me to beſtowe this trauayll in writing of this matter. The great benefytes allſo, which without my deſert, you haue heaped vpon me (being ſo great as I doubt whether any man haue receiued the lyke of any kyng of Polonia) hath driuen me therūto. VVherfore howe myche the more I ꝓfeſſe and acknowledge my ſelf boūde vnto you, ſo myche▪ the more carefull am I of your ſafety, and namely of the euerlasting ſaluation of your ſoule. For the defence wherof, I will not only not flee any payne and trauail, but most willingly aduenture my lyfe. For it is poſsible ther want not ſome, which do allſo beate vpon your eares with thies wordes: [Throw thy ſelf downe: for it is writtē.] But I haue ſo great a confidence in your conſtancy, and in the mercy of God, that aſsisted therwith, you will neuer imbrace their wycked counſells of ſeparation, or ſuffer their peſtilent perſuaſions to haue any place with you.
               
                  For myne owne part yf I ſhould ſee yourThe godly Zele of this lerned praelat highnes (which God of his mercy forbyd) ſlipping downe from that high tower of the church, I would not fayle (God geuing me ſtrēghth) yea though I ſhould preſently dye therfore, but with my body receyue you faulling downe, and with the death therof, redeme the ſafegard of your ſowll.
               You knowe (moſt worthy Kyng) how often I haue imployed my trauaill in the defence of the ſound and holly doctrine of the churche. You know how ſynce the tyme your highnes pleaſure was to haue me called to the office of a Biſshop, I haue not ſpared any charges,The great pains and Care of Hoſius in ſuſteynīg the churche ſo ſore aſſaulted and ſhaken by heretikes. labours, or perill, to ſtaye the declyning religion within this your kyngdom and dominions, and to the vtter moſt of my power, to ſuſteyne and ſhore vp the ſame, ſeeming redy to faull. VVho can be a better witneſſe then your highnes, what ſtudy, labour and diligence, I haue imployed, in auowing, defending, and proouing, our aunciēt Chriſtiā, Catholike, and right religion? But for that God is iuſtly angry with our ſynnes, how litle good hath yet followed therof, I ſee to my great grief.
               
                  This Sathaniſme doth daily increaſe moreThe cauſe vvhie hereſies ſprīg and increaſe. and more. For when men haue once begonne to throwe them ſelues downe, then are they caryed daily downe hedlong more and more, into the bottomles dungiō of errours. For as it was in their power to let them ſelues fall, ſo when they be once going, it is not then in their power to ſtay them ſelues. VVhat is now the ſtate of your kyngdome, your highnes ſeeth. VVhyle euery man allmost hath noneThe ſtate of coūtres vvhere he reſy taketh place other thing to diſpute of, but of the expreſſe word of God. VVhyle eche man arrogateth vnto him ſelf the knowledge therof, and will haue his owne fancy adored, as the expreſſe word of God: Yea and often is it ſeene that how myche the more vnlerned a mā is, with ſo myche the more bouldnes he will take on him to taulke, and diſpute of that which he vnderſtandeth not.
               But lord how myche I feare leſt while euery mā wil haue what ſo euer him ſelf ſayeth, or deuiſeth to be houlden for the expreſſe word of God, we ſhall ſhortly recken emong vs ſo many Polonian Gods, as allredy we ſee of Germayne Gods? VVould God your highnes would be induced (most vertuous Prince) to

harken to the Prophets, and Apostles, which ſtyll crye vnto you [Auoyde idolls.] For whatEzech 14. 1. Cor. 10. 1. Ioan. 5. Sap. 14. Eccle. 30. Eſa. 1. Hiere. 2. Ezech. 14 18 20. Oſee 8. Amos 2. Miche. 1. can they be ells, but idolls, which transferre diuine honour vnto them ſelues? and will haue what ſo euer they ſaye or inuent, to be houlden and reputed for the very word of God? This ſo horrible an idolatry your highnes muſt driue and beate backe farre from al the borders of your kingdome, and dominions: Neither muſt you permit any man to ſet him ſelf vp as a God, or to commaund any perſon to bowe downe and inclyne before hisZacha. 13. Act. 21. word as before the word of God.
               VVhat is in deed the expreſſe and cleer word of God you haue now lerned of me: and yet though nothing be more cleer and expreſſe, yet is it vtterly extinguiſshed, when euery man ſhall take on him power, and ſkil to diſpute and reaſon of Gods word. I trust I haue done that was my part to doo. ForA cōpendious collection of the cheef matters treated of in this booke. though not learnedly inough, yet haue I plainlie and opēly ſhewed, how great daunger it bringeth to the churche, when euery man be he neuer ſo vnlearned is ſuffred to take vpon him the iudgemēt of the expreſſe word of God. I haue alſo oppened what is that

woord of God which is ſo cleere, perſpicuous, and expreſſe, that euen without ſcriptures it may be lernyd by the ſympleſt, and that it is not needfull for them that beleeue in Chryſt to diſpute therof: but that it behooueth thē firmly to retayne the ſame in theyr hartes, and not to ſuffer it to depart from thence.
               Now your part (Right mighty kyng) ſeemyth to be this, that you forbidd to all your ſubiectes this reaſoning and contencious arguing of the word of God: And yf any be curious to knowe what is the expreſſe word of God, that you cōmaund thē (according to theMalach. 2. words of the ſcripture) [to learne the lawe at the mouth of the priest.] And that you take eſpeciall heed and regard that you ſuffer not your eares to be beatē vpō with theſe ſayings of heretiks: [If thou be the ſonne of god, throwe thy ſelf downe: for it is written.] It is theMatt. 4. expreſſe word of God &c. Theſe be the wordes of Sathā ſpeaking by his lymmes and mē
                  bers, whom you ought to hate more then any venemous beaſt.
               That which the churche teacheth is the expreſſe word of God: and that which is taught against the ſence and conſent of the

churche is the expreſſe word of the diuel. Therfore you must ſtoppe your eares against the doctrines of ſyche men, as Vliſſes did against the ſingyng of the meremaydes, and whē ſo euer your hap ſhal be to heare any ſyche, to geue ſome manifest ſhewe, and tokē, how myche your highnes miſleeketh it.
               So did your noble progenitors our kynges, your bleſſed father, grandfather, and great grandfather, all not only notable by the worthyThe great pietie, religion, and cōſtācy of the kinges of Polonia prayſe of their other vertues, but allſo for their ſingular pyete, and conſtancy, in houlding and mainteynīg the catholyck and ryght faith: Yea they ſo abhorred the ſocyetee, and cōpany of heretikes, that ſome of them (as we reade in our Chronicles) did willingly Vladiſlaus kinge of Polonia refuſed the kingdom of Bohem in this reſpect. refuſe kyngdomes being offred them of heretikes, becauſe they had a conſciēce to make or meddle with them. Theſe their vertuous ſteppes yf you wil followe (which we truſt and hope your highnes wil) the ſtate of thinges in your kyngdom are not yet ſo deſperat or past recouery, but that (God fauorīg) the trā
                  quillite of the Churche may be agayne reſtored. VVhich happy daye that it may once ſhyne vpon vs, we moſt humbly and earneſtly beſeeche almighty God.
            
            FINIS.
         
      
      
         
            
            
               A TABLE OF THE PRINCIPALL MATTERS: BY THE ORDER of the Alphabet. The number noteth the leafe: a. and b. the firſt and ſeconde ſyde.
            
               A
               THE preſumptuous wordes of an Anabaptiste.  Fol. 38 a
               The Apologie of England ſlaundereth Hoſius.  Fol. 47. a
               The diuel aſſaulteth the Apostles as he did Chriſt.  Fol. 20. a
               Onely one letter in question betwene the Catholikes and the Arrians.  Fol. 77. b
               The Auguſtane Confeſsion.  70. b. 72. a
            
            
               B
               The folie of the Bohemians.  56. a
               Bucer againſt Luther.  96. b
               The gentle agreement betwene Bucer and Luther.  78. b
            
            
               C
               Caluin and Alaſco against VVestphalus.  96. a
               Caluins complaynt of Luther.  96. b
               The breache of the Canons is one kinde of blaſphemy against the holy Ghoſte.  91. b
               The preaching of Catholikes and of the olde true Prophetes agreeth.  6. and 7.
               The duty of Catholikes when hereſy ſpringeth vp.  30. a
               VVhat is the whole controuerſy betwene Catholikes and Protestants.  48. b. 49. a
               The difference betwene Catholikes and Proteſtants.  50. a
               The force of Charite.  100. b
               Charite is the ſcope and ende of all Scripture.  102. a
               Charite is the liuely and ſauing worde of God.  62. a
               
                  VVho is a demy Chriſtian.  76. b
               He is no Chriſtian that is diuided from the Churche.  77. b
               A truthe receyued in the Churche is not to be aboliſshed for ſatisfying the multitude.  66. a
               Truthe is only in the catholike churche.  40. b
               The voyce of the churche is the voyce of God.  42. a
               The true churche of God.  109. b
               The voyce of the churche.  48. a
               Contempt of the churche, the originall of theſe preſent hereſies.  81. a
               Communion vnder bothe kindes, grounded vpon no ſcripture at all.  49 50. 51.
               Suche communion not neceſſary for the Layete.  54. a
               The Sentence of generall councell, the Sentēce of God.  29. b
               VVhat religion moueth Proteſtāts to not forbeare the cuppe.  59. b
            
            
               D
               Diſſenſion amonge the proteſtants, rayſed vp the Swenckfeldian ſecte.  38. b
               Thre cauſes, why heretikes ought not to be diſputed with by ſcriptures.  24. b
               VVhat is the worde of the diuel.  42. a
               Howe the diuell ſpeaketh by his miniſters at this daye. 15. See more in the worde, Sathan.  
               Strange Gods are newe doctrines.  93. 94. a
               The true ſence of Chriſte his wordes: Drynke ye all of this.  53. b
            
            
               E
               The waie to auoyde errours, is not by permiſsiō of any.  64. b
            
            
               F
               Conſtācy of the Catholike Fathers againſt the Arriās.  78. a
               Flaccus Illyricus condemneth his maſter, Melancthon.  98. b
            
            
               
               G
               Howe hereſy hath creped on, and multiplied in Germany.  70. a
               The diſordered alteration in Germany.  71. b
               The ſtate of proteſtāts in the free Cytes of Germany.  79. b
               VVhat the Goſpell is by Caluins definition.  90. a
               Sathā ſhrowdeth hīſelf vnder the name of the goſpel.  21. a
               The ſchiſmatical Grekes better then proteſtants.  51. a
            
            
               H
               Hereſy is in the vnderſtanding, not in the ſcripture.  48. b
               VVhere in hereſy conſisteth.  33. a. and 39. a
               The deceitefull pretence of heretikes in al ages.  21. a
               The ende of diſputing with heretikes.  24. a
               The extreme arrogancy of heretikes.  44. a
               VVherunto their deuiſes doe tende.  85. a
               Heretikes thr all the ſcriptures to their owne mindes.  87. a
               Heretikes are idolls to be fled from.  92. a. and 95. a
               VVhy Catholikes maye not conſent to heretikes.  87. b
               Heretikes voyde of Charyte.  62. a
               Hereſies haue bene quēched by cōtrary decrees, not by tolerations.  64. b. 65. a▪ & b
               Coūcels and parliamēts in likeregarde with heretiks.  73. b
               Heretikes wil bring God in to Order. 75. b. Heretikes differ from Catholikes no we, as the faulſe prophetes did from the true. 3. b. & 4. a. Heretikes transfigured into the Apoſtles of Chriſt. 14. a. Heretikes now like to heretikes in the primitiue Churche. 21. b. VVhy heretikes ſee not the Truthe. 101. b. The maruelous blindneſſe of heretikes. 105. a Heretiks cā not poſsibly haue the expreſſe word of god. 106. b The cōflict amōg heretiks about their priuat churches. 109. The cauſe why hereſies ſpringe and increaſe.  111. b.
               
                  The ſtate of countres where hereſy taketh place.  Ibidem.
               The first and principal attempt of Sathan to bring a man to hereſy.  16. b
               Hoſius ſlaūdered extremely by the apologie of Englād.  47. a
               Hoſius the paterne of a good Biſshop.  67. b
               The Godly zele of Hoſius. 111. a. His vertuous prayer.  Ibid.
               His great trauail in defending the Catholike faith.  111. b 69. a
            
            
               I
               VVhat harme cometh of innouation and change of lawes.  
               The hereſy of lustificatiō by only faith, an old hereſy.  22. a
            
            
               L
               Howe Luther ouerthwarteth the Churche.  17. & 18.
               Luther a ſworen enemy to good workes.  23. a
               The lewde practyſe of Marcion renewed by Luther.  27. a
               Luther belyeth the Nicene councell.  28. b. 29. a
               Luther wil not haue the Sacramētaryes diſputed with.  28.
               Luther caſt in his owne turne.  32. a
               The extreme pride of Luther.  44. a. & b
               Luther a right miniſter of Sathan.  57. b.
               The foundation, procedinges, and ſucceſſe of Luthers Goſpell.  82. and 83.
               Bitter diſſenſions betwene the Lutherās them ſelues.  32.
               The zelous and rigorous Lutheranes.  80. a
               The impiete of a Luther an in ouerthwarting the order of the churche, 83. b. An other of the ſame batche.  Ibidem.
               Lutherans against the Zuinglians. 96. a. Alaſco his complaynte of the Lutheranes. 97. a. Certaine Lutheranes wil rather doubte of S. Paule, then of the Auguſtane confeſsion.  97. b
            
            
               M
               Melancthon againſt Luther.  98. a.
               
                  Melancthon cōplayned that he had folowed Luther to ſeruilly. Ibidem. Foure Lutheran Doctours againſt Melācthō, Luthers owne derling.  98. b
               The cruelty of Merlinus againſt the Oſiandrines: of one Proteſtant againſt an other.  86. a
            
            
               O
               The doctrine of Oſiander.  86. a
            
            
               P
               Luther graunteth all right Chriſtianite to Papiſtes.  82. a
               Pride letteth from true knowleadge.  1. b. 75. a
               The intolerable pride of the vnlerned multitude.  77. a
               Pride and ſelfeloue the cauſe of all this garboyle in religion.  47. b
               The anſwer of the kinge of Polonia to the proteſtantes embaſſadours.  63. a
               The greate pyete and religiō of the kinges of Polonia.  113. b
               The variable alteration of Polonian heretikes.  69. b
               Falſe prophets pretēded Gods worde amōge the Iewes.  3. a
               The difference betwene the falſe prophetes and true, as nowe betwene proteſtants and catholikes.  3. b
               Securite and looſeneſſe of life preached by the falſe prophetes as nowe by proteſtantes.  6. b. 7. a & b
               The race and iſſew of proteſtants.  45. b
               All and not All in Scripture as it pleaſeth proteſtants.  52. a
               The odious arrogancy of Proteſtants.  58 b
               A moſt peſtilent doctrine of Proteſtants.  23. a
               Much of the Proteſtants doctrine condemned a M. yeres paſt for hereſy.  32. b
               Proteſtants like to Manichees.  44. a
               The ciuill warre amōg the Proteſtants them ſelues.  95. b
            
            
               
               S
               The wonderfull ſleightes of Sathan.  61. a
               Sathan paſſeth not on the cuppe, ſo he maye induce the ſchiſme.  64. a. 57. a
               The ſubtelty of Sathan.  65. a
               Sathan transformed in to an angell of light.  14. b
               VVho throwe them ſelues downe, nowe a dayes, at Sathās worde.  13.
               VVhat Sathans intent is by heretikes his miniſters.  42. a
               Sathans full intent and finall purpoſe.  95. a
               An olde complaint of 10 aunciēt fathers, againſt heretikes for alleaging of ſcriptures in their priuat ſenſe.  32 b. 33. 34. 35. 36. 37.
               A not able example howe to reade holy ſcriptures.  43. a
               The diuell alleageth Scripture againſt Chriſt.  12.
               Heretikes alleage ſcriptures againſt the churche.  12. b
               The workes of olde heretikes full of ſcriptures.  13. a
               The diuell by his miniſters alleageth Scriptures againſt Chriſt.  19. b
               One ſelfe Scripture maye be the worde of God, and the worde of the diuell.  104. b
               VVhat all preſent ſectes promiſe to their folowers.  19. a
               Very proper and apte ſimilitudes.  50. b. 53. and 105.
               Howe the ſixt of S. Iohn belongeth to the Supper.  55.
               The reuel amonge Lutheranes aboute the Surpleſſe.  80. a.
               The Swenckfeldians being proteſtants, will no more the Scriptures.  46. b
               Scriptures depraued by vnlerned and light perſons.  21. b
            
            
               T
               Tertullian againſt heretikes.  24. 25. and 26.
               
                  VVhat is meant by theſe wordes: Throwe thy ſelf downe.  58. a
               The Tigurin and Laſkane Confeſsion.  70. b
               Truthe is not priuat or perſonall, but common to all.  40. a
            
            
               V
               Paulus Vergerius a firebrande of ſedition.  85. b
               The inconſtancy of his doctrine.  86. a
               The ſacrilegious wordes of Paulus Vergerius.  75. a
               A moſt euident diſplaying of preſent Proteſtants by Vincentius Lirinenſis.  12. b. 13. 14. 15. and 16.
            
            
               VV
               Rauening wolues.  13. b
               The pretence of Gods worde a moſt eaſy pretence of Sathan to deceiue withall.  14. b
               VVhat is the true worde of God.  41. b
               VVhat the expreſſe worde of God is.  50. b
               VVhat is the expreſſe and true quickening word of God, cō
                  mōly now called, The lyuely word of the lord.  100. a
               The worde of God aptly compared to the Lode ſtarre.  105.
               Howe to knowe whē the true word of God is vttered.  107. b
               Scriptures alleaged for good workes.  9. b. 10. a & b
            
            
               Z
               Zwinglius againſt the Lutherans.  96. a
            
         
         
            Ego Cornelius Tanſenius teſtor me certo intellexiſſe a doctis viris, fide dignis & Anglice peritis, hunc D. Cardinalis Hoſij librum, De Expreſſo Verbo Dei, hic fideliter verſum eſſe in linguam Anglicam, ac proinde ad Anglorum vtilitatem iudico eum typis excudendum.
            
               Ita eſſe teſtor Cornelius Ianſenius
Sacrae Theolog. Proſeſſor.
            
            
         
      
   