
      
         
            
            
            GREAT BRITTAINES RESVRrection: Or the Parliaments paſſing Bell.
            BY VVAY OF PSALMODIE, AGAINST the tryumphing of the Papiſts, in their ſeuen Pſalmes.
            And in imitation of the ſong of the three Nobles of Iſrael, deliuered out of the fierie Ouen of Babell.
            
            By VVilliam Hubbard, Chaplaine to the Kings Maieſtie, in his Highnes Tower of London.
            
               Hoſ. 14.10.
               Who is wiſe, and he ſhall vnderstand theſe things? and prudent, and he ſhall know them? for the waies of the Lord are righteous, and the iust ſhall walk 
                     〈◊〉
                   them: but the wicked ſhall fall therein.
            
            Seene and allowed.
            AT LONDON, Printed by T. C. for Arthur Iohnſon, and are to be ſold at his ſhop in Pauls Churchyard, at the ſigne of the white Horſe. 1606.
         
         
            
            
            To the right Worſhipful, Sir VVilliam VVaade Knight, Lieutenant to his Maieſtie, in his Highnes Tower of London: Grace and fauour with God and man, be multiplied in Ieſus Chriſt.
            
               I H
                  •••
                made bold (right Worſhipfull) to dedicate this Hymne and generall ſacrifice of compunction and thankſgiuing, to your name and memorie, both as a tendering of my particular office to you and yours principally: and becauſe God hath made you ſo generall a man for the common good, being ſo learned, religious, and habitually prudent from the chiefe ſchoole of high wiſedome in our eſtate, the bourd of his Maieſties moſt honourable priuie Counſell, and a moſt ſufficient ſeruant of King and Country in this place: whereupon I begin to conceiue ſtrong hope, that the Lord hath ſent you amongſt vs, not onely for theſe deare and preſent times of this new generation of gun▪ powder men in this place, in which your dexterity and ſeruice is apparant to all, but to be valued of them who are able to giue it his due weight & poiſe, without diminiſhing any graine of ſuch a mineral better then gold:Tower miniſterie. but for eſtabliſhing alſo the Church and gouernment here vnto poſterity, which hath beene the ſinne of omiſsion in many before you: and now needeth ſome Zerubabel, or Nehemia,
               Zach▪ 4.7.10. Noh. 13.4.7.8. a reſtorer after ſo many exigents, as it hath beene driuen vnto in the miniſteries of the ſame, being driuen out of their poſſeſsions, and olde indowments, in the midſt of gold and ſiluer, Iewels and Plate, as Tantalus in the miaſt of water, wanting water: where rather the ſupport ſhould be certaine and liberall for Gods honour, and the Kings, for the attendance of ſuch an one, as both may informe the officers and ſeruants there, and inhabitants beſides, to the number welnigh of 400. communicants (aggregated thither, and

eſcaping ſcot and lot elſe where, who enioy all diuine rights for themſelues and their families at the Miniſters hands, and as though their ſoules were worth nothing, or free of heauen,Pro. 3.9. honour the Lord with no part of their ſubſtance) and may at times alſo by moderate dropping of his words vpon the Priſoners,Ezech 21.2. rather then at or a little before their death (for their error came not in a moment,Conference with priſoners. nor is Chriſtian regeneration ripened but by degrees) inſtruct the contrarie minded with patience, as the ample ſaith: trying whether God will giue them repentance at any time to know the truth,2. Tim. 2.24.25.26. that they may come to amendment out of the ſnare of the diuel, of whom they are held to do his wil▪ which place of ſcripture I confeſſe I haue long time much made of. In which kind my poore labours haue not beene in vaine in the Lord, both to the reclaiming of diuers, and to the diſcouerie of matter beneficiall to the eſtate: which I think ſome of their honors haue not forgot, glorfied be the name of him that hath his chaire in heauen, and teacheth the heart. In all which ripe and ſweet fruites of your faith,In veni lateritiam: reliqui marmoream. that you may increaſe with the mighty increaſes of God, my harty prayer is, that ſo you may be eminent daily in this your whole ſo carefull a charge and employment, in this royall Caſtle, the key of the kingdome: that you make that marble, which you found brick: that that which was planted with wilde figs, you may eſtabliſh with Cedars: finally, ſo to wade thorough this whole cumberſome & vncertaine ſea full of many new monſters, as that you may haue an Oliue branch ſtill in your hand, & with an vncorrupt mind lift vp your head to the head of all with holy ouation, ſaying. I haue run my full race:2. Tim. 4.7.8. I haue fought a good fight: I haue kept my ſelfe in the faith, and others: Clavum et clipeū tenui. Amen.
            
               
                  Your Worſhips in his beſt offices and ſeruices 
                        •
                     or the Church, William Hubbard.
            
         
         
            
            To the deuout and Chriſtian Reader.
            
               A Foundation and direction of expreſſing my thoughts, by way of Pſalme, hath beene the Apoſtles holy canon and ſanction:Col. 3.1
                     •
                  . 
               Let the word of Chriſt dwelt in you plenteouſly in all wiſedome▪ teaching and admoniſhing your owne ſelues in Pſalmes and Himnes,
               Why this treatiſe by way of Pſalme. 
               and ſpirituall ſongs. And I finde that our Lord and Maiſter Ieſus Chriſt, after he had kept his paſſeouer with his diſciples, and waſhed their feet after ſupper:Ioh 13.2. Math. 26.30. and inſtituted & performed the ſacrament in an excellent ſermon or ſermocination reaching from Iohn, cha. 13 31. thorough the whole 14.15.16. chapters, with a prayer annexed, containing the whole 17. chap. he thought not this heauenly feaſt and banquer, ſufficiently furniſhed, vnleſſe hee cloſed vp their ſpirituall ſtomack with a Pſalme, as ſome precious marm
                  •
               let
                  •
                For ſo ſaith the ſcripture: When they had ſung a Pſalme,
               Math 26.2. 
               they went out into the mount of Oliues. A moſt Chriſtian exerciſe, and too much neglected among profeſſours. Others in great varietie of inuention in verſe & proſe, in Latine and Engliſh, in ſermon & otherwiſe, haue trauelled in this argument laudably and fruitfully: ſome memorably euen by the voyce of a dolefull

Pyramis demoliſhed in Fraunce, crauing reſtitution in noble great Brittaine: yea the Theater and Engliſh Roſcius himſelfe hath pourtrayed this work of God, and ſet it aloft, tanquam in arce Phidiae, as it were in the turret of the famous caruer Phidias, to the view of all men. But I tooke this courſe, the rather, becauſe I obſerue the friends of the Romiſh Pioners, to haue had a ſecret ſeauenfold Pſalmodie, as a claudeſtinarie oriſon frō hand to hand, in which they ſolace themſelues with ſtrange notes, and tunes, and ditties, and hopes of newes:Select ſentences out of the Popiſh newe Pſalter. In their 4. Pſalm. as in an inſolent Paean, triumphing before hand, for a Iubily & golden day at hand. I will ſet downe ſome of their words, becauſe the booke is not in manie hands. And I by a good friend came by the moſt of it. Of innocent King Edward, thus they ſpeake: England, ah vngratefull England, forgat the liuing God, and felt the curſe of hauing a child to her King.
            Of our late Queene, of thrice bleſſed memory, thus they ſeeme to ſay: The nobility to their owne vtter extirpation ſhamefully forſooke their Biſhops, without aſſiſtance.
            Of our noble Soueraigne they ſeeme thus: Alas, O Lord: that thou haſt ſuffered a parching winde to blow from the North:
            Which made the boughes of thy planting to wither, and the flouriſh thereof to decay:
            And yet as it were recomforting themſelues, thus they ſeeme to prophecie.
            In a moment canſt thou cruſh her bones, and lay her pride in the duſt:
            And: The earth is infected with the wickednes

of the Inhabitants, and crieth vnto thee for vengeance:
            And poſſibly would ſwallow them as it did Ch
                     •
                  re and his company: were it not for thine elect ſake:
            Reuenging fire of Sodome and Gomor might bee iuſtly feared:
            And: Confirme the heart of thoſe thy labourers: endue them with ſtrength from aboue, and giue ſucceſſe vnto their endeuours:
            Againe: Embolden our hearts with courage, to concurre with them freely in furthering thy ſeruice.
            And in another place: Confirme your hearts in hope, for your redemption is not farre off.In their ſecond Pſalme.
            
            The yeare of viſitation draweth to an end: and Iubilation is at hand:
            And: Ieruſalem ſhall be built vp againe: and the ſecond glory thereof, ſhall be greater then the firſt.
            And: Righteouſnes ſhall proſper, and infidelity ſhall be plucked vp by the rootes.
            God will ariſe as from a long ſlumber, & eſtabliſh againe the arke of his ſanctification.
            And: The roote which hath waxen olde vnder ground, man ſhoote vp againe as a freſh plant by the riuer ſide:
            Falſe errour ſhall vaniſh as ſmoake:
            And they which ſawe it, ſhall ſay: Where is it become?
            Iuſt iudgment & holy lawes ſhall be reſtored, &c.
            Againe: His tabernacle he will ſpred againe; and dwell amongſt vs as in times paſt.
            And: Sacred ſongs ſhall break their long ſilence, the lamp of our Lord ſhall be 
                  〈◊〉
               .
            
               And: The reſemblance of heauen ſhall be renued, the reſemblance of hell ſhall be deſtroyed.
            
               England ſhall be called a happy Realme, a bleſſed Country, a religious people.
            Thoſe which knewe the former glory of Religion, ſhall lift vp their hands for ioy, to ſee it returned againe.
            Thoſe that neuer ſaw it ſhall be ſtrucken with admitation: wiſhing that they had ſooner knowne the truth: condemning their fathers which forſooke it.
            Men ſhall ſay of it, one to another: heere is indeede the houſe of God, and the gate of heauen.
            How great diuerſitie is betweene truth and falſehood, deuout ſolemnities, and counterfet ceremonies?
            From the Eaſt point to the Weſt, men ſhall confeſſe their errors.
            They which thought themſelues wiſeſt, ſhall ſay they knew nothing:
            Gladly ſhall people walke in their auncient ſteps of truth and equitie, &c.
            The Prince of peace will breake the exactors rod. &c.
            No longer will he diſſemble the oppreſſion of his people▪
            
            He is bent to reuenge their cauſe.
            The daughters of Babylon ſhal be caſt downe: and in the duſt lament their ruine.
            Proud hereſie ſhall ſtrike her ſayle: and groane as a beaſt cruſhed vnder a cart wheele.
            Againe: The omnipotent hath ſworne to make

her ſtoupe: and that he will abaſe her haughtines.
            Againe: The memorie of nouelties ſhall periſh with a crack: as a ruinous houſe falling to the groūd.
            And: Hee will come as a flame that burſteth out beyond the ſurnace.
            His fury ſhall flie forth as thunder: and pich on their tops that maligne him.
            Againe: A ſecond Cyrus hath he ſtirred vp: confirming his Scepter for the good of his people.
            He ſhal likewiſe bring the Infants of Sion from all quarters of their baniſhment: Ioyfully ſhall they returne from forraine lands.
            And thoſe Countries, where now they harbour, ſhall finde ſuccour in this Ile for their neceſſities.
            Againe: The tempeſtuous night being paſſed: a perpetuall day ſhall be our comfort.
            His truth, his iuſtice, his Prieſts, his ſacrifice ſhall be no more taken away.
            I haue beene the larger: that the reader might ſee, & obſerue the Papiſts expectation out of their owne many words without equiuocation. But Mutatis mutandis the prophecie ſhal be inuerted vpon themſelues: as is in part alreadie: Magnified be the name of God therefore.
            Now for this my methode, as it were a letanie or proceſſion: and a kinde of ſpirituall preambulation thorough the whole England, as men doe to keepe their bounds: ſo we to ſee in particular and generall how much we are bound to God:Exod. 15. 
                     •
                  ud. 5. wee haue excellent preſidents to omit Miriams ſong, and Deborahs, which both ſtand vpon the reſolution into particulars: but in Dauid, himſelfe more notably: Dauid
               
the ſweet ſinger of Iſrael, the king of ſingers, firſt Pſal. 136. which vſed to be ſung of the Leuites in the temple:1. Chro. 16.41. In which Pſalme as it were by a logicall or theologicall predicament, hee beginning with the great works of GOD in generall, hee after diuideth his thoughts into the works of creation, and adminiſtration:
                  
                     Odê Epae
                           ••
                        
                        ticos, ê antiſtrophos.
                  
                  Why repetition.
                  Preſidentes of particular recapitulation, and a burdē of words in ſongs of thankſgiuing See alſo Pſalm. 118. in the beginning.
                hee goeth from the heauens to the earth: hee particularizeth in the great lights the ſunne and the moone. In the works of adminiſtration he exemplifieth in the Lords deſtroying Aegipts firſt borne: in bringing Iſrael out thence: in cutting ſea into two parts: in bringing Iſrael thorough the midſt: and not at the ſhore and in ſome ſhallowe place: In ouerthrowing Pharao and his hoaſt there: In leading this people thorough the Deſart: In ſmiting great kings for their ſakes: particularly Sihon and Og: in giuing his people their land: in remembring not their miſerie onely, but in feeding all fleſh. The burden of all which to euery verſe is:
The mercy of the Lord endureth for euer.
            
            That is to ſay: Gods mercy appeared not then onely and in thoſe particulars, but for euer: And that theſe particulars were ſtakings downe, that they had had Gods mercy from time to time, and might be ſure of it for euer: euen as Eſay the Prophet ſaith: Heare,Eſay, 55. and your ſoule ſhall liue: and I will make an euerlaſting couenant with you: the ſure mercies of Dauid: What is this elſe, but you ſhall be as ſure of my loue as euer Dauid was: And in a neerer example,A 
                     •
                  . preſident. Pſal. 148. hee rangeth and marſhalleth the creatures in order, with redoubling the ſame wordes: praiſe him all ye his Angels: praiſe him all his armies:

praiſe him ſunne and moone: praiſe him heauen of heauens, and ye waters that be aboue the heauens, let them praiſe, &c. praiſe ye the Lord frō the earth, Dragons, depthes, fire, hayle, ſnow, vapours, winds, mountaines, hills, beaſts, creeping thinges, and feathered fowles, Kings and all nations, Princes, and all Iudges of the earth: young men and maydes: olde men and children: Let them praiſe the name of the Lord, &c and why all theſe? For the particular mercie (ſaith Dauid) in exalting the horne of his people. Euen as Eſay on the other ſide in the impenitencie of the people conteſteth heauen and earth:Eſay. 1.2. atteſteth Oxe and Aſſe againſt Iſraels ingratitude.
            And hence no doubt was deduced the canticle of the three children, though apocrypha,The ſong of the three children: O all ye works of the Lord, &c. yet very auncient, and inſerted for the worthines of it into the liturgie of the Church of England. Where the three great noble men and rulers of thy Prouinces themſelues perſonally ſtand forth, and beginning from the generall workes of God, diſcend to ſpecials: in heauen to Angels, ſunne & moone: and paſſe along the cloudes in their ſpirits, to ſhowers, windes, fire, heat, winter, ſommer, dewes, and froſts, yce & ſnow: and knock at the dore of euery creature in the earth: mountaines, green things, wells, ſeas, floods, whales; fowles, beaſts, particularly ſummoning men: more particularly Iſrael: among them the Lords Prieſts and ſeruants: the ſoules of the righteous: and humble men that walke with God, and indure any thing or euery thing for him:O'A
                     •
                  aria, Azaria & M
                     ••
                  ael: doe you praiſe the 
                     〈…〉
                   the Lord. and by name they call vpon themſelues: As though all the creatures were obteſted to helpe them to praiſe God, & to acknowledge

this Creator and preſeruer of them: and that they who had the chiefe deliuerance, though men of care, knowledge, and vnderſtanding in all learning and wiſedome, yet were vnſufficient without worlds of helpe.Dan. 1.17. & 2.17.18. Therefore as God preſented all the creatures before Adam their Lord & owner vnder God: and at another time all the creatures of the earth before Noah,
               Gen. 2, 19.20. & 7.14. their preſeruer vnder the ſame God: And as Landlords haue their tennants to ſhew their poll, and to pay head ſiluer to their Lords in their Courts yearely: And as ſea-men ſcaping ſhipwrack, offer vowes,Ionas 1, 16. and hang vp tables of deliuerance: ſo haue I endeuoured by theſe holy examples, and the like to preſent in all humble duty all degrees and eſtates before this Lord their preſeruer, with crownes of ſaluation on their heads, palmes of victorie in their hands, Pſalmes of thankſgiuing in their mouthes. For when the funerall men of Rome tolled our laſt knel among thēſelues:To the Parliaments paſsing Bell. ſo certainly that they thought all the Phyſitions of great Brittaine could doe her no good: and that God himſelfe had forſaken her: ſaying, now the Proteſtant ſhall die, & his name periſh: did not the Lord of life cauſe the bel to ſtay on a ſuddaine:Pſal. 41.5. and hath hee not ſpirited her againe with a freſh life,Great Brittaines Reſurrection. Heb. 11.19. and made her the daughter of a ioyfull reſurrection. As it is ſaid of Iſaac, that Abraham after a ſort receiued him frō the dead, when he was ſo neare vnto death and yet deliuered. My meaning was to ſtirre vp all our ſpirits, mine owne and others, and to keepe vs ſomewhat waking, leaſt ſecurity the bane of all ſhould creepe in. For if right vſe be made of this: what doth let but we may write: Aeterna Britannia

magna: wherein no doubt a princely and honourable monument from this Senate in a feſtiuitie ordained for euer to be kept (which ſhall be like a marble piller, with a real,Parliament holy day. and compendious inſcription of the matter and occaſion ingrauen walled about, and a keeper of it as of other monuments for all to viſite) to Gods glory and increaſe of our faith and repentance, ſhal reuiue our anniuerſarie thankfulnes to all poſteritie. And me thinkes I obſerue a new edge vpon many louers of religion ſince,Rom. 10.19. 1. Sam. 5.4. Vt ingulent homines ſargunt de nocte latrones: vt temet ſerues non expergiſcere? Theeues riſe by night to kill: and thou to ſaue thy ſelfe by waking haſt no will. when they ſee God hath ſo prouoked them by a fooliſh and idolatrous people deſperately zealous for the ſetting of Dagon, that thereby with greater inflamed hearts the friends of Sion labour to reſetle the arke of God vpon our center for euer. In which for my part I cannot but praiſe God for the feruour and ardent ſpirit of the moſt honorable and zealous lower houſe, like the ſpirit of famous Martin Luther, and a fierie conglobation in their holy and deuout diſpoſitions in many notable propoſitions, and yet alſo giue God moſt hartie thanks for the graue, moderate, and mature conſiderations of the moſt honourable & high part of the vpper houſe, as the ſage ſpirit of melancthon, and a refrigeratiue conſtellation: whoſe operations and influences ſhal by Gods grace haue heauenly and mighty effects very beneficiall to the publike good in due time, and their ſweet aſpect and louing reſpect vnto one another, and to the whole by their happy and peaceable coniunction ſhall profit, vpon further occaſions that which is behind of their faith, wiſedome, and zeale, which ſhall be the better effected, if we could all goe one way. For I perceiue

in many caſes, as the Lamprey and ſerpent ingender, ſo ſome profeſſors ſo named (for I except the graue, humble, modeſt, and fatherly, whom I know many) and the Papiſt with diuerſe ends ioyne to debaſe him, that without reſpect of factions in his honeſt ſimplicity and plainenes, oppoſeth himſelfe to two extremes:Ariſtotle li. 1, eth. ca. 6. Great was the light of wiſedome, that ſhined in the Gentiles: He that wil preſerue truth, muſt not only confute other mens opinions, but his own. And would to God al ſides could learne of the fountaine of wiſedom, not to do any thing for diſpleaſure againſt any ſuppoſed tares,Math. 13. as to pluck vp wheat: and all ſides ſo to denie themſelues and their own name, that we might thinke it no diſgrace, but good deuotion to ſay in a common voyce: Thy name be ſanctified,Math. 6. O Lord, whatſoeuer become of our name. And heere I moſt humbly deſire as in this laſt paſſage, ſo in the whole proceſſe the friendly chriſtian and charitable conſtruction & indulgence of all men: wherin any thing by omiſſion or addition is miſtaken, which in ſuch variety of degrees to ſort euery one with their proper attributes and offices is eaſie for a contemplatiue man, labouring according to this place & my function, to be a remembrancer among many: knowing that as in a race though men runne ſwiftly of themſelues, yet the clapping of hands of other obſeruers, & of them that blowe the trumpets, addeth a new courage and vigour to them. The ſum of my deſire is:Cantic. 4.2. that all our people of great Brittaine hereafter may be like one flocke of ſheepe, as the holy Ghoſt ſpeaketh: as in good order come vp from their waſhing: a peculiar people abundant and zealous

of good works: euery one bearing twins and none barren among them:Tit. 1.14. 2. Cor. 5.11. that our Church knowing, the terrour of the Lord, heereby as Chriſt ſpeaketh, may be purged, and bring forth more fruit; that it may grow as the Lily, and haue rootes of Lebanon:Ioſ. 15.2.3. that ſhe may looke forth from her ſleepe,Hoſ. 14.5, 6, 7.8.9. as the morning faire as the moone, pure as the ſunne, terrible as an armie with banners, that all the world may confeſſe: what nation is ſo great vnto whom God commeth ſo neare in all that we neede,Cantic. 6.9. euen before wee call vpon him: What nation ſo great,Deut 47. Eſa. 65.24. that hath ordinances and lawes ſo wiſe and ſo righteous, as they haue ſet out in this their day. Amen. April. 29. 1606.
         
         
            Faults eſcaped.
            SEction 1, line laſt, for reſeueth. read, and reſerueth. ſec▪ 5, l. 9, read ſulphurous, ibid. li. 23, read hath for haue, ſec: 6, in margine, for ornatumque, read ornatum, 16, d, for a deo, read ad eos, ſec: 16, li, 14, read leprous, ſec. 19, li. 9, read wheeles, ſec: 21. li, 15, for houres, read hoardes, ſec▪ N. li. 16, Goteham, ſec: 22, li. 23, at this ſigne * left out: who ment to haue the incuſtodie: and 25. read volies, ſec: 25, li. 9, f. 1 Fſaac alſo, Iſaac alone, ſec. 29, li. 17, Parliaments petition, and li. 58.10, 11, &c. ſec▪ 30, li. 30. read praiſe, ſec. 32, third page, for cheſts, read clefts ſec. 33. li. 4. read trayne and 2. p. all dimenſions. ſec 39. page. 2. in fine: read maruell.
            Sec. 11. after the word practiſe: alſo all the 
                  〈◊〉
               
               ▪ Academia: ſchollers and children of the famous Kings ſchoole of Weſtminſter, who like the male children of Iſrael by this Italian Pharao, had like to haue beene conſumed in a deluge of fire, and as the innocent Babes of Bethlehem to be ſlaine by the Romiſh Herod, in deſpite of young Chriſt amongſt vs.
            The Author is named Habbard for Hubbocke, without direction indeede, but not without prouidence, as being the auncient and rightfull title of the family: though he refuſeth neither.
         
      
      
         
            
            
            
               ❧ Great Brittaines Reſurrection.
            
               O Thou mighty Iames, King of great  
               Britane, Fraunce, and Ireland: whom GOD hath aduaunced ſo peaceablie to ſo manie vnited Kingdomes, vpon ſo variable a change, without any ſenſible alteration, to the admiration of all the world: and ſeemed to haue rooted thine eſtate, by blisfull and much royall iſſue: by amitie of Forraine Princes, by great loue & loyaltie of ſubiects: that it was thought not able to be remoued: (thou Lord of thy onely goodnes,Pſal. 30, 7. hadſt made his rocke to ſtand ſo ſtrong) and yet in one moment GOD hiding his face, all had like to haue beene diſſolued with one blaſt of powder, if the ſame mercifull God had not withhelde the breath of his wrath:Eſa. 30.33. which is a riuer of brimſtone, to kindle this Topheth, a pit prepared of olde, a place deepe and large, the burning thereof is fierce fire, and much wood: doe thou according to thy excellent and rare Princely learning & iudgment (whereof Kingdomes, Vniuerſites,2, King. 10.28 and Forraine Embaſſadours, are witneſſes) with zeale as Iehu, roote Baal out of Iſrael by one acte: open the

windowe of the Parliament as Ioaſh his windowe, at the counſaile of Elizeus:2. King 13. in the end. Smite the Syrians not twice or thrice, but ſixe times, vntil thou haſt vtterly conſumed thē: bleſſe thou the Lord with all princelie offices of pietie and iuſtice, more and more to the ſauing and comfort of all thy people.Pſal. 144.10. Acknowledge that it is tree that giueth deliuerance to Kings, reſcueth the annointed his ſeruant: praiſe him and magnifie him for euer.
            
                O Thou moſt gratious Queene Anne, who haſt forſaken thine owne Country & natiue ſoyle, and come into forraine parts to partake in all thy youth & beauty, the ſame lot with thy Regal Lord: behold how when the daughter of England did homage vnto thee,Pſal. 45.14. with all the rich before thy face with preſents: and thou wenteſt out in all honour and ſinglenes of heart, to behold and reioyce in the ſolemnity of ſo great an eſtate, which God had ſo miraculouſly caſt into your lap without your hands: when theſe vnmercifull bouchers of Rome hardning their hearts, meant to haue buried thee in one graue with thy royall husband, or rather torne in pieces: (I abhor to ſpeake it) without all buriall (which was afforded to Kings daughters, though neuer ſo euil:) euen then thy life was deare and precious in the eyes of the Lord,2. King 9.34. and his tender care was ouer thee: doe thou therefore bleſſe the Lord, and ſerue him more & more with one heart ioyntly, with this thy princely Lord and husband: praiſe him and magnifie him for euer.
            
               O Thou moſt noble Prince Henry, the ſtaffe of  thy Fathers ſtrength, and the prime hope of theſe imperiall diadems: whoſe innocent life theſe blood-thirſtie Babilonians longed for, equally with thy Princely Fathers: to deſtroy roote, and branch:Deut. 22.6. and fruite, parent, and childe in one day: to kill damme and young in one neſt:Exod. 23.9. to extinguiſh preſent and future: as it were ſeething tender Kidds in mothers milke, againſt Lawe of GOD and nature:Lam. 3.27. Doe thou ſtill beare the yoake of the Lord in all ſteadines and ſtedfaſtnes as moſt comfortably thou doeſt to all our ioy: in theſe firſt fruites of thy dayes: Remember ſtill thy Creator in the dayes of thy youth:Eccles. 12.
                     ••
                  
                and neuer forget this Preſeruer in all the dayes of thine age: bleſſe thou the Lord, in all thy princely family, as holy and zealous young Ioſias, praiſe him and magnifie him for euer.
            O Ye Honourable Counſailers, and Potentates, who turne the wheele of eſtate vnder our Soueraigne: againſt whom ſuch wicked counſell was deuiſed to deſtroy you all before the mighty throne of our King: & to defeate vs of counſell, not reparable in a long time: which yet is the onely comfort in diſtreſſe: (ſo great was the indignation of the Lord towards vs,Pſal. 18.7.
                     •
                  . Pſal. 29.1. at whoſe noſtrills are kindled haileſtones and coales of fire: but that the Angell of the euerlaſting counſell did interpoſe himſelfe) In the booke of publique thanks: The K. 2. ſpeech in Parliament. My L. of Saliſ. at the arraig
                     •
                   and in his anſwer to the Pamphlet. as you the Sonnes of the mighty, haue giuen this glory to God: & do freely confeſſe that all this ſauing health was from him alone: that GOD did all as a friend

that doth a pleaſure, which his friend knoweth not, vntill he feele the comfort of it, that it is done: (for notwithſtanding the noble vertues and vigilancie of Abner, and vndoubted fidelitie of all the Kings ſeruants,1. Sam. 26.16. round about him, on the right hand & on the left, pot & ſpeare had been taken frō the Kings head:Gal. 1.16. Pro. 20.18. Apoc. 4.10. Arke and Scepter from vs in one houre:) doe you more and more conſult with God in this and all other deliberations, and not with fleſh & blood: that his ſtatutes may bee your Counſailours: That he may eſtabliſh all your thoughts by his counſell: long may you liue in all grace and honour, according to your great place and truſt: doe you as the 24. Elders, fall downe, and throwe downe your crownes, of wiſedome, intelligence, pollicie, vigillancie, gouernment, before him that liueth for euer: bleſſe ye the Lord, praiſe him and magnifie him for euer.
            
                O Ye reuerend Biſhops and Prelates, the venerable Gouernours of the Church of Chriſt,Apoc. 1.20. as the Angels and Preſidents of the ſeauen Churches of England among vs: the grauities and preſence of Superiours in the Church, haue beene regarded of the prophane & barbarous tyrants of the earth, and bloody Souldiours: Alexander the great at the ſight of Iaddus the high Prieſt,As Percie, vnderſtanding the B. of Saint Dauids to be ſicke. 1. Pet 2, 25. Iob. 21.16. ſpared Ieruſalem: and yet of theſe Sulphurous helhounds, you were more eagerly ſought after to the fire, & they rued if any of you ſhould be away: doe you honour this Lord the great Biſhop of our ſoules, with further care & loue to all the ſheepe and Lambes committed to your charge: And with all your power doe ye exalt the

ſtandard of his glorious Goſpell, in all places of your Cōmiſſions: haue in your fatherly wiſedomes as much patience as you can to your inferiour brethren of the Miniſtrie (notwithſtāding ſome of their intemperate exulcerations) for the common ſeruice of the Goſpell ſake: their places and times cannot reach to the maturitie of experience, which your wiſedomes hath attained: behold alſo, they are keen againſt an enemie:Phil. 3.15.16. whom though difference haue diuided by names of diſcord, yet the enemie would haue made no difference of ſlaughter of you both: beare as you may with their improuidencie, till God reueale further vnto them: (which moderation time hath bred in many: & is not profiting in wiſedome and iudgement, a part of our growing to the ripe age and ſtature of Ieſus Chriſt;) that wherunto we are come, wee may proceede by one rule, euen to minde one thing which is neceſſarie:Luk. 10.42. Doe you ſtand in the gap in your paſtorall & ſage wiſedomes and zeale, to turne away the Lords wrath, which yet is not ceaſed: bleſſe you the Lord, praiſe him, and magnifie him for euer.
            O Ye Nobles and Peeres of the Realme, the pillers  of our eſtate, and flowers of the Kings Coronet: Behold now the day of the Lord of Hoſtes,Eſa. 2.12.13. Cant. 3.7. was to bee vpon euery thing that was exalted: vpon all the Cedars of Lebanon: vpon all the Oakes of Baſhan: and vpon all the high mountaines: and vpon all the hills that are lifted vp: vpō euery high towne, euery ſtrong wall, euen vpon all the ſtrong men that are about the bed of Salomon, all the valiant of Iſrael,
               
who handle the ſword and are expert in warre, and vpon euery one, that hath his ſword vpon his thigh for any feare:Eſa. 2.12.13. Cantic, 3.7. theſe, euen your ſelues, the cruell inſtruments of Nabuchadnazzer of Rome, would haue conſumed as the three renowned rulers of the Prouinces,Dan. 3.19.21. 
               Sidrach, Miſach, and Abednego, in one fierie Ouen, heated to the ſeauenth degree, in your habites,Liuie dec. 1. l. 1. Senes triumphales cō
                  ſulates, qui curules geſterant magiſtratus, 
                     •
                  t in fortunae priſtinae honorū. que aut virtutis inſignibus morerētur, auguſtiſsima veſte veſtiti in medio aediū in eburneis ſellis ſedere: Galli haud ſecus quā venerabundi intuebātur ſedentes viros praeter ornatū que habitū
                  
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   humano auguſtiorem, maieſtate etiā, quā vultus grauitaſ
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   oris pre ſe ferebat dijs fimillimos: ad eo 
                     ••
                  luti ſimul
                     •
                  chra verſi ſtabant, &c. roabes, coates, and ſhooes, as they were, as the Scripture noteth: and yet the Infidel galles vnder Brennus, reuerenced the faces and veſtures of the Fathers of the Senate in the capitoll of heathen Rome: Beholde the Lords great deliuerance ouer you: his holy Angels among you, ſo that no ſmell of fire vpon your garments, nor a haire of your heads ſinged: doe you therefore and your poſteritie, and all your retinue: Bleſſe the Lord, praiſe him, and magnifie him for euer.
            O You graue Iudges and Fathers of the Law, and Sages of the Land, whoſe doome was ſo neare without all courſe of iudgement, and triall of Law: which you afford to the meaneſt creature, and moſt grieuous offender: doe you put on Iuſtice as a roabe: Let equity be a couering as a Crowne: breake the power of the oppreſſour, and let the innocent goe free: that Iuſtice may not be as Wormewood, nor iudgement as gall: but truth may runne down as a mighty ſtreame euery where: Doe you bleſſe the Lord, the chiefe Iudge of the world, who hath deliuered you from ſo great & ſodaine a iudgment: Bleſſe him, I ſay, in all your Courts, in all your benches,  proceedings, Aſſiſes, and Seſſions: praiſe him and magnifie him for euer.
            
               O You the learned and prudent Maiſters of the  Lawe and Chauncerie: the Secretaries and Clarkes of eſtate, attendants in this honourable place by your offices, who were to bee in the ſame net of deſtruction: now that your ſoule is eſcaped, as a bird the net broken,Pſal. 147.7. the fowlers taken and your ſoule deliuered: Doe you tremble and ſerue this great God, and King, and your Country, with all good care & ſound conſcience, as before the Court of conſcience in heauen in greater degrees:Fulmen petit culmen. The thunder ſtrikes the higher. (for if his wrath had beene kindled a little, what could great and high place & preſence do good:) behold the thunder ſmiteth the talleſt tops? Doe you therefore feare this great GOD, breake out into voyces and vowes of laud and thankſgiuing: bleſſe you the Lord, praiſe him and magnifie him for euer.
            O You worthie Knights and Burgeſſes, who repreſent  the bodies of the ſeuerall Countries & Shires of our Nation:Sir Th. Smith de Rep. Aug. and were to be a ſhort raunſome for a ſmall Interim with your bodies, for the bodies of the Countries, who looked when their turne came to be deuoured alſo: As Vliſſes of Polyphemus: when the reſt were deuoured before h
                     •
                  m. Heb. 12.29. Bee you faithfull betweene them, who commit their welfare vnto you and this God: who though he be a conſuming fire, and your houſe was as a burnt ſacrifice,Leuit. 6.9. ſoking vpon the fire almoſt to the laſt night: yet hee hath not burnt it, nor touched our eſtate, as brittle and combuſtible as the fierie buſh in the Deſart:Exod. 3.2.3. but gloriouſly ſhewed himſelfe in the midſt of you for your ſafetie, as in the viſion to Moſes. Wherefore

put off your ſhooes as hee did: lay aſide all earthly treadings awry in loue of your ſelues, & your owne pelfe:Gal: 2.14. goe not with a ſplay foote to the Goſpell of peace: and if indeede you ſeeke the Lord with all your hearts in the propagation of the Goſpell, by a preaching Miniſterie thorough the Land: as I am perſwaded very many doe: then ſticke not ſome of you to returne the impropriations in your owne power backe againe to the Church, as ſome honourably haue done heretofore:H.E. of Hunt. Sir Fr. K. M. Alderſey, &c. and others offered to doe the like in your very owne houſe of Parliament: and ſome with their money hath purchaſed ſome of thē to the Church: and were they not the auncient patrimonie of Chriſt? Did not Queene Mary in her darke dayes and wayes giue example?See Acts of Parlia. and by act of Parliament make reſtitution of the appropriations annexed to the Crowne? It well becommeth the zealous this day, ſome to ſtand forth, as Zaccheus after ſo long detinue:Luc. 19.9. Seeing this day ſaluation is come vnto their whole and particular houſes, and they become the ſonnes of Abraham,
               Gen. 22.10.11 all of them as Iſaac ſaued from the knife, by an angelicall hand, to deliuer poſſeſſion of the Lords inheritances: ſome to offer liberally, as Araunah the Iebuſite, did like a King, as is recorded to the ſhame of Chriſtians:2 Sam. 24.23. Some as Nehemiah,
               Neh. 5.8.10.11 to depart from their owne for ſome time to redeeme the Churches portion back again, as he & his ſeruants did forbeare the purchaſing of lands for themſelues, to ſupply publique wants: Others not ſticke to aboliſh diminutiue rates, and vnequall diſproportionate compoſitions, whereof peraduenture many haue ſtollen vpon the Church: and to

reduce the tythes to their primitiue vncorrupt kind, or among you to take ſome effectuall way in the varietie of your high and exerciſed wiſedomes, for a liberal maintenance of a preaching Miniſtery (without which the diſcourſes of it, are cloudes and claps of thunder, without the ſweete dewes and drops of early and later raine:) and indeede a rich ſacrifice of thoſe ſorts vpon this returne of you all, from the gulfe of ſuch a death, would be an vndeniable conſtat of your zeale and pietie to all poſterities, and an acceptable performance of a holy vow to him, who hath ſpared you all, & taken nothing frō you. And ſo in the name of God go on with all your courage, zeale, obedience, and fidelitie to GOD and man: bleſſe you the Lord, praiſe him, and magnifie him▪ for euer.
            O Ye eloquent and skilfull Sergeants, and Counſailours  at the Lawe, the Profeſſours and exercents in this facultie: pleaders and agents, and all the men of Lawe▪ whoſoeuer in theſe adiacent Courts, together with all the Scribes. Notaries and Protonotaries Atturnies, and all other appendants and dependants, in ſo great a Muſter in your rankes and Companies, that plaine and quiet men meruaile how there can be imployments for ſo great an Armie: who all are intended to keepe peace among Subiects; among whom yet many,Oſe. 4.8. Ier. 5.27.2
                     •
                  . it muſt needs be liue of the ſinnes of the people: as a cage is full of birds, ſo are their chambers full of deceit. Thereby they are become great, and waxen rich: they are waxen fat and ſhining, and though they doe not

iuſtly, yet they proſper: whoſe heate of contention to multiply ſtrifes and Clyents: pluralities and totquots of Caſes and Cauſes: that it ſeemeth to reſemble the troubleſome knots of the olde Popiſh ſchool-men, to make things more pletted, perplexed, and intricate: and yet thereby they heape vp money and fees, which deliuereth not in the day of wrath, but inkindleth it rather: now that you are all deliuered from deſtruction, which was ſo neare vnto you alſo in the very tents and pitched fields of your variance,
                  
                     •
                  ob. 29.16. and in that place, that is witneſſe of all your integritie: whether you ſought out the cauſe diligently as holy Iob did,Pro. to buy the truth, and ſell it not; or otherwiſe of your vntruſtineſſe: wreſt not the Law: accuſtome not to ſpeake againſt your conſcience:Rom. 7.12.14 take heed it be not ſaid of ſome of you: as in another ſenſe: the Lawe is holy, and iuſt, and good, but I am ſolde vnder ſinne: euen euery one that ſo often pleade at ſo many barres: remember this great barre and tribunall ſeate to which you were to come, not ſo prepared, as elſe you would: extoll this mightie GOD of your deliuerance: let godlines bee your chiefeſt gaine, and the right and peace your greateſt ioy:1. Tim. 6.6. bleſſe you the Lord in all your takings and ſpeakings: endightings and counſailings: complainings and defendings: praiſe him, and magnifie him for euer.
            
                O You Gentrie and Yeomanrie, the frie of this Nation, and ſeede of ſucceeding ages: ye Students at the Lawe, and other nouices and punies vnder your graund Benchers, and moſt graue Seniours:

that aſſemble to heare, and obſerue the experience and maturitie of the auncient, and to furniſh your ſelues for future time: who had like to haue beene oppreſſed in your minorities, and in the very great hall and common ſchoole of your practiſe, and at the feet of them that teach you: but that the Lord proteſted for ſinfull England as for great Niniuie: to ſaue ſixe ſcore thouſand aliue, that knew not the right hand from the left;
                  
                     •
                  onas, 4, 11. Eſa, 65, 8. to preſerue you as a cluſter of Grapes, hopefull of wine: of which one ſaith, deſtroy it not: there is a bleſsing in it: Doe you therfore laud this Lord, who is your God from your youth, and let him be your God vnto your age: bleſſe you the Lord, praiſe him, and magnifie him for euer.
            O Ye Sutors and Clients, and Sollicitors of the  Law, who are enraged in ſtomack and diſquietnes: in reuenge and couetouſnes,Gal. 5, 15. to eate vp one another: and trauaile farre, and oft to conſume your times and families:Pſal. 120.4. and blow the coales of Iuniper vpon one another, facing and defacing your ſelues mutually to maintaine theſe fires: behold the day of the Lord vpon you: like Plaintife, like Defendant: like giuer, like taker: like Clients like pleader:Eſa. 24.
                     •
                  . one Beaſom of deſtruction to ſweepe away all that hunt their brethren with a net, and lay ſnares to catch men: but that God is more patient to vs all,Ier. 5.16. then we are to one another: who did ſuddainly blow the retreate from this great ſlaughter: elſe a man of you had not beene left aliue: therefore feare this Lord, the God of peace, and loue, and comfort:Phil. 4.5. 
               let your placabilitie bee knowne vnto all men: the Lord is at

hand: bleſſe thou the Lord, praiſe him, and magnifie him for euer.
            
                O Ye ſeruants and followers of the Nobles and Gentrie, and others in this great aſſemblie of Parliament, and full Terme: Conſider your ſeruice to almightie God, what it hath beene heeretofore: and your faithfulnes to men;Eph. 6.5.6. 1. Cor. 7.23. let it not be in eye ſeruice, but in ſinglenes of heart: you are bought with a price, hereafter be ſeruants not onely of men, but of this God; who hath deliuered you from this common lot of miſerie: bleſſe I ſay, and curſe not: deliuer your ſelues from the common condemnation: faſhion not your ſelues according to the world, in the prophanenes of too many Seruitors,Rom. 12.2. miſpending time and life: forgetting God and religion: remember the iudgement of olde: not a ſeruant of Noah or Lot, ſaued in the watriſh and fierie deſtruction of their times,Gen. 7.23. & 19.20. and yet you preſerued at this time: therfore bleſſe you the Lord your preſeruer, praiſe him, and magnifie him for euer.
            
                O You inhabitants and ſoiourners in the auncient Citie of Weſtminſter, with all the confines and skirts of the liberties thereof, or in any reach, whether this whirlewinde of Gods wrath ſhould haue reached by land or by water: Behold you alſo were the children of death:Iob. 1.19, and your houſes appointed to deſolation, as the houſes of Iobs children: by a ſtrong winde, on a ſuddaine: euen peraduenture whilſt you were eating and drinking, & taking money:Exod. 33.8. therefore riſe vp in your degrees, and worſhip

as the Iſraelites, euery man at his tent doore: bleſſe you alſo the Lord, praiſe him, and magnifie him for euer.
            O All you open and ſecret Papiſts and Catholicks  (for ſo you will be called) that were to bee aſſembled in and neare the Parliament, whoſe heads and bodies if they had beene gathered together vpon this maſſacre, and laid on heapes, as all the ſeuentie ſonnes of Achab at the Court gates of King Iehu:2. King. 10 7▪9 2. Sam. 3, 28. it was cleare who had done it: Dauid and his Kingdome had beene guiltleſſe before the Lord for euer: your brethren and fellowes had done it: acknowledge them the ſchollers of Pope Hildebrand, who when Henry the third the Emperour, vſed to pray in S. Maries Church in mount Auentine, hired one to lay great ſtones on the beames to let them fall on the Emperours head, which he haſting to accompliſh, a huge ſtone drew him downe, and cruſht himſelfe to pieces. They alſo would haue cauſed you to haue paſſed through the fire, as a ſacrifice to Moloch:2. King. 23.10. 
                     •
                  enno card. in vit. and haue vſed you as Moabites. They would haue made you their martyrs, before your time: you ſhould haue beene lickt vp in the common flame: Come you therefore out of Babylon; Loe how ſhee rewardeth her children, like the harlot mother,2. Cor. 6.17. 1. King. 3 19. who in Salomons dayes ouer-laid her owne child to death, and yet would haue the liue children of the true and naturall mother in her keeping. Touch no vncleane thing: doe you trie the ſpirits heereby,1. Ioh. 4.1. and iudge them to be rauening Woolfes:Math. 7.15. know them by theſe ripe fruites of red and ſcarlet ſinnes, of horrible, and

vnnaturall, and vniuerſall murther: and ioyne with vs now at laſt in the ſincere profeſſion of Gods word alone, which God hath defended in your eyes, and experience, ſo oft of olde, and now freſhly: do you nowe come out of the fire with feare, and make a perfect vowe as Naaman,
               Iud. ver. 27. to offer to no other God, and to bleſſe the Lord God of the Proteſtants; euen the God of Paule,
               2. King. 5.17. Act 27, 37. for whoſe ſake God ſpared two hundred ſeuentie and ſixe in the ſame ſhip, to praiſe him, and magnifie him for euer.
            
                O You ſtately buildings and Edifices of Antiquitie, whoſe ſeates were ſet for iudgement: whether all the heads of the tribes aſcend, and other nobles and elders of this Realme for common cauſes of olde: together with the princely Oratories and Chappels, and Churches of deuotion, and for the inauguration and inueſtiture of the Kings and Queenes of this Realme: who haue long ſtoode in peace on your baſes: and beene vnmooueable in ſo many alterations of Princes, Nations & times: and yet now one ſtone was not to be left vpon another, if they might haue had their will:Math: 24, 2. P
                     •
                  al. 137, 7. Leuit. 14.45. Crying downe with it, downe with it, euen to the ground: abhorring not the men onely, but the place alſo as a leaporous houſe, and vowing to make it waſte as a wildernes: doe you conſider, and bee not inanimate and altogether mute,Rom: 8.19, 20. but as the creature that lifteth vp his head for the day of redemption, ſpirited with a feeling of your preſeruer: that they which viſite your monuments, & come to ſee your ornaments; may go about you,Pſal. 48.12. as of olde about Syon, and tel her

Towers, marke well her bulwarks, and conſider her walls: and ſee not a ſtone mooued,Pſal. 102.14. Pſal. 7. or a piece of timber ſhaken: GOD hath taken pleaſure in the ſtones of your foundations, and hath had pittie on the duſt thereof: as for your enemies hee hath trod downe their life in the earth, and laid their honour in the duſt. Doe you ſtand and continue to tell poſteritie, as a ſtedfaſt and ſpeaking pillar to admoniſh the members of that body, all that come vnder your roofe hereafter, there to intend him onely that deliuered them:Eſa. 10 1, 2, 3. and not to tempt this iealous God by any ſiniſter decree: whoſe wrath had like to haue vomited vs vp, a luke warme nation,Apoc. 3, 15, 16. Math: 3, 12. Zeph. 2.2. neither hot nor colde out of his mouth: and who had his fanne in his hand, to haue burnt vs vp a people not worthie to be beloued, as chaffe in one day: ſo that all may with teares & feares, accuſing & iudging our ſelues, get vs to our God right humbly: and learne heere aboue all places, eſpecially of eſtate, with voices, ſuffrages, and decrees of holines & iuſtice, to bleſſe this Lord, praiſe him, and magnifie him for euer.
            O Ye auncient monuments and Tombes of the  dead, the Sepulchers of the famous founders of this common wealth, the noble Kings, Queenes and Worthies of this Realme: whom many haue viſited with ioy and honour: whoſe bones, and bodies, and ſacred memories haue reſted in peace a long time, notwithſtanding the vprores of Kingdoms, mutinies of people, turmoiles of ciuill warres, and mightie earthquakes: and yet ſhould now haue beene digged out of your honourable graues, and

haue had your parts rend vp with this blaſt, as malefactors in a newe execution: and diſlodged out of your honourable houſes of reſt: your corpes diſturbed, and your aſhes ſcattered by this Plutoes and helliſh confuſion of Babell, and terrible earthquake ploughing vp all before them, and making furrowes in the hard rockes: doe you therefore lift vp your heads,Math 27.52.53 and riſe vp as the bodies of the righteous out of the duſt, at the death of Chriſt: and bleſſe this Lord, who letteth you reſt the reſt of your time, euen a little time,Apoc. 6.11: expecting a ioyfull and ſpeedie reſurrection with all the Saints of God, and all your people ſucceeding you together, to praiſe him, and magnifie him for euer.
            
                O Yee Rolles, and Charters, and auncient Regiſters and Records of Courts of eſtate, containing the decrees of the wiſedome of the auncient, and the rules of iuſtice and equitie betweene man and man: which all ſhould haue bene ſhriuelled together in the fire of the Lords iealouſie: like as at the diſſolution of the whole world, when the elements melt with heate,2. Pet. 3.10. and heauen it ſelfe vaniſheth as a ſcrowle: and the workes of the earth are to be burnt with fire: doe you flouriſh and reuiue out of your places, not to bee intanglements and incumbrances, or tedious tarriers, with dilatorie pleas, reſpiting the cauſe, or reſpecting the face of any: that all men that haue to doe with you, may more bleſſe God that loueth peace and equitie, and is a God of order,1. Cor. 14.33. and not of confuſion, that there remaines euidence of truth, and that the land markes are not

remooued, as the Diuell would haue had it:Deut 27.17. and therefore bee the more inflamed, in all honeſt and true dealing to praiſe God, and magnifie him for euer.
            O You Chariots of the mightie, and Coaches, and Caroches of the great men of our ſtate,Iud. 5.10. together with the white Steeds and Palfreyes,2 King. 9.2
                     •
                  . Pſal. 33.17. that runne as the horſes of Iehu: who had periſhed in the ſame deluge of fierie deſtruction: or been ſtoned or preſſed to death with your maiſters and owners. A horſe had beene a vaine thing to ſaue a man: the glory of outlandiſh Courſers: the neighings of horſes, and the pride of the ratling of the wheele had vaniſhed: doe you who as creatures, are ſubiect to vanitie,Rom. 8.19.20. vntill the reuelation of the ſonnes of God be; and your deliuerance from the bondage of corruption: acknowledge in your degrees, that the iudgement of the Lord is like a great deepe: hee ſaueth man and beaſt: Let man and beaſt therefore,Pſal. 36.6. bleſſe this Lord, praiſe him, and magnifie him for euer.
            O Thou glorious and triple Court of great Brittaine,
                and all you braue gallants of each of the princely houſholds: you high and tender Ladies & honourable virgins: ſee how God pittied your ſex and ſoftnes of education: and all ye ſeruants of ſo great a Monarch, Queene, and Prince, with all their traine and retinue: Conſider the danger to be paſt before you heard of it: where had beene all your beautie, honour, grace, approachment, iolitie, and

brauerie, if this plot had taken effect: doe you all learne to loue the Courts of the Lords houſe, counting one day better ſpent there,Pſal. 84.10. then any in the tabernacles and chambers of vngodlines: wiſh there rather to peepe in at the doore, then otherwiſe to haue free ingreſſe into the priuie chambers of Princes: Alas, what could the bed chambers, the withdrawing chambers, and priuie chambers of Princes haue auailed you:1. King. 22.25 Ier. 9.21.22. when you ſhould haue runne from chamber to chamber, to hide you your ſelues: and yet no chamber could haue hid you, when the foundations of the earth had beene diſcouered: when as no barre could haue ſhut out deſtruction: death would haue ſcaled euery wall, and climde in at euery windowe:Iſa. 28.17.18.19.20. Iudgement had beene laide to the rule, and righteouſnes to the ballance: this thick haile, pel mel would haue ſwept away euery vaine confidence, and this breaking in of a fierie ſea, had ouerflowed the ſecret places: euery couenant with death ſhould haue beene diſanulled: the agreement with hell could not ſtand: this ſcourge ſhould haue runne ouer, and haue paſſed thorough: all ſhould haue beene trod downe by it: when it paſſed ouer, it ſhould haue taken you away: and it ſhould haue paſſed euery morning, and in the day, and in the night: and there ſhould haue beene onely feare, as Eſay ſpeaketh: euery bed ſhould haue beene too ſtraite, that it could not ſuffice, and euery couering too narrowe, that none could wrap himſelfe, but that this mantell of woe had infolded euerie one: doe you therefore feare and tremble, and worſhip with holy worſhip, this GOD, that hath

made faſt the barres of theſe gates: and bleſſed all within them from this curſe ſo neare vnto you:Pſal. 147.13.14. let there be a new heauen and a new earth among you:Eſa 65.17. & 66.22. Apoc. 21 1.2. make a ſolemne vowe to haue cleane hands heereafter, and to baniſh ſo deare corruption from the regall palace, eſpecially in Church matters: be free ſpirited: embrace ingenuitie and plainenes: abandon ſhifts, gloſes, and flatterie:1. Theſ. 4.6. Pſal. 15.2. (for the Lord is the auenger of theſe thinges:) Speake the truth euery man from his heart: pittie the attendance of ſuitors with ſpeedie diſpatch: that remedies bee not worſe then diſeaſes: (for a lingring ſicknes is worſe then a timely death:) finally, promote Gods glory, not your owne ambition, with all your meanes and acceſſe: make not ſad the heart of the righteous;Ezech. 13.22. Pſal. 16.3. but giue grace and honour to the Saints, and them that excell in vertue: ſo bleſſe you this Lord, as you look for his bleſſing, and feare his curſe: praiſe him, and magnifie him for euer.
            O Thou famous Citie of London, of olde called  
               Auguſta, and Empereſſe of the land,Holinſhed. pa. 104. & 247. e
                     •
                  
                  ▪ Polid. & pa. 731 and chamber of the Kings and Queenes of England, the head and mother of the Cities of the land: the nurſerie of religion and fidelity: the ſtore-houſe of the good Subiects: and the neſt of the wealth of the realme: and therefore the more maligned of the Enemie, whoſe elders are as Barrons and Chapmen,Eſa. 23.8. the nobles of the earth, whoſe peace they ſo much enuied, whoſe ſtrength and loyaltie they feared: whoſe wealth the fingers of many inſatiable cormorants, itched to be medling with: intending no doubt all

mercileſſe rapine, diſhonour, and villanies, not to be named, towards thee. How ſhould thy hidden and ſecret houres haue beene ſought out,Ob
                     •
                  d. 
                     •
                  .6. and thy treaſures ſearched at full▪ Remember what Goteham a Prieſt, and predeceſſour of theſe imagined againſt thee:Simonides in Tullie. 2. de orat. cum obtritos humare vellent ne
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   poſſent inter noſcere: ex eo quod meminiſſet quo 
                     •
                  o
                     •
                  ū loco quiſque cubuiſſet, demōſtrator vniuſcuiuſque ſepeliendi fuit. Simonides when as ſome would haue buried thē that were ouerlaide in the duſt vpō the fall of a houſe, & could not diſcerne them: thereby that he had remembred in what place euery man ſat: he was able to giue direction for the buriall of euery one in his degree. did he not towards his death wiſh fire & brimſtone vpon thee from heauen, which theſe were ſetting from hell? thou ſhouldeſt haue beene (if not ſacked) yet ſo cumbred with feares & freſh incounters at home, and newes of ſlaughters abroad, warres and rumours of warres, that thou couldeſt ſcarce ſeeke out the bodies of the dead to gather the Princes and Nobles out of the duſt and rubbiſh: doe thou betime repent of thy prodigality, deliciouſnes, and wantonnes, thy couetouſnes, and hypocriſie, and euery other ſinne: pray for ſound iudgement, to diſcerne true and wholeſome doctrine: and beware of humours: learne to honour with a perfect heart, with all thy peace, plenty, and ſtrength, this Lord that keepeth thee (the onely watch-man of the Citie: whoſe eye neuer winketh nor is wearie, for he that keepeth Iſrael, neither ſlumbreth nor ſleepeth) bleſſe thou the Lord: praiſe him, and magnifie him for euer.
            O Thou famous Cittadle, the royall Caſtle of the Tower of London, the firſt footing of Coronation of the Kings and Queenes of this land, and the poſſeſſion taking, and earneſt of the reſt of the Dominions  belonging to this Kingdome: a faithfull and ſufficient, and ſpeedie ſeruant at hand, to thy ſoueraigne and Country, a friend to their friends:

and an enemie to their enemies: a vowed companion, and comfortable neighbour to the honourable Citie of London, the ſinewes and ioynts of our warlike prouiſion, and commaunder of peace: the feare of the rebellious: the ayme of the enemies eye: the expectation and care of all true ſubiects: how ſhouldeſt thou haue beene vſed ſore againſt thy will againſt thy deareſt friends? the miſchieuous deſignes againſt thee, the moſt wiſe, prudent,Sir. W. Wade. and religious Gouernour within thee: The induſtrious and vigilant officers and attendants there: (whoſe ſurpriſing they deuoured in their firſt hopes) he knoweth beſt who is thy Fort and Tower:Pro. 18.10. Pſal. 61.3. Pſal. 31.2.3. Pſal. 63.19. whoſe name is a ſtrong Tower, and deliuered vs before our dead hearts could runne vnto him: who brought the pray vnto thy lap, and tooke captiuitie captiue, and gaue them into thy cuſtodie: Be thou like the Tower of Dauid, as it were the 
                     •
                  eck o eſtate, built for defence with all thy thouſand ſhields, and all the targets of the ſtrong mē that hang therin: the Tower of Lebanon that looketh to Damaſoo▪
                doe thou and all thy Miniſters inſtruments ſtore & furniture with triumphs and trophes, with voties and peales of ioy & thankſgiuing, bleſſe this great Lord thy keeper, praiſe him, and magnifie him for euer.
            O Yee Townes and Countries, who taſted of the headleſſe skirmiſhes, & ſuddainnes of the brutiſh furie of theſe enemies of Sion, and the haters of the peace of Ieruſalem, the very ſame fatall time by their deſperate inſurrection among you, aboue all other ſhires and places: doe you (I ſay) as ſonnes  likewiſe of the reſurrection,Warwick ſh. Worceſter ſh. Stafford ſhire. Ezech 16.6. vnto whom the Lord ſaid, in your blood line: you ſawe the enemie, but felt no harme: their letter propheſied ſafetie in the Country, but againſt their wils: doe you therefore

bleſſe this great God, that bleſſeth you the more for Balaams curſing;Ioſ. 
                     •
                  4.10. Graunt, Percie, Gates by, and the 
                     •
                  . Wrights, Treſſam, Gar
                     ••
                  ts man. Oue
                     •
                  . who ſcattered their forces, diminiſhed their power: and ſo quickly quelled them in cauſing their owne power to brand them in the faces, and all their purpoſes to be defeated without anie great purſuite, and ſome of them to periſh in the very acte of their owne ſinne; ſome to languiſh with griefe, others to kill themſelues: and all their miſchiefe to returne vpon their owne heads: bleſſe you againe and againe this Lord: praiſe him, and magnifie him for euer.
            
                O Yee Miniſters and ſpeciall ſeruants of the Lord: the Prophets of Iſrael, and feeders of the ſheepe of the Lords paſture;Apoc. 9.3. whom theſe ſmoakie locuſts of the bottomleſſe pit, theſe rauenous Wolfes greedie of the prey, moſt abhorred: to place their owne Baals Prieſts, and all the ſacrificers of the Groues and hill-altars in your roomes, and ſo to deuoure the Lords inheritance: your ſafety & miniſtration they enuied; your families they vowed to ſhame and miſerie:Apoc. 15.3. your perſons to certaine and more cruell deſtruction aboue others, by a ſpecial marſhal at armes, appointed vtterly to extirpate you: Let your Harpe be in your hand, and Pſalmes of Moſes and Dauid, and the lambe in your mouthes: reioice ouer her all you Prophets & Apoſtles:Apoc. 18.20. Deut. 33.8. for God hath done your iudgment on her: Let Vrim & Thummim be for euer with you:Exod. 32.27. gird the ſword of the ſpirit about you, to deſtroy all ſpirituall and corporall Idolatrie: thinke it not now a time to ſtriue for complements, and to inforce odious exaſperations, & antichriſtian compariſons

againſt the reuerend Fathers, when as you lee your ſoules and their ſoules, & the ſoule of religion it ſelfe is ſought after: making leſſe of your liues, then of the leaſt of their ceremonies,Rom. 8, 30. hauing as little conſcience to kill you all, as to ſlay a ſheepe: behold the ſcope of Diuinitie is a large field, Chriſt crucified is a ſpacious argument; vrge that, and walke in that, and forbeare other impertinents: See you not that the reſolution of our ſtate hateth Antichriſt, with a perfect hatred, this 48. yeares, and is therfore hated vnreconcilably, as beeing in it ſelfe the moſt Euangelical monarchie in the world, and a ſanctuarie of refuge for all the profeſſours in the earth vnder her ſhadowe: let this whet your courages, and ſet an edge on your zeale; and teach you ſpirituall diſcretion, to goe with one ſhoulder to ruinate Babel, and not be diuided in your ſelues in your ſeuerall ſtations: Curſed be he that doth the worke of the Lord negligently:
               
                  
                     •
                  er. 49 10. Let your voices and ſpirits declare in all the congregations, that the Lord himſelfe is a Champion for the houſe of Aaron:Pſal. 115.10. a defender of the tribe of Leui: and that he holdeth all the ſtarres of all our Churches in his owne righthand: and that his mercie to that function endureth for euer: Celebrate you the Lord of the harueſt, ſo benigne and gratious vnto you: and remember him that ſaid,Luk. 
               Occupie till I come
               ▪ and ſo much the more, becauſe the enemie is ſo buſie: Let the houſe of Aaron then, and all the tribe of Leni, bleſſe this Lord, their ſpeciall Lord and Maiſter, and patrone: praiſe him, and magnifie him for euer.
            
               
                O All ye louers of the Goſpell, and faithfull profeſſours of Chriſts holy religion in this Kingdome: who next after magiſtracie and miniſterie, were moſt hated, noted, and obſerued, and appointed to cruel butcherie & maſſacre: your families to be ſingled out to pillage & diſhonour, of whichſome of thē peraduenture they had ſurueyed, taking notice of their number & ſtrength, and to haue been ſacrificed not as Iſaac alſo, but as Abraham alſo, euen the father and children,Apoc. 13. and the very ſeruants at the foot of the hill: how would not Rome haue bragged ouer you as a Lady and Conquereſſe: who ſhall not feare the beaſt, and worſhip his image, or take his marke in his forehead or right hand: But the Lord cauſed the knife to ſtay, that was ſo neare the throat, and made the Ramme that puſhed at you, to be taken in the thicket of his owne deuiſes:Math. 10.16. and to be a ranſome for the innocent Lambs of his flock: be wiſe hereafter, as ſerpents, thinke not they haue done. Beware the dogge that barketh not: who ſaid, they ſhall not know,N
                     •
                  h▪ 4.11▪
                nor ſee vntil we come into the midſt of them, and ſlay them: doe you bleſſe and honour this God of your life and beliefe: adorne his glorious Goſpel in your ſelues and families ſo much the more: praiſe him, and magnifie him for euer.
            
                O Ye wealthie & fat ones of the world, who haue gathered ſiluer as duſt, and gold as ſtones: that haue grace and place,2. King: 10.27 fauours and honours aboue others, Mannors, and demeanes, and children, and call the lands and houſes by your names: that haue

ſhips and ſhops, and ſtore-houſes, and ware-houſes,Pſal. 17.14.
                     •
                  .49, 11. Luk. 12, 20. and wealth laide vp for many yeares: Loe in one moment your ſoule gone, & whoſe ſhould all theſe haue beene? how quickly ſhould all haue been turned, returned, and ouerturned,Ezech. 25.27. in an houre therefore let thi teach you not to truſt in vncertaine riches, but in the liuing God: to treaſure vp religion,1. Tim: 6, 17. Math. 6, 17. not pelfe: to confeſſe all to bee tranſitorie: learne hence the contempt of the world:Luk. 21.34 and to be prouided, that the day of the Lord come not as a ſnare vpon you:Luk. 16.9. make friends of vnrighteous Ma
                     ••••
                  
                in this life, that you may be receiued into better tabernacles: yeeld it to be true, the world paſſeth,1, Pet. 1.23.24.25. and the iolity thereof, and all fleſh is graſſe, and all the glory thereof is as the flower of the field: onely the word of God, and them that are begotten by it,1. Ioh. 2, 17. abide for euer: doe you therefore hee reafter in all your graces and places, countenance, & maintenance, wealth and ſtore, for this ſo great patience towards you: bleſſe this Lord, praiſe him, and magnifie him for euer.
            O Yee that take pleaſure in pleaſure, (though to Gods diſpleaſure) and in your owne voluptuouſnes, in drinking away the health of body and ſoule, in gaine, ſtealth, and robberie, in ambition, iniuſtice, oppreſſion, or any other wickednes, and all the impenitent: learne a parable of the figge tree: you that write or ſpeake parables, let them take one from our Parliament and ſtate: therefore if it bee ſo much pleaſure and honour to take pleaſure to bee ioyned in affection with the creature, know is farre

greater honour and pleaſure for the creature to bee ioyned with the Creator, who is bleſſe for euer. Learne in all your pleaſures and contentments, to remember this Lord, who ſpeaketh ſuddainly of a parliament,Ier. 18.7. a kingdome, a nation, a citie, a towne, a family, a man, a woman to pluck vp, to roote out, to deſtroy, as ſuddainly as the Potter daſheth in pieces,Prou. 1, 25. Rom. 2.4.5. a veſſell of clay: deſpiſe not counſell: refuſe not inſtruction: neglect not the riches of Gods bountifulnes, and long ſuffering, which loueth not to take you tardie, and at aduantage, to vndoe you in the Act of your ſinnes,2, Pet. 3.9. but leadeth you to repentance: harden not therefore your hearts, nor heape not vp wrath againſt the day of wrath, and the declaration of the iuſt iudgement of God, who wil reward euery one according to his works, put not off from day to day: for you know not how, nor when, nor by what meanes he commeth: and when he commeth, hee commeth as a whirle-winde, and laugheth at the deſtruction of the vngodly:Pro. 1, 26, 27. Be ſober therefore and watch: bleſſe you the Lord, praiſe him, and magnifie him for euer.
            
                O Yee deſperate & refractarie malecontents, and irreligious Atheiſts, that looked for a troublous time to fiſh in, as in middle waters: for a miſt and ſmoakie time to goe vneſpied, as falſe thieues: being readie and yawning to make haſt to the pray: Loe the pray is pluckt out of your teeth:Pſal. 58.1. know that there is a God that iudgeth the earth: and hath meanes to deliuer his from temptation in the very flames, as he did Lot in Sodome:2. Pet. 2.9. that the wicked ſhall not haue

their wills on them, nor one of their bones be broken: and that the ſtones are at league with them;Pſal. 34.20. Iob. 5, 2, 3. Pſal. 11.6.7. but vpon the vngodly he raigneth ſnares, fire, and brimſtone, ſtormes, and tempeſts, as thick as haile, this ſhal be their portion: euen hence learne to bende your ſelues to ſome lawfull calling, and be content with your eſtate, and thereby to bleſſe the Lord:Luk. 3, 14. praiſe him, and magnifie him for euer.
            O You hard hearted Papiſts, and indurate hypocrites,
               1, Tim. 4.2. whoſe conſciences are ſeated with hote irons, to make the commandement of God of none effect, whereas hee ſtrictly forbad murther: to eſtabliſh your owne traditions, which you call the catholike religion, you ſpare no blood: where are your brags of 
                  •
               8? of the late Queenes death of happy memorie, and of this infernall tragedie? where are your hallowed altars to be erected in Paules?
               Their words & confeſsions. the threatnings againſt our bibles? promiſing of mariages to your friends, and ſharing offices and honours as you would? Where are your ſeuen Pſalmes to pray for proſperity, when that crack ſhould haue beene? your letters exhortatory, praying vntil that fatal Tueſday: then totnam to be turnde French?Apoc. 16, 5.14, 18. your publike prayers beyond ſeas in generall, for ſucceſſe to the catholike parliament, petition of blood? Shall not the angell of the fire proteſt againſt you? Lord thou art iuſt, which art, which waſt, and is holy, becauſe thou haſt iudged theſe thinges: for they ſhed the blood of the Saints, and Prophets (and had ſtill an vnſatiable dropſie vpō them, thirſting after more) and therefore haſt thou giuen them blood to drink:

for they are worthy: and another Angel anſwere by alternation: euen ſo Lord God almighty, true & righteous are thy iudgments: Be ſtill once at length, take Gamaliels wholeſom counſell: be no more fighters againſt God:Act. 5, 38. conſider whether this counſell be of God:Act. 9, 5. take Chriſts own counſell: Kick not againſt the pricke: Remember S. Peters words: Let none ſuffer as a murtherer, teſtifie and beare witnes againſt vs: you miſlike our parliament and proceeding, and what a manner of one ſhould yours haue beene: ſhould not your parliament haue beene as a mighty ſtrong winde rending mountaines, & tearing rockes, or as a fearefull earthquake or flaming fire: and yet the Lord not with you: though you bragged as Rabſakeh: are we come vp without the Lord, who hath conducted vs,1, King, 19, 11. and concurred with vs to this verie place to deſtroy it?2, King. 58, 25. 1, Pet. 4, 15. yea the Lord ſaide vnto vs: Goe vp againſt this parliament, and deſtroy the land: whereas our parliaments haue beene in a ſtill voyce vnto you onely to haue you ſtill: without any diſpoſition to diſquiet you▪ without that very neceſſity of our liues (God pardon vs for it) by ſome new ouert action, and reſtleſſe practiſe of yours, driue vs to make law afterlaw, which yet were ſlackly executed by vs: See O you ſeduced ſoules: is this their almes, prayers, hoſpitality, faſting, good works: who perſecuteth now? who is the Lambe, and who the Wolfe? the olde prouerbe ſhall ceaſe: Punica fides: and Papiſtica fides ſhall come in place: Carthage of olde was: now Rome is broke forth: Is this your petition, catholike? Is not this tolere, non tolerare: not toleration of religion, but killing of the men: See

Gods hand againſt you, be ſtill at length, and know that the blood thirſtie ſhall not liue out halfe their dayes:Pſal. open your eyes to ſee the myſteries of Antichriſt fulfilled, and ſore plagues in theſe dayes poured vpon them that worſhip the beaſt;Apoc. 16.2. lay it to your hearts: how as Pharaoh he oppreſſeth you with ſore worke to vndoe you and yours, how many families of Dukes, Earles, Lords, Knights, and Gentlemen, he hath made deſolate, making ſome of them pioners, and labouring men in ſtorie and clay: forſake him by ſo many warnings, ſo many of you as belong to the Lord▪ as for the reſt, he that is ignorant, let him be ignorant ſtill: hee that is obſtinate,Apoc. 22.11. 1, Cor. 14, 3
                     •
                  . let him be obſtinate ſtill: fulfill the meaſure of your condemnation: let your profeſſion be a ſnare, a net,Rom. 2
                     •
                  , 8▪
                and a ſtumbling blocke, for a recompence vnto you: let their eyes be darkned, and bowe downe their backes alwaies▪ If our Goſpell be hid,2, Cor. 4.3. it is hid vnto them that are loſt, in whom the God of this world hath blinded their eyes, leaſt the light of the glorious Goſpel, which is the Image of God, ſhould ſhine vnto them: and yet know,Exod. 14, 17. Pſal. 110.2. that God who got honour of Pharao and all his hoaſt, who hath foyled you ſo oft, will raigne in the midſt of his enemies:Eſa. 1, 24. he will eaſe himſelfe of his aduerſaries, and be auenged of them that hate him the will be exalted in iuſtice ouer you, and ſanctified in iudgement, euen Abimelech ſhall confeſſe that God is with Iſaac,
               Gen. 26.27. Pſal, 58.11. whom he before driue a way: yea the nations ſhal ſay: there is a fruit for the righteous, and a God that iudgeth the world:Eſa, 6, 3: the whole earth ſhall be filled with his glory, he will be bleſſed, and praiſed, and magnified foreuer.
            
               
                O Ye helpleſſe and ſuccourleſſe people, women and children, olde men & Infants, young men and maides: Artificers and Tradeſmen, Farmers, Husbandmen, and feeders of cattell, all that till the ground: and all you that loue peace and honeſt fruition of your owne: gather your ſelues, blowe a Trumpet in Sion:Ioel. 2, 15, 16. gather the elders, aſſemble the children and ſucklings: let the Bridegroome come forth of his chamber, and the Bride out of her cloſet: and ſee the worke of the Lord, how he hath deliuered you from ranſacking, rifeling, and miſerable impoueriſhment, and deſtruction. Behold, was not the Angell come out of the temple of heauen alreadie with a ſharpe ſickle:Apoc. 14, 17. and had not the other Angell, that had power ouer the fire, called vnto him with a loud crie, though wee as deafe Adders heard it not: thruſt in the ſharpe ſickle, and gather the cluſters of the Vineyards, of great Brittaine (for her grapes are ripe, that they may be caſt into the great winepreſſe of the wrath of God, to be troden in euerie Towne, Hamlet, and Citie:) but that the Lord repented him, and yet we doe not repent vs: Seeke you the Lord therefore, in all your labours, trades, grounds, fields, cattell, callings, and degrees: preſerue Gods feare: promote his glory: confeſſe him to be a Father to the fatherleſſe, husband to the widdowe, and a deliuerer of the ſimple and harmeleſſe of the earth:Iob. 1.5. and ſet your ſelues hence-forth (as Iob, in his family, ſo you in yours) to offer ſacrifices of prayers and pſalmes to the Lord, according to the number of you all, leaſt there be ſinne found in your

trades & dealings: ſome ſinnes of lying, couſoning, ſwearing, falſe meaſures, or weights: or ſome corruption of vice in you, or your children, & ſeruants: as fatherly Iob ſuſpected and feared his owne houſe: pray the Lord of the harueſt to ſend forth labourers into his harueſt: pray and pay duly,Math. 9, 3
                     •
                  . that God may haue his right, and bleſſe you the Lord euery way, praiſe him, and magnifie him for euer.
            O Thou entire and whole Court of Parliament, the higheſt hill of our land:
                  
                     Lectiſ
                           •
                        ernium inſtitiae: caput publici conſilij.
                  
                  The ſpred bed of Iuſtice: and head of publick counſell. Pſal. 101.1.
                the open theater of all our actions: the Senate houſe of grand eſtate: the chiefeſt counſell of imperiall law: and the ſanctuarie of higheſt appeale, and deciſion among ſubiects: the marrowe of wiſedome, and chriſtall confluence of cleargie, nobilitie, and gentrie: the center of vnderſtanding, and riches of experience from all ſides: ſing for euer a ſong of iudgement and mercy vnto our God, as one man together: they intended no place in the firſt place, but this place of Parliament: no perſons but Parliament men to deſtruction: in other iudgements, as plague, famine, warre, the meaner ſort oftner goe to wracke, but heere they ſhot at the faireſt flocke together:Luk 13, 1. As Pilat mingled blood and ſacrifices together, ſo they (O horrible indignitie) meant to mingle blood and duſt together, and to make morter of the choiſeſt blood in our land,Apoc. 8.8. to build their Babell with. Babilon I ſay, meant to make that worthie houſe as the mountaine ſet on fire and tumbled into the ſea, like an Ae
                     ••
                  a ſpit-fire,Ezech. 24.3.4. flaming gobbets of fire vpon her owne friends and children: to make it as a pot, as Ezechiel ſpeaketh: hauing cut

you as fleſh to the pot, to ſeeth euery good morſell therein: to make that reuerend place, a very ſhambles,Ioſephus. hauing got, as Herod all the nobles of Iurie into one Amphetheater, to runne and ſtreame with the fineſt & pureſt blood:Ezech. 22.19. to make it as a melting houſe, as the ſame Prophet threatneth: to new found our Church and Common-wealth: to make our Princes and noble-men of Sion,
               Lam. 4, 2. who weare fine gold, to be eſteemed as earthen potſhards: the founder and mettal men of Rome, eſteemed you all no better then lead, yron, & braſſe: and put you all in one furnace: ye the Lord himſelfe ſeemed to haue barrelled vp wrath againſt you,Ezech. 22:19. as they had barrelled pouder: as though hee had directed them to begin at no place but there firſt,Ezech. 9, 6. as he ſaid once, begin at my ſanctuarie, and at my auncient men which were before the houſe; ſo heere begin at my parliament: as though the Lord meant to make that graue place, like Kibrah-Hattanah,
               Pſal. 78.31: Num. 11, 34. the graues of luſt: that whilſt the word was yet in your mouthes, the wrath of God to come vpon them: to ſlay the ſtrongeſt of them, to ſmite downe the choſen men in Iſrael, as though the Lord had appointed a ſacrifice in the place, and a great ſlaughter,Eſa, 34, 5, 6, 7. as in Bozra of olde: the earth to be drunken with blood, and the duſt to be made fat: euen a ſacrifice vpon the mountaines of Iſrael,
               Ezech. 39.17, 18 with many diſhes of the blood of the valiant, and blood of the great ones: like the Lords great ſupper in the Reuelation,Apoc. 19, 17, 18 for all the birds to come vnto it: but the Lord hath ſpared his owne people, and poured out the blood of our enemies, and lifted vp their carcaſſes for euery bird to peck on: and behold, you all are

as a brand not touched by the fire:Ezech. 39.
                     •
                  . Zach. 3.2. He threatned to take vp huge and mighty ſtones, but would not let one of them be caſt at you: he laid fewell, but would not let it kindle: He filled the pot, but would not let it ſeethe, nor any morſell be diuided to put within it: He brought the ſacrifice to the hornes of the altar, but would not ſlay it: but gaue your enemies into your hand: And in the ſame place diuided their heads and quarters, where they meant to haue rend in pieces yours: GOD hath ſcattered the bones of them that beſieged thee:Iud. 7, 25. Apoc. 3.9. he hath ſlaine Orob and Zeb in their owne rocke and wine preſſe: and heerein is the Scripture fulfilled: I will make thy enemies come to worſhip before thee,Pſal. 33.5. and they ſhall knowe that I loue thee: take full warning at ſuch a caueat, as one body, why the Lord ſeemed to come to your pauilion, and why hee knocked at your doore: And in particular, let euery ſoule among you looke to the reckoning that GOD hath with you:3, Sam. 7, 9. 2, Sam. 6, 12: caſt about as Dauid with Nathan concerning the temple: And at another time in the imperiall aſſembly for reducing the Arke, when ſomething had beene forgotten before: followe on and proceede with the Lord,In the letter. that they may be Prophets againſt themſelues: God and man by your concurrence to puniſh the wickednes of this time: (and what wickednes hath any age or chronicle obſerued greater?) that they may receiue a blow in parliament in deed, and yet no ſtirring afore hand on our part:Apoc. 2, 20. and that they may ſee none hurt them, but themſelues: Conſider that theſe are nōt olde, outworne, and ouergrowne Papiſts: but bred in our time, & vnder our improuidence (God

impute it not vnto vs) take full order that Ieſabel be permitted to teach and ſeduce no more: deale faithfully betweene GOD and his people, leaſt a worſe thing come vnto vs: behold God prouoketh you on paine of your liues: the Countrie repoſeth truſt in you, the Churches depend on you: and the eyes of all the world are vpon you, to ſee the fruite of your wiſedom in thorough orders for your owne ſafeties & Gods glory: elſe we ſhall be as a reproach among all nations, and as a ſhip of fooles in a calme ſea and ſound barke, and no enemie to boord vs, to miſcarie in the hauen, by not prouiding for a tempeſt aforehand, with this inſcription ouer vs: Thy deſtruction is of thy ſelfe, O England. Be this ſpoken to no diſhonour of ſo graue a Senate, that hath made ſo worthie proceedings alreadie: but to ſtirre vp all to pray▪ that God may enſpire effectually, that neither friend may miſſe any comfort, nor enemie haue hope, or cauſe to ioy: Surely GOD that offered to make a great nation of one Moſes,
               Exod. 32.10. is able to raiſe vp parliament men of ſtones: and indeed did not the beames, and timber,Abac. 2.11. and ſtones of the parliament threaten wrath: Seeke therefore the Lord with a perfect hart, ſet vp a Pyramis to thy God, and a pillar of memorie as Abraham did: That God hath been ſeene on your mount:Gen. 
                     •
                  2.14. erect a new monument where they would haue deſtroyed all the olde monuments: as Nebuchadnezar, make and publiſh generall decrees, make the ſignes knowne abroade, that the high God hath done vnto thee,Dan. 3.32. that there is no other God that can deliuer ye, as our God: as the dedication of a ſpeciall holy day for this purpoſe declareth already: haue

warre with Amalech for euer, remember the Lords charge: forget not: forget not.Deut. 25.19. Apoc. 18.6. And as another ſcripture directeth: Reward Babylon double into her boſome: remember him that ſaith: Take vs the little Foxes. And againe:Cant. 2.15. Pſal. 137.8. Bleſſed ſhall hee be that taketh the children of Babylon and daſheth them againſt the ſtones: take order that all fleſh in all our dominions,Luk. 3.6. by the preaching of his word, may ſee the ſaluation of this God: that children vnborne may ſeeke the God of their Fathers, and all of vs in your behalfes, for ſo wiſe, zealous, and prouident Counſell,Pſal. as the oracle of God, may bleſſe the Lord God, praiſe him, and magnifie him for euer.
            O Thou whole Kingdome of England, thou careleſſe  daughter, that liuedſt at eaſe, and dwelt in ſecuritie as Laiſh, nowe this eight and forty yeares:Iudg. 1
                     •
                  .7. 1. Theſſ. 5, 3. when thou ſaideſt within thy ſelfe, Peace, peace, ſtrength, ſtrength, amitie, amitie, vnitie, vnity, lenity, lenity: Loe a ſnare as ſuddaine as the trauell of a woman: the Lord came againſt thee: the true God ſtole vpon thee as a thiefe: loſſe of children and widowhood, ſhould haue come vpon thee in one day:Apoc. 16, 15. the portiō of Babel in her perfection: the morning thereof thou ſhouldeſt not haue knowne:Apoc. 18.8. Eſa. 47.9. In the Q. declaration. 1662 Apoc. 14. thou waſt as neere to hauock, as thy ſiſter of France, on the other ſide of the water: vpon whom came an inundation of blood, as it were to the horſes bridles, to deſtroy an hundreth thouſand at one time: the walls and roofe of Dagon fell downe vpō Philiſtines 3000:Iud. 16.27. 
               1, King. 20.30. the buildings of foure whole Cities of Sodome oppreſſed their owners: one wall falleth vpon 27000. of Syrians:

               Ierichoes walls come tumbling down: but Englands are ſpared. Thou art let goe as a ſcape got, or liuing ſparrow,Leuit. 14.52.53. from the death in hand: thou haſt not loſt not one man in all thy Tribes: do thou therfore exalt,Pſal. 144.14. ſet vp, and bleſſe this thy God that loueth thee deerely: by prolonging thy peace in thy borders, and preuenting this crying and complaining in thy ſtreetes: elſe haddeſt thou beene, yea and ſhalt be a wofull ſpectacle of miſerie, & an incōparable example of calamitie to all the world: ſhould not thy times haue beene as in the dayes of Noah? ſome taken eating, ſome drinking, ſome in marrying: and knew nothing till the flood of vengeance came? as in the dayes of Lot: ſome building, ſome planting, ſome buying, ſome ſelling, and the fire diſturbed all their works?Math. 24.58.61. ver. 40.16.17.18. Luk: 17, 28. as in the day of Ieruſalem: ſome taken flying: of two in the field one hit, the other ſcaping▪ ſome in the houſe, not ſuffered to come downe: others abroad not ſuffered to ſet any thing out of the houſe▪ ſome taken in the Inne as Moſes: ſome neere the gardens,Exod. 4, 25. Num. 22.24. Num. 25.14. Iud. 9. as Balaam: ſome in the tents of whoring, as Zimri and Coſt: ſome as Abimelech, hauing come neere the dore to haue his braine brokē with a ſtone: ſome taken lying in receiuing bribes as Gehezi:2. King. 5.26. Act. 5. Dan. 4.52. ſome robbing the Church, as Ananias and Zaphira: ſome walking in the Taraſſes as Nebuchadnezar: ſome drinking with cōcubines, as Baltazar, &c. Lord how many hearts had beene diſcouered? how many hypocrites diſmaked? faint and fraile men laid open: ſome weak would haue proued ſtrong? ſome ſtrong, would haue proued weake: the reputed faithfull, might haue been vnfaithfull: the truſtie, might haue

become treacherous: men taken to be quiet, might haue beene outragious: many that make faire weather, would haue been glad of this ſtorme: they that ſeeme content with their owne, would haue taken part in the common ſpoile: how many priuate quarrels would haue beene reuenged vnder publike viſors? how many that ſeeme Proteſtants, would haue appeared Papiſts how many wiſe would haue proued fooliſh; and at their wits end? how would the baſe haue preſumed againſt the honourable:Eſa. 3.5. Amos, 3, 11. the young againſt the aged: who could haue beene ſure of life or goods, or wife, or childe, one houre? what houſe not rifled? what virgine not rauiſhed? what wife not defloured? euery Towne and Country ſhould haue beene filled with woe and lamentation, and aſtoniſhment: Winter houſes & Sommer houſes had beene demoliſhed: the great houſes ſmitten with breaches, the little with cheſts, as Amos ſpeaketh. It ſhould haue beene a day of darknes and blacknes, none like it from the beginning,Ioel. 2, 2. neither any more ſuch to the yeares of many generations: the land before it as the garden of Eden, after it a deuouring wildernes. And ſurely it parliament ſhall take all courſe for ſafety, that poſſibly the higheſt reach and extent of mans wiſedome can compaſſe, yet if we be not reconciled to GOD,Apoc▪, 19.29. and returne with all our heart: It we be not zealous to amend: loe hee ſtandeth ſtill at the doore and knocketh, our ſafety is no ſafety, and our reſo
                  •
               e is but a repriuall to a greater aſſiſes: 
                  〈◊〉
                
               England therefore ſay vnto her God:Iob. 42.5, 6. heretofore I haue heard of thee by the hearing of the care, but nowe mine eye ſeeth neerer then

euer, therefore I abhorre my ſelfe in duſt and uſhes: Let the enemie neuer haue his hope, that the iniquitie of England is fulfild.Porerierius in Gen. 15. Let England, ſeeing ſhee is new borne, be a new creature: Let England ſay, the mercie of God to it indureth for euer: and that her deliuerance ſurpaſſeth all the deliuerances of Gods firſt borne Iſrael: let her proclaime to all people: Come and ſee,Pſal. 66.6. and heare, what GOD hath done for me and my children: helpe me all ye nations: and ioyne with me to bleſſe this Lord, to praiſe him, & to magnifie him for euer.
            
                O You the right honorable Commiſſioners, and other the worſhipfull, imployed, in examining this triane, and in digging vp this hidden graue, like the Troian horſe among the Gentiles, of all villany: you ſee & ken further in this ſed of miſchiefe, then any other eye:Pſal. 107.24. you ſee the works of the Lord, and his wonders in theſe deep deuices: further then is fit for euery one to knowe, and which time will more reueale and make bare and naked: Heauen is high, earth is deepe, and the heart of the King who can finde out?Pro. 25.3. you ſee the dungeon of trayterous harts: and haue pierced into the bottomleſſe hell of Popiſh and Ieſuiticall practiſe, by their owne bookes, writings, and confeſſions: you ſee the labyrinth of their windings & turnings, and all the falſe dores of equiuocating ſoules, more intricate, then their hiding chambers, in their couerts, and dens, and ſecret lurking places: you ſee the power of the Lord to confound them, whilſt we imagined no ill his wiſedom to let them run on till they ſhould be out of breath:

like a good Chirurgion, not to launce the wound, til it grew to a head, and the botch ripe, to breake with too much bily matter:Pſal. 9.15, 16. you ſee the iuſtice of the Lord, who hath made himſelfe knowne by executing iudgement, they are ſunken downe in the pit, that they made: in the net that they hid, is their foot taken: the wicked is ſnared in the worke of his owne hands O meditate and marke. 
               Higgaiō Selah: you ſee the mercy of God triumphing ouer all his works: arguing and diſputing in his loue, concerning vs: How ſhall I deliuer thee vp, O little England? How ſhal I deliuer thee,Oſe. 11.8.9. O great Brittaine? how ſhall I make thee as Admal? how ſhall I ſet thee as Zeboim: mine hart is turned within me: my repentings are rolled together: I will not execute the fiercenes of any wrath, I will not returne to deſtroy: I am God and not man, the holy one in the midſt of thee: behold, I would haue fined thee,Eſa. 48.8, 9.10. but not as ſiluer: yea, I haue ſaued thee out of this fierie furnace of affliction, for mine owne ſake, for mine owne ſake haue I done it: for my names ſake haue I deferred my wrath: for my praiſe haue I refrained from thee, that I cut thee not off: you therefore that ſee more (as the cunning eye in pictures, the skillfull eare in muſicke diſcerneth more then the vulgar ſort:) you that ſee the length, the bredth, the depth, the heigth, & at the dimēſions of Gods works here aboue others: riſe vp higher in your ſpirits: by their ſubtilty, right honourable, be more and more wiſe as ſerpents, for the ſtate, and to preſerue honourable plainenes in the ſimplicity of Doues, in holie conuerſation for your ſoules health: and for bleſſing of your pollicy: ſo bleſſe you this Lord, praiſe him, and magnifie him for euer.
            
               O Thou noble Lord, that high Montegle of honorable  diſcent,Dan. 5.5.25. and auncient renowned houſe, predeſtinate aboue all other, to be a moſt happy inſtrument of thy ſoueraigne and Countries ſafetie: conſider and ponder according to thy ingenuous honour and right loyal wiſedom, this great work of God, in the very fingers of that mans hand, that was author of the letter: the writing prooued to be like the writing vpon the plaiſter of the wall, in the Pallace of King Baltazar, when he thought all ſure: and yet that night he loſt kingdome and life: Mene, Tekel, Vpharſin: Mene, God hath numbred and finiſhed you: Tekel, thou art weighed in the ballance, and found too light: Pare
                     •
                  : thy kingdome and plot diuided and ſcattered, and giuen to thine enemies: the letter, made loue and nature worke toward thee alone, whoſe very fountaine and ſprings were ſtopped vp, and ſhut cloſe to all others: and yet out of that ground, their blinded harts & infatuated minds might haue gathered, that if blood or alliance, or any other reſpect ought to haue moued them to haue bowels and feeling towards thee, it might haue led others to haue had tendernes towards others alſo of their friends: yea, euen to all England the common parents of vs all: and to euery ſonne & daughter of the ſame:Rom. 1.22. but that ſeeming to be wiſe, they became fooles:Prou. and the ſcripture muſt be true: the mercies of the wicked are vnmercifull: their bowels the ſeat of mercie, are cruell: if they that are euill, can giue good thinges to their friends,Math. 7.9 10.11 not ſtones but bread, not ſcorpions but fiſhes: how much more

ſhall not our heauenly Father, who made all, euen pittie all, and loue the images of his owne creation, the works of his owne hands? who hath better right to euery one of vs, then any friend hath to his friend in any bond of nature: for hee hath made of one blood, euen all mankinde,Act. 17, 26. to dwell on all the face of the earth, and hath aſſigned the bounds of their habitation: wee are all the generation of God: in him we liue, wee moue, and haue our being: Doe thou wiſely conſider, the Lords loue to thee, and obſerue prudently withall, their leaden rule of their falſe loue: for no good patriore can abide himſelfe to be loued, when his Country is hated: obſerue the wiſedom of God, to produce out of cōmon hatred, particular loue: out of particular loue, generall ſafetie in his mighty power: notwithſtanding, vowes, oathes, and ſacraments of ſecrecie to ſet our ſworne enemies to indight for our good: to make their fingers write peace, whoſe hearts hatched warre: to order in his wiſe diſpenſation, ſuch a ſpirit of zeale and caution in you: doe thou reuerence this great God, in a true ſenſe & ſound ſpirit of diſcerning ſpirits, that hath honoured thee with ſo great ſeruice: ſuggeſted and gaue grace to make the beſt vſe of it (as they prophecied in another meaning) namely, to be a great ſauiour to Prince & Country: and yet remēbring what a holy father ſaid: Marie the great inſtrument of all Chriſtians good: ſhe was more bleſſed by beleeuing Chriſt, then by bearing him: by receiuing him in her heart by faith, then by conceiuing him in her wombe: doe you my good Lord, make this a meanes to increaſe your faith, and reſolution

of conſcience in the beſt maner: bleſſe you the Lord, praiſe him, and magnifie him for euer.
            
                O Thou mighty King and Queene, Prince, and Duke, Counſailers, Prelates, Peeres, Iudges, Lawyers, and Gentrie, and generally all the Subiects of this land and eſtate, whoſe heads ſtood vpon one necke, to be ſtriken off at one blowe, whoſe bodies were in one ſhip of venture, within an inch bord of drowning, and within a ſtep of death, or rather on the top of a maſt, a horrible and hideous tempeſt growing, all our Pilats, and Marriners, and cunning ſea men a ſleepe, and we ſaw it not: recognize with me, in Queene Maries dayes they burnt many, but at many ſtakes, but heere they meant to burne vs all at one ſtake:Documare ad cadem. amongſt the Romanes they put the tenth man onely to death in a generall prouocation, heere nothing would ſerue but a generall ſlaughter, euen the abhomination of deſolation, ouer ſo many ſacred perſons, and ſo holy a place: Let all them then that thus ſhould haue died together, learne holy feruencie of their enemies, to ſtriue for the common faith, to giue honour and obedience to whom it is due: Care and defence, to whom it appertaines: let all them in vnion of ſpirit, and the holy communion of Saints, with an indiſſoluble knot of truth, peace, concord, common comfort and ſocietie: liue, and loue, and die together in an holy aſſociation in the quarrell of the Goſpell, and defiance to Babylon, in the maintenance of one God, one Chriſt, one ſpirit, one faith, one truth, one baptiſme, one communion, one King, one people, that ſo liuing and dying together,

we may with one heart and hand, one faith and truth, one minde and mouth, euer bleſſe one Lord, praiſe him, and magnifie him for euer.
            O All you Churches of the Lord in any part of the  world, that call vpon the name of the Lord in truth, for whoſe confirmation of your loue & faith, the Lord of hoaſts hath ſo mightily pleaded among vs, that maketh their pennes to write health, who otherwiſe wiſhed their launces to worke vs death, to ſhew that hee walketh in the middeſt of the ſeauen golden candleſticks,Apoc. 1.13. all whoſe territories and tents they hated deadly as vs, profeſſing their wills & skill, an eager deſire to let ſome of them blood againe, as they did heeretofore in Fraunce, being cunning to deſtroy: be you the more rooted in your holy faith: reſolued with all conſtancie in your religion, and eſtabliſhed in your ſpirits, to ſerue ſo prouident a God in one vniforme profeſſion of truth with vs, for which God hath giuen ſo glorious a ſentence, that all variance ſet aſide, God may perſwade Iapheth to dwell in the tents of Shem,
               Gen. 9.27. Apoc. 20.
                     •
                  .9. and Canaan to be ſeruant to them both: and caſt our ſelues into a perfect knot of loue, to make defence againſt Gog and Magog, that gather themſelues frō the foure corners of the earth, to compaſſe about the tents of the Saints and the beloued Citie, that ſo as one flocke we may acknowledge one ſheepheard: and vnceſſantly bleſſe him, praiſe him, and magnifie him for euer.
            O Ye mightie Lords & Emperours of the world, euen all the ten hornes and ten Kings of the earth, the Kings I ſay, who are kinne and brothers to one another, & all you worthy Counſailers, who

haue fulfilled Gods will in vpholding the Citie on ſeauen hills ſo long,Apoc. 17.16.17 better then her owne hills could vphold her: and now, God putteth in your hearts by this warning what you are to looke for, if you pleaſe not this ſcarlet woman, as ſome of your moſt ennobled auceſtors & progenitors, haue taſted in all your quarters, with the loſſe of their deareſt liues & beſt kingdomes: ſhee ſitteth in Vatican, and with her vaticinies and prophecies, ſendeth you and yours from the Caſtle of S. Angelo to death, as the Alaſtor and deſtroyer of the world: She keepeth her latitat in her laterane, liuing a ſhadowed life, and ſetteth others to that worke to which ſhee putteth not her finger: wherefore ſtir vp your heroicall ſpirits, prepare your ſelues to fulfill the reſt of Gods myſterie prophecied before, that ten Kings ſhould ioyne in one conſent againſt this whore of Babel, who committeth ſtates together, to kill one another for her: Proclaime a ſacred warre againſt her, to ſhew your holy hatred of her; that Sion may riſe, & Babylon may fall,Apoc. 1
                     •
                  , 11. and her ſmoake may riſe vp more and more: do you begin to bleſſe this Lord, who hath ſhewed by this example to all the world, that he ſpecially loueth the liues of Kings & Princes, and Counſailers of eſtate: and therefore do you your vttermoſt (and what cannot Kings do) to ſet forth the lawes of this King of Kings in all your Realmes: ſhew your ſelues to be Kings and free men, not in bondage to any, but reſtorers of the world, according to your great power: can you haue a better time and occaſion? ſee the ſtirring and readie affections of many Kings, Potentates, and States, to concurre with you: bleſſe

this Lord GOD, of whom you hold your crownes, praiſe him, and magnifie him for euer.
            O Ye holy Angels and celeſtiall creatures, that excell  in ſtrength, whereas we are weake:Pſal. 103, 20. you that fulfill his commaundements, and hearken perfectly vnto the voyce of his words: whereas we vpon earth are all ſhort, you that pitched your tents about the parliament houſe, and all our tabernacles,Pſal. 34, 7. that looked ſo faithfully and louingly to your charge, ſo that no foote did ſtumble at any ſtone: bleſſe you this Lord forvs, and with vs, in all your heauenly queers,Pſal. 91, 11, 12. praiſe him, and magnifie him for euer.
            O All you people of the word, Iewes, and Chriſtians, Turks, and Infidels, ciuill, and Barbarians: Indians, and Cannibals, friends and enemies whatſoeuer: conſider I pray you in all your Countries & generations, whether any like horrible, vnnaturall, and execrable thing euer were: where neither the dread of the God of life, nor duty to a ſacred King, nor the tendernes of a gracious Queene, nor the ſweetnes and golden hope of a young Prince, nor authority of Counſailers of eſtate: nor reuerence of prelates, nor honour of nobility, nor grauity of Iudges, nor reſpect of the flower of their owne Countrie: nor conſideration of the face of the aged, nor any hope of the young ones, nor pittie of the innocent, nor compaſſion to the harmleſſe multitude, nor loue to their owne affectionate in the ſame religion, nor bowels of nature to their owne Country: nor rule of ſcripture to thinke of heauens Country: nor relenting of conſcience in themſelues in ſo many moneths of leiſure, to worke any remorſe, but the

more hardening, nor pietie to the memories of the dead, nor awe to any liuing, what opinion the world ſhould haue of ſuch incendiaries: nor feare of any to reuenge it: nor care of poſterity, to confound mens eſtates and rights, by deſtroying their deeds & writings in the fire: nor thought of iuſtice to let men haue a lawfull triall: nor abhorring of cruelty in the multitudes of the ſlaine: nor barbarouſnes in the manner of death, or rather in ſo many manners of death, burning, drowning, ſtoning, beheading, quartering, preſſing: nor touch to the rufull ſcriching and howling, of the maymed, bruiſed, wounded, & not ſlaine outright: nor charity to ſend men to hell, as they thought, without time to aske mercy: nor fore-caſt of perill to them and theirs, if they ſhould be diſcouered: nor any thing in heauen, earth, or hell: this world, or the world to come, could moue them, ſome being of great birth and wealth, ſome of zeale and profeſſed religion, ſome of the prieſthood of the Romane faith, and all naturally of this Countrie and nation, but that they complotted, contriued, put in practiſe to their vttermoſt power, the moſt diuelliſh murder, butchery, and maſſacre, that euer Sathan hatched from the beginning of the world, frō the ſhedding of the blood of Abel the righteous: at which we that ſcaped admire, and adore him that ſaued vs: they that heare it are amazed, & aſtoniſhed: and can ſcarcely beleeue that any ſuch thing was, but that it is apparant as the ſunne in the firmaments which all nations doe now ring of, and is readie for euery Chronicle, as the new manuell of the world, both in attempt and deliuerance, to ſhewe the odiouſnes

of bloudie and woluiſh Rome: and the ſoueraignty and fatherly loue of God to mankinde, and eſpecially to the Engliſh nation & proteſtant Churches there: Doe you therefore, O all you people, tribes, kindreds, and nations of the world, and all ye works of the Lord in all places of his dominion,Pſal. 103.22. Pſal. 150.5. doe you I ſay, ſpeake good of the name of the Lord: let euery one that hath faith, let euery one that hath breath and common feeling, and ſence of humanitie, and loueth the liues of men in the common affection to mankinde: glorifie GOD, that loueth to ſaue many people aliue, and hence learne to abhor the Abadon, the Apollyon, and Romiſh deſtroyer:Apoc. 9. and to honour this God of our life, who holdeth all their ſoules in life, let them bleſſe this Lord in their Countries and Regions, praiſe him, and magnifie him for euer.
            O All you people that heare me this day, or ſhall  reade any part of this ſacrifice of thankſgiuing: be ſtirred vp heereby the more, to lift vp your hearts vnto God, to extoll his name, exalt his glory, and found out his praiſe in all places, and vpon all óccaſions: eſpecially to celebrate him for the riches of his mercie, in the defence of the Goſpell in our proteſtant Churches: O my ſoule, and all that is within me, and all that belongeth vnto me,Pſal. 203.1, 22. bleſſe thou not only in word and writing, but in deed and truth, this holy name of the great defēder of our precious faith: praiſe him, & magnifie him, not now alone, but continually, and for euer & euer: Amen, Amen. Alleluiah.
            
            FINIS.
         
      
   