
      
         
            
            
            THE ANCIENT, Honorable, Famous, and delightfull Hiſtorie of Huon of Bourdeaux, one of the Peeres of Fraunce, and Duke of Guyenne.
            Enterlaced with the loue of many Ladies, as alſo the fortunes and aduentures of Knights errant, their amorous Seruants.
            Being now the Third time imprinted, and the rude Engliſh corrected and amended.
            
            LONDON ❀ Printed by Thomas Purfoot, and are to be ſould by Edward White, at his ſhop at the little North dore of Poules at the ſigne of the Gunne. 1601.
            
         
         
            
            
            
               ❧ The Printer to the Hiſtorie enſuing.
            
               THe foundation of all true fame and repute, which in this world is moſt to be reckoned of and eſteemed, (according to the opinion of all Writers both ancient & moderne) conſiſteth in bold, honourable, and heroycall reſolution, which enflames the ſoule with a continuall thirſting deſire, of purſuing braue and generous purpoſes, perfourming of high and aduenturous ac
                  ••
               ons, which (when their bodies are mantled vp in the ob
                  •
               cure moulde of the earth) leaueth their names cannonized in Fames aeternall Calendar, and renownes them as rare preſidents to all following Poſterities. And from ſo perfect ground of good and laudable example, the young infant ſpirits of latter grow'th, raking vp the embers of their worthy proceedings, the ſparke of glorious imitation catcheth hold of their warme and forward deſires, and ſo enkindling further till it breake foorth into a flame: burnes vp and conſumes all conceits of cowardiſe, and as an enlightned Beacon on a Promontorie toppe, calles & inuites them to the like honourable atchieuements. Hence enſued that deſertfull and well worthy to bee remembred purpoſe, of Sir Iohn Bourchier Knight, Lord Berners, when not onely in this woorke of Huon of Bourdeaux, but many other famous Tranſlations of like conſequence by him perfourmed, he gaue witneſſe to the world of ſo labourious an endeauour, and (as it were) ſquared out an excellent

platfourme for generous imitation. But let me not herewithall forget, that the right noble Earle of Huntingdon Lord Haſtings, was a continuall ſpurre to him in the purſuite of ſuch paines, and likewiſe a cheerefull encourager of me in the imprinting, aſſiſting euer both with his purſe and honourable countenance, the trauaile that ſorted to ſo good example. Which being now finiſhed and made compleat, with better abilitie of will, then other perfourmance: we leaue to the gentle acceptance of ſuch, as knowe how rightly to iudge, and kindly to entertaine: to others our paines are not imparted.
            FINIS.
         
         
            
            The Table.
            
               HOw the Emperor Charlemaine required his Barons that they wold chooſe one among them to gouerne his Empire. Chap. 1.
               
               The concluſion and anſweare that the Barons made. And what counſaile the diſhonourable Lord Earle Amerie gaue to the Kinge, againſt the two Sonnes of Duke Seuin of Bourdeaux: whereby great miſcheefe afterward enſued. And of the good aduice that Duke Naymes gaue to the Emperour. Chap. 2.
               
               How Charlemaine ſent two Knightes to the Ducheſſe of Bourdeaux, to commaund her to ſend her two Sonnes to his Court. Chap. 3.
               
               The anſweare that the Ducheſſe of Bourdeaux made to the Emperours Meſſengers. Chap. 4.
               
               Howe the Emperour was content with the report of the two Knightes: and how the Traitour Earle Amerie went and complained to Charlot the Kinges Sonne. Chap. 5.
               
               How the two Sonnes of Duke Seuin tooke leaue of the Ducheſſe their Mother, and how in their way they ouer-tooke the Abbot of Cluny their Vncle, going towards Paris to the Emperour Charlemaine. 
                  Chap. 6.
               
               How by the counſaile of Earle Amerie they ran firſt at Gerardin Brother to Huon, and bare him to the earth, and ſore wounded him, whereof Huon was right ſorrowfull. Chap. 7.
               
               How Huon of Bourdeaux was ſorrowfull when he ſaw his Brother Gerard ſo ſore wounded, and how he ſlew Charlot: and how he came before the King at Paris and appeached him of Treaſon. Chap. 8.
               
               How the King was ſore diſpleaſed with Huon, becauſe he had appeached him of treaſon: and how Huon ſhewed all the manner why he ſlew the Knight that wounded his Brother. Chap. 9.
               
               How Charlot the Kings Son was brought before him dead, and of the great ſorrow that he made: and how Earle Amerie appeached Huon for the death of Charlot, and how the King would haue run vppon Huon, and of the good counſaile that Duke Naymes gaue to the King. Chap. 10.
               
               How the Traytour Earle Amerie charged Huon before the Emperour, that he trayterouſly with treaſon pretended, had ſlaine the Kings Sonne, and in that quarrell he appealed Huon to Battaile. Chap. 11.
               
               How the Abbot of Cluny would prooue, that the ſaying of Earle Amerie
                  
was falſe and vntrue: and howe the Earle did caſt his Gage againſt Huon, who tooke it vp. Chap. 12.
               
               Howe thoſe two Champions came into the field whereas they ſhould 
                     •
                  ight, accompanied with their friends. Chap. 13.
               
               How the two Champions made their Oathes vppon the Reliques, that their ſayings were true, and what the king ſayd. chap. 14.
               
               Howe Huon of Bourdeaux and Earle Amerie fought together before kinge Charlemaine: and how the Traitour Amerie was ſlaine by the noble Proweſſe and chiualrie of Huon. 
                  chap. 15.
               
               How after the Emperor Charlemaine had ſeen Earle Amerie was ſlain, he commaunded expreſly, that Huon ſhould auoide the Realme and Empire, and to be baniſhed from thence for euer. chap. 16.
               
               How king Charlemaine ſent Huon to doe a Meſſuage in Babilon to the Admirall Gaudiſe. 
                  chap. 17.
               
               How the noble Duke Huon of Bourdeaux tooke leaue of the King, and of all the Lordes and Barons, and road with the good Abbot to Cluney. 
                  chap. 18.
               
               How Huon came to Rome, and was confeſſed of the Pope who was his Vncle, and of his departing: and how he came to Brandis, where he found his Vncle Garyn of St. Omers, who for the loue of Huon paſſed the Sea with him. Chap. 19.
               
               How Huon of Bourdeaux departed from Brandis, and Garyn his Vncle with him: and how he came to Ieruſalem, and from thence into the Deſer
                     ••
                  , whereas he found Gerames, and of their conference. chap. 20.
               
               How Gerames went with Huon and his companie, and ſo came into the wood, whereas they found king Oberon, who coniured them to ſpeake 
                     •
                  nto him. chap. 21.
               
               How King Oberon was ſore diſpleaſed, in that Huon wold not ſpeake: and of the great feare that he put Huon and his companie in. chap. 22.
               
               Howe King Oberon Dwarfe of the Fayrey purſued ſo much Huon, that he conſtrained him to ſpeake to him at laſt. chap. 23.
               
               Of the great maruailes that Oberon ſhewed vnto Huon, and of the 
                     〈◊〉
                   that fell. chap. 24.
               
               Of the great gifts that Oberon gaue to Huon, as his Horne of Iuorie, and his Cup, the which were of great vertues: and how Huon after thought to prooue the vertue of them, whereby he was in perill of death. chap. 25.
               
               How Huon arri
                     •
                  ed at Tormont, and foūd a man at a gate, who brought him to lodge at the Prouoſts houſe in the Towne. chap. 26.
               
               
                  Howe Huon gaue a Suppper to all the poore men of the Citie, and how the Duke was Vncle to Huon: and howe the Duke had Huon into his Caſtle. chap. 27.
               
               How the Duke thought to haue murdered Huon his owne Nephewe, whiles he ſate at the Table. chap. 28.
               
               How by the ayd of Greffrey and of the Priſoners, Huon was ſuccoured, and ſlew all the Paynims, and the Duke fled, and after beſieged the Caſtle. chap. 29.
               
               How King Oberon came and ſuccoured Huon, and ſlewe all the Paynims, except ſuch as would bee chriſtened: And howe Huon ſlewe the Duke his Vncle. chap. 30.
               
               How king Oberon forbad Huon, that hee ſhould not goe by the Tower of the Gyant, to the which Huon would not accord, but went thether, whereby hee was in great danger of death. And of the Damſell that hee found there, who was his owne cozen borne in Fraunce. 
                  chap. 31.
               
               How the Damſell cozen to Huon, ſhewed him the Chamber whereas the Gyant ſlept, and how he went and awaked him: and of the good armour that the Gyant deliuered to Huon. 
                  chap. 32.
               
               How Huon ſlew the great Gyant, and how he called Gerames and his companie to him, and of the ioy that they made for the death of the Gyant. chap. 33.
               
               How Huon departed from the Caſtle of the Gyant, and tooke leaue of his companie, and went alone afoote to the Sea-ſide, whereas he found Mallabron of the Fairey, on whom he mounted to paſſe the ſea. chap. 34.
               
               How Huon paſſed the Sea vppon Mallabron, who bare him to Babilon: and how Huon came to the firſt gate, and ſo to the ſecond. chap. 35.
               
               How Huon paſſed the Fourth gate, and how he came into the Garden whereas the Fountaine was, and of that which he did there. chap. 36.
               
               How Huon came into the Pallaice, and did his meſſuage to the Admirall, and how he ſlew many Paynims, and was afterward taken, and put in priſon. chap. 37.
               
               Of the great complaints that Huon made being in priſon, and howe the Admirals Daughter came to comfort him, and how ſhe departed not well content with Huon. 
                  Chap. 38.
               
               Howe Huon made great complaints for the famine that hee endured, and how the faire Eſclaremond came again to comfort him, conditionally that Huon would fulfill her deſire. Chap. 39.
               
               How Gerames and his company departed from the Tower & the Damſell

with him, and came to Babilon: and of the manner that Gerames vſed to know ſome newes of Huon. 
                  Chap. 40.
               
               How Gerames and the faire Eſcleremond went to the Priſon to comfort Huon and the other Priſoners. Chap. 41.
               
               How the great Gyant Agrapart, eldeſt Brother to Angolofer whome Huon ſlew, aſſembled his people and came to Babylon, to haue the Tribute of the Admirall as his brother had: and of Battell hand to hand that he deſired of the Admirall Gaudiſe, the which was agreed to. Chap. 42.
               
               How the Admirall Gaudiſe tooke Huon out of priſon, and armed him to fight with the Gyant Agrapart. 
                  Chap. 43.
               
               How Huon fought with Agrapart the Giant, and diſcomfited him, and deliuered him to the Admirall, who had great ioy thereof. Chap. 44.
               
               How the Gyant Agrapart cryed mercie to the Admirall: and howe Huon deſired the Admirall Gaudiſe to leaue his law, and to be chriſtened. Chap. 45.
               
               How Huon ſeeing that the Admirall wold not forſake his beleefe, blew his Horne, whereby Oberon came to him, and how the Admirall was ſlain and all his men. And how Huon and the faire Eſcleremond were in perill of drowning, by reaſon that he brake the commaundement of King Oberon. 
                  chap. 46.
               
               How Huon and Eſcleremond arriued in an Iſle all naked, and how the Pirats of the Sea tooke Eſcleremond and left Huon alone, and bound his handes, feete, and eyes. Chap. 47.
               
               How the faire Eſcleremond was led away by the Pirats of the Sea: and how the Admirall Galaffer of Anfalerne deliuered her out of their hands. chap. 48.
               
               How the Pirate fled to Mombrance to Iuoryn, and how he ſent to 
                     〈◊〉
                   the Admirall Galaffer of Anfalerne, and of the anſweare that he had 
                     〈◊〉
                  . chap. 49.
               
               How King Oberon at the requeſt of two Knightes of the Fayrey, called 
                     〈◊〉
                   and Mallabron the monſter of the Sea, went and ſuccoured Huon
                  ▪ and carried him out of the Iſle of Noyſant. 
                  chap. 50.
               
               How Huon found a Minſtrell, who gaue him cloathing and meat, and tooke Huon with him as his Varler, and went to Mombrance. 
                  chap. 51.
               
               How Huon and his Maiſter Mouflet arriued at Mombrance, and how 
                     〈◊〉
                   ſpake with King Iuoryn. 
                  chap. 52.
               
               How King Iuoryn cauſed his Daughter to play at the Cheſſe with Huon, vppon condition that if he were mated, he ſhould then looſe his head:

and if ſhe were mated, Huon ſhould haue her loue: and how Huon won the game. Chap. 53.
               
               How Huon was armed, and mounted on a poore horſe, and went after the Armie to Anfalerne. 
                  Chap. 54.
               
               Howe Huon fought with Sorbryn and ſlewe him, and wanne the good horſe Blanchardyn, whereon he mounted and wanne the Battaile, and was brought with great tryumph to Mombrance. 
                  chap. 55.
               
               How Huon was had in great honour, and ſate at the Table with King Iuoryn of Mombrance. 
                  chap. 56.
               
               How the old Gerames arriued at Anfalerne by fortune, and the Admirall Gallaffer entertained him to maintaine his warre: And how the faire Eſcleremond ſpake with him. Chap. 57.
               
               How King Iuoryn came againe before Anfalerne, and how Gerames and Huon fought together, and at laſte they knewe each other. And how they entred into Anfalerne, and ſhutte the Admirall Gallaffer without. Chap. 58.
               
               How Iuoryn cauſed Mouflet the old Minſtrell, to bee brought to the gibet to haue been hanged: and how he was reſcued by Huon. 
                  chap. 59.
               
               How the good Prouoſt Guyer, Brother to Gerames, arriued at the Port of Anfalerne. 
                  Chap. 60.
               
               How Huon and Gerames, and all their companie, with the faire Ladie Eſcleremond, departed from the Caſtle of Anfalerne, and ſayled thence on the Sea. Chap. 61.
               
               How Huon and his companie arriued at the Port of Brandis, and from thence went to Rome to the Pope, who wedded together Huon and the faire Eſcleremond, and of their departing from thence. chap. 62.
               
               How Huon and his company arriued at the Abbey of Mauriſe, where hee was receiued by the Abbot & Couent, with great reuerence. chap. 63.
               
               How the good Abbot ſent word to Duke Gerard of Bourdeaux, howe his Brother Huon was in the Abbey of Mauriſe. 
                  Chap. 64.
               
               How Gybouars of Beam and Gerard practiſed Huons death: and how the Traytour Gerard came to ſee his Brother Huon, who with great ioye receiued him. chap. 65.
               
               How theſe twoo Brethren departed from the Abbey about midnight, and how the Traytour Gerard beganne to fall at rude words with Huon, when they approached neere the wood whereas Gybouars lay in ambuſh. chap. 66.
               
               How theſe Traytors ſlew all Duke Huons companie, except Gerames,
                  
and Eſcleremond, and Huon himſelfe, the which all three were faſt bound handes and feete, and blindfold, and ſo brought to Bourdeaux and were put in priſon. Chap. 67.
               
               How the Traytours returned to the Abbey of Saint Mauriſe, & ſlew the good Abbot, and tooke away all the Treaſure that Huon had left there. Chap. 68.
               
               How the Traitour Gerard ſhewed to King Charlemaine, how his Brother Huon was returned to Bourdeaux wthout doing of his Meſſuage to the Admirall Gaudiſe. 
                  Chap. 69.
               
               How the King commaunded that Huon ſhould be ſent for from Bourdeaux, to the intent that he ſhould die. Chap. 70.
               
               How the Emperour Charlemaine went himſelfe to Bourdeaux, to cauſe Huon to be ſlaine, for the great ill will that he bare to him. Chap. 71.
               
               Howe the Twelue Peeres drewe to counſaile, to giue ſentence vppon Huon, either with him or againſt him. Chap. 72.
               
               Howe the Peeres layde all the deede vppon Duke Naymes, to giue the iudgem
                     •
                  nt vppon him: But for all that euer he could ſay or doe, the king 
                     ••
                  dged Huon to die. chap. 73.
               
               Howe King Oberon came to ſuccour Huon, and made Gerard to confeſſe all the treaſon that he had purchaſed againſt Huon. 
                  Chap. 74.
               
               How King Oberon cauſed to bee hanged the Foure Traitours, Gerard, Gybouars, and the two Monkes, for their falſe witnes: and of the Peace made betweene Huon and Charlemaine: And how King Oberon gaue to Huon his Realme of the Fayrey. chap. 75.
               
               How King Oberon departed, and tooke leaue of King Charlemaine, & 
                     〈◊〉
                   
                  Huon and Eſcleremond: and alſo how King Charlemaine departed from 
                     
                        •
                     ourdeaux. 
                  Chap. 76.
               
               How King Oberon deuiſed with his Knightes, in the Cittie of Momur in the Fayrey, of the deeds of Huon of Bourdeaux, and of that which ſhold happen after to him. Chap. 77.
               
               How Huon tooke homage of his men, and chaſticed his Rebels, and of three Pilgrims, by whome much ill fell after, as yee ſhall heare. chap. 78.
               
               How Duke Raoul of Auſtrich, by the report of the Pilgrims, was enamoured of the faire Eſcleremond, and of the Yourney that was proclaimed, to the entent to haue ſlaine Huon. 
                  Chap. 79.
               
               How after that Duke Raoul had beene at Bourdeaux in the guiſe of a Pilgrime, to ſee the faire Ladie Eſcleremond, hee then returned againe to

                  
                     Ʋyennae. 
                  Chap. 80.
               
               How Duke Huon tooke leaue of the Ducheſſe his Wife, and howe hee arriued at Mayence, and went to the Pallaice. chap. 81.
               
               How Huon ſlewe Duke Raoul in the preſence of the Emperour, ſitting at his Table, and of the maruailes that he did: And how in the chace that was made after him, hee ſtrake downe the Emperour, and wan his good horſe. chap. 82▪
                  
               
               Howe Huon after that hee was mounted vppon the Emperours good horſe, he arriued at Colleyne, where he found his men: and how he departed thence. And of the Emperour who lay enambuſhed in a wood, abiding there to haue ſlaine Huon. 
                  chap. 83.
               
               Of the great Battaile within two Leagues of Coleyn, between the Emperour of Almaine and Huon of Bourdeaux, and of the Tru
                     •
                  e that was taken betweene them. chap. 84.
               
               How Huon graunted the Truce to the Emperour, and how the Prouoſt of Coleyne came and aſſayled Huon, not knowing of any Peace taken betweene them. Chap. 85.
               
               How Huon arriued at Bourdeaux, and of the counſaile of the faire Eſcleremond his wife, the which he would not beleeue nor follow. chap. 86.
               
               How Huon had great ioye for the birth of the faire Clar
                        •
                     et his Daughter. chap. 87.
               
               How the Emperour aſſembled a great Hoaſt and came before the Cittie of Bourdeaux. 
                  chap. 88.
               
               How the Emperour of Almaine beſieged the Citie of Bourdeaux: and how Huon made him readie to fight with his enemies. chap. 89.
               
               Of the great Battaile that was before Bourdeaux, whereas Huon hadde great loſſe, and the old Gerames taken. Chap. 90.
               
               How the Emperour rayſed vp a pare of Gallowes, to hange vp the old Gerames, and all the Bourdeloyes that were taken Priſoners. Chap. 91.
               
               How Huon yſſued out of Bourdeaux, and reſcued the old Gerames and his companie, whome the Emperour would haue hanged. Chap. 92.
               
               How the Emperour aſſayled the Citie of Bourdeaux two times, whereas he loſt many of his men. Chap. 93.
               
               Howe Huon ſent Habourey his Meſſenger to the Emperour, to require peace, and of his anſweare. chap. 94.
               
               How Huon yſſued out of Bourdeaux, and came to the Tents, & fought with the Emperour. chap. 95.
               
               How Huon made another yſſue out of Bourdeaux, and tooke away all

the beaſts that were in the paſtures without the Towne, pertaining to the Emperours hoaſt. Chap. 96.
               
               How Huon of Bourdeaux made him readie to go to ſeeke for ſome ſuccour: And of the ſorrow that the Ducheſſe his wife made. Chap. 97.
               
               How Huon departed from the Citie of Bourdeaux, and ſayled vntill he came into the hye Sea, and had many great fortunes. Chap. 98.
               
               How Huon arriued on the perillous Gulfe, whereas he ſpake with Iudas: And how 
                     •
                  e arriued at the Port of the Adamant. 
                  chap. 99.
               
               How Huon deuiſed with his Patron, in regarding of the Caſtle of the Adamant. 
                  Chap. 100.
               
               How a Galley with Sarazins came and aſſayled Huon, who were all ſlaine, and alſo all Huons men, and howe Huon went to the Caſtle of the Adamant and ſlew the great Serpent, and of the maruailes that he found there. Chap. 101.
               
               How Huon of Bourdeaux fought with the horrible Serpent, and ſlewe him within the Caſtle of the Adamant. 
                  Chap. 102.
               
               Howe after that Huon was departed from Bourdeaux, the Emperour made diuers aſſaults to the Citie, but he could not win it, for the defence of the good chiualrie that was within it, and of the ambuſhment that was layd by the counſaile of Duke Sauary, whereby the Cittie was taken and wonne. chap. 103.
               
               Of the death of the olde Gerames, and of the taking of the Citie of Bourdeaux, and of the comming of the Ducheſſe with the Emperour: and of the deliuering vp of the Caſtle to the Emperour. Chap. 104.
               
               How the Ducheſſe Eſcleremond deliuered her Daughter Clariet to 
                     〈…〉
                   vnto the Abbot of Cluny, of whome the Abbot was right 
                     •••
                  full. Chap. 105.
               
               Howe the noble Ducheſſe Eſcleremond yeelded vp the Caſtle 
                     •
                  o the Emperour, and how ſhe and her companie were Priſoners in the Citie of Ma
                        •
                     ence. 
                  chap. 106.
               
               How there arriued at the Caſtle of the Adamant a Shippe full of Sara
                  
                     ••
                  ns, wherein was the Biſhop of Millaine: and how Huon cauſed them to be chriſtened, and then he brought them into the Caſtle, whereas they 
                     〈◊〉
                   great ſtore and plentie of victuals. chap. 107.
               
               Howe Huon ſawe a Shippe arriue at the Port of the Caſtle of the Adamant. 
                  chap. 108.
               
               How Huon 
                  
                     〈…〉
                   by a Griffen out of the Caſtle of the Adamant, and how he ſlew the Griffen, 
                  
                     〈…〉
                   other young Griffens: And of the

Fountaine of the faire Garden: and of the fruite of the Tree neere to the Fountaine. chap. 109.
               
               How Huon fought with the great Griffen, and ſlew her. chap. 110.
               
               How an Angell appeared vnto Huon, and commaunded him to gather three Apples of the Tree by the Fountaine, and no more: And howe the Angell ſhewed him tidinges of his wife the faire Eſcleremond, and of his Daughter Clariet, and ſhewed him the way that hee ſhould goe from thence. chap. 111.
               
               How Huon of Bourdeaux ſayled in a rich Shippe, and of the perillous Gulfe that he paſſed by: and how he arriued at the Port of the great Cittie of Thauris in Perſia. 
                  chap. 112.
               
               How Sir Barnard departed from the Abby of Cluny, and went to ſeeke for Huon his Cozen, whome hee found at the Port of the great Cittie of Thauris. 
                  chap. 113.
               
               How Huon of Bourdeaux and Barnard his Cozen, acknowledged themſelues each to other, and ſhewed the diſcourſe of their aduentures. chap. 114.
               
               Howe the Admirall of Perſia did great honour to Huon of Bourdeaux, and led him into his Pallaice, whereas hee was receiued with great ioye and triumph. chap. 115.
               
               How the Admirall, by reaſon of the Apple that Huon gaue him to eat, he became of the age of Thirtie yeares, whereby he and all the people of Perſia and Media were chriſtened, and of the great honor that the Admirall made vnto Huon. 
                  chap. 116.
               
               Of the complaints that Huon made to the Admirall of Perſia vpon the Emperour of Almaine, and of the ſuccours that the Admirall promiſed to Huon. 
                  chap. 117.
               
               How the Admirall of Perſia aſſembled much people, and he and Huon with all their Armie, tooke the Sea and came to the Port before the Cittie of Angory, whereas they found a great number of Paynims and Sarazins, readie to defend the Port. chap. 118.
               
               How the Admirall and Huon tooke the Port, and fought with the Admirall of Angory, and diſcomfited him and tooke the Cittie, and how afterward Duke Huon went into the Deſerts of Abillant, to ſearch aduentures. chap. 119.
               
               How Huon went ſo long in this Deſert, that hee found Cain, and ſpake with him a long ſeaſon: & how he beguiled Cain & depar
                     ••
                  d. chap. 1
                        •
                     0▪
                  
               
               How Huon departed from Cain, & paſſed the Sea in a Veſſ
                     ••
                   guided by

the Diuell, who beleeued it had beene Cain, and Huon arriued at a Cittie called Colanders, whereas hee found the Admirall of Perſia and Barnard his Cozen, who had layd ſiege to the Citie. Chap. 121.
               
               How Huon of Bourdeaux had great ioy, when he ſaw the Admirall of Perſia before Colanders, where he fought with the Sarazins. chap. 122.
               
               How the Citie of Colanders was taken by the Admirall of Perſia, after he had wonne the Battaile, and of the great ioy that was made vnto Huon, when hee was knowne by the Admirall of Perſia and Barnard his Cozen,. chap. 123.
               
               How the Admirall of Perſia and Huon of Bourdeaux, and all their hoaſt paſſed by Antioch, and by Damas, and came to the Citie of Ieruſalem to the holy Sepulchre, and was nobly receiued by the King of Ieruſalem: and how the Souldans Meſſenger came and defied the Admirall of Perſia. 
                  chap. 124,
               
               Of the anſweare that the Admirall of Perſia made vnto the Souldans Meſſenger, and of the report that he made to his Maiſter. chap. 125.
               
               Howe the Admirall of Perſia ſent for his men that lay at Napelous, and cauſed them to withdraw towards Rames, and howe they departed from Ieruſalem: and how he went to fight with his enemies. chap. 126.
               
               Now ſpeake we of the great Battaile that was in the plaines of Rames, betweene the Souldan of Babylon and the Admirall of Perſia, the which was diſcomfited by the Proweſſe of Huon of Bourdeaux. 
                  Chap. 127.
               
               How the Admirall of Perſia and Media found Huon, whereas he had fought with fortie men Sarazins, and how the Souldan fled to Acres, and how the Admirall of Perſia and Media beſieged him there, and of the ſtrange Viſion that Huon had in the night, chap. 128.
               
               How Huon counſailed the Admirall of Perſia, to rayſe vp his ſiege before Acres for diuers reaſons, and to returne into Perſia. 
                  chap. 129.
               
               How the Admirall of Perſia a greede to the counſaile of Duke Huon, and praiſ
                     •
                  ed his ſaying: and of the faire offer that the Admirall of Perſia 
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   vnto Duke Huon of Burdeaux, 
                  chap. 130.
               
               How Duke Huon of Bourdeaux tooke his leaue of the Admirall and of all the other Lordes of Per
                        •
                     ſa, and went and tooke ſhipping at the Port of Theſ
                        •
                     r
                        •
                     e, and how he arriued at Marſellis, without finding of any ſtrange aduenture. Chap. 131.
               
               How the good Abbot of Cluny layd an ambuſhment of men, betwene Maſcon and Tournous, againſt the Emperour of Almaines Nephewe, who was there ſlaine and all his men, whereof the Emperour was ſo

ſore vexed and troubled, that he tooke the Ducheſſe Eſcleremond out of priſon to haue burnt her, and the three Hundred priſoners of Bourdeaux, to haue hanged them all. chap. 132.
               
               Haw King Oberon ſent two of his Knights of the Fayrie, that is to ſaye Mallabron and Gloriant, to deliuer the faire Eſcleremond, who ſhould haue beene burnt, and the three Hundred Priſoners that ſhoulde haue beene hanged, who were all delyuered by the afore ſayde Knights▪ 
                  chap. 133.
               
               How the Emperour Tirrey made the noble Ladie Eſcleremond to bee well ſerued and apparelled, and all the other Priſoners, but about three weekes after, hee made the Ladie and the priſoners to be put againe into priſon, whereas they were in great miſerie. chap. 134.
               
               How Huon departed from Marſellis, and came to his Vncle the Abbot of Cluny in habit diſguiſed, and vnto him diſcouered himſelfe, wherof the abbot had great ioy, and ſo had Clariet his Daughter. Chap. 135.
               
               How Duke Huon ſhewed to his Vncle the Abbot of Cluny, all the aduentures that he had, ſince he departed from the Citie of Bourdeaux: and how he gaue the Abbot the Apple of youth, whereby the abbot became againe to his beautie, that hee had when hee was but of Thirtie yeares of age. chap. 136.
               
               How Huon of Bourdeaux departed from Cluny, and went to the Citie of Mayence vppon Friday: and how he came nere vnto the Emperours Oratorie. chap. 137.
               
               How Huon did ſo much with the Emperour Tirrey, that he had peace with him, and his wife rendred vnto him, and all his Landes and Signiories: and how the Emperour brought him vnto the abby of Cluny, whereas they found the Abbot in armour, not knowing any thing of the peace that was made. chap. 138.
               
               How the Emperour made good chere vnto Duke Huon of Bourdeaux. 
                  Chap. 139
               
               How the Emperour arriued at Cluny, and how the abbot ſet vpon him, and of the peace that was made, and how the Emperour conueyed Huon to Burdeaux, and rendred vp all his Lands and of the parting of the Emperour, & how Huon made prouiſion to goe to king Oberon. 
                  chap. 140.
               
               How Huon deuiſed with the Ducheſſe his Wife of his departing, and how ſhee would, goe with him: And how hee left his Daughter & Land and Signiories in the keeping of his Vncle the Abbot of Cluny and with Barnard his Cozin, chap. 141.
               
               
                  How Huon tooke leaue of his Daughter, and of the good Abbot his Vncle, & of Barnard his cozin, & entred into the Riuer of Gerone the Duches with him: and of the ſtrange Fortunes that they had. chap. 142.
               
               How Huon loſt all his men, and the Ship brake in peeces: and how he and the Ducheſſe ſaued them ſelues vpon a board, and came and arriued at the Caſtle of the Monkes. chap. 143.
               
               How Duke Huon made ſemblance to haue ſlaine the Monke, holding him faſt with the ſtole, to the entent that hee ſhoulde ſhew vnto him the troth. chap. 144.
               
               How the Monke bare Huon and Eſcleremond ouer hils and Valleys in the ayre, vntill he came into the countrey of King Oberon. 
                  chap. 145.
               
               How Kinge Oberon crowned Huon and Eſcleremond, and gaue them all his Realme and dignitie that he had in the Land of the Fayrie, and made the Peace betweene Huon and King Arthur. 
                  chap. 146.
               
               Of the Ordinances that the noble King Oberon made before he dyed. chap. 147.
               
               How the Kinge of Hungary, and the Kinge of England, and Florence Sonne vnto the King of Aragon, deſired to haue in mariage the faire Ladie Clariet, and how ſhee was betrayed by Brohart, and howe Barnard was drowned, and of the euils that the Traytour Brohart did vnto the Ladie Clariet, and how he dyed at the laſt. chap. 148.
               
               When the Traytour Brohart drowned Barnard, and of theyr aduentures, and how Brohart was ſlaine. chap. 149.
               
               Of the great ſorrow that was made at Blay, by the abbot of Cluny, and by the Princes of the noble City of Bourdeaux, for the faire Ladie Clariet that was ſtollen away: and of the ſorrow that was made, when they ſaw Barnard brought in dead by Six men. And of the puniſhment that was done to the Lineage of the Traytour Brohart. 
                  chap. 150.
               
               How the Ladie Clariet al alone came to the Sea-ſide, whereas arriued the Kinge of Granado in a Ship, who tooke away Clariet, and of other matters. chap. 151.
               
               How the King forbad his Son Florence, that he ſhould not be ſo har
                  
                     ••
                   as to fall acquainted with the faire Ladie Clariet, and how Florence promiſed the King his Father, to deliuer into his hands the King of Na
                     
                        •
                     arre priſoner, in caſe that he would bee content at his returne, that he might haue the new found Damſell, the which the King granted, but he did it not, for he had drowned her, if Peter of Aragon had not bene, who reſcued and ſaued her from the death. chap. 152.
               
               
                  How Florence went to fight with his enemies: and how Sir Peter of Aragon returned towards the Towne, to bring thether Priſoners: and how he reſcued the faire Damſell Clariet from drowning, and how afterward King Garin cauſed the Damſell to be cloſed vp in a Priſon. chap. 153.
               
               How Florence diſcomfited his enemies, and tooke the King of Nauar, and led him into the Towne, and deliuered him to the King his Father: and how Florence deliuered him again quit, becauſe that his Father ſhewed vnto him, that the faire Damſell was drowned. Chap. 154.
               
               How king Garyn put his Sonne Florence into a Tower in priſon: And how the Damſell eſcaped out of the Tower, and ſpake with Florence her Louer at an arch vppon the Garden-ſide, and how they were eſpyed: and how ſhe thought to haue drowned herſelfe. Chap. 155.
               
               How the firſt Watchman found out the Damſell, and ledde her into a great wood there by, and afterward the ſame Watchman deliuered Florence out of priſon, and ſhewed him the place where the Damſell was: and how Florence and Clariet entred into the Sea: and how the king went after his Sonne, and the Watchman taken. Chap. 156.
               
               Of the great debate that was in the Pallaice for the Watchmans ſake, whom the king would haue had to be hanged: and how the king of Nauarre tooke the Citie of Courtoys, & how he departed thence. chap. 157.
               
               Howe the Ship wherein Florence was and his Loue, was taken by the Sarazins, and all their companie taken and ſlaine, and led to the Caſtle of Anfalerne. 
                  Chap. 158.
               
               How Sorbarre the captaine comforted Florence and Clariet: and how there arriued Foure Ships with Chriſtian men by fortune of the Sea, and how Florence was knowne by them. Chap. 159.
               
               How Sorbarre and Florence and their companie went into the Towne, and robbed and ſpoyled it, and ſo tooke the Sea with great ioye and triumph, and the faire Ladie Clariet with them, and tooke their courſe to ſayle towards the Realme of Aragon. 
                  chap. 160.
               
               Howe king Huon King of the Fayrey, ſent twoo of his knightes to the two Kings: And how he appeared between them with a great number and of the Peace that he made between them. chap. 16
                        •
                     .
               
               How Florence and Clariet arriued there with their companie, & came to king Huon: and of the great ioy that was made at their comming, and howe there they were wedded together: and the Peace confirmed betweene the two Kinges. chap. 162.
               
               How king Huon and Queene Eſcleremond departed, and how he gaue

great rich guifts vnto the two Kinges, and to all other Lordes, Ladies & Damſels: And of the ſorrowe that was betweene the Mother and the Daughter, at their departing. chap. 163.
               
               How Queene Clariet was brought to bed of a Daughter, at which deliuerance the Queene dyed: and how when the young Damſell came to the age of Fifteene yeares, the King her Father would haue had her in mariage, wherewith all his Lordes were ſore troubled. chap. 164.
               
               Of the great ſorrowe that the Damſell Ide made, when ſhee heard her Father, how he would haue her in marriage: And how by the meanes of a noble Ladie and Sorbarre ſhee departed at midnight, and went at the aduenture that God would ſend her. Chap. 165.
               
               How Kinge Florence was ſorrowfull, when hee was aduertized of his Daughters departing, who was apparelled like a man: and howe ſhee came into Almaine
                  ▪ and how ſhe found certaine Theeues in a Forreſt, and how ſhe came to Rome to the Emperour like a Squier. chap. 166.
               
               Howe the Damſell Ide was entertained with the Emperour of Roome, and howe the Lady Oliue his Daughter was enamoured of Ide, weening ſhe had beene a man: and how the King of Spaine came before the Cittie of Roome: And how the Damſell Ide tooke the King of Spaine in Battell, and diſcomfited him. Chap 167.
               
               How the Emperour of Rome highly receiued the noble Damſell Ide, and of the honour that was made vnto her: and how the Emperor made her Conſtable of his Empire. And how the King of Spaine was deliuered out of priſon, and made homage to the Emperour. Chap. 168.
               
               How the Emperor gaue his Daughter in marriage to the Damſell Ide, knowing none other but that ſhe had beene a man, and how ſhe was appeached by a Varlet, that heard their deuiſes whiles they were in bed together, whereby the Emperor would haue burnt the Damſell. chap 169.
               
               How God made great miracles for Ide, for he made her to change from the nature of a woman & to become a perfect man, wherof the Emperor and Oliue had great ioy and ſo Ide and Oliue lay together, & ingendred a Son named after Croiſſant: and of the death of the Emperor. chap. 170.
               
               How Kinge Florence ſent twoo Knightes to Rome to the Emperour his Sonne, deſiring him to come & ſee him, and to leaue the Empire of Rome to his Sonne Croiſſant, and to ſet noble men about him to guide him: and alſo to bring with him the Empreſſe, the faire Oliue. 
                  Chap. 171.
               
               How the Emperor Ide and the Empreſſe Oliue gaue good inſtructions to their Son, when they departed from Rome, & how they arriued at Courtoys,
                  
and came to Florence, who with great ioy receiued them as his Children. Chap. 172.
               
               How Croiſſant was ſo bountifull and ſo liberall, that he gaue away all the Treaſure that his Father had left him, ſo that at laſt he had no more to giue, and ſo was conſtrained to goe ſeeke his aduenture, hee and a Varlet alonely. chap. 173.
               
               Howe they of Rome ſent to King Guymart of Puille, to the entent that he ſhould come and gouerne that Countrey, & to be their Lord, becauſe Croiſſant was a child, and had giuen and waſted all that he had: and how Guymart came thether, and was receiued as Lord. chap. 174.
               
               How Croiſſant ariued at Niſe in Prouaunce, and came to the Earle Remon, who was beſieged by the Sarazins: and of the honour that the Earle Remon did to Croiſſant, and howe hee gaue him his banner to beare, and made him Knight: And of the great enuie that the Earles Sonne had at Croiſſant. 
                  Chap. 175.
               
               How Croiſſant did maruailes in the Battaile, by whome the Sarazins were diſcomfited and ſlaine, whereof the Earle Remon and the Duke of Callaber were right ioyfull. Chap 176.
               
               Of the great honour that the Earle Remon did to Croiſſant: and howe hee would haue giuen him his Daughter in marriage, whereof the Earles Son was ſore enuious, and thought the ſame night to haue murdered the noble Croiſſant in his bed, but he fayled, for the noble Croiſſant ſlew him, and afterward fled away as faſt as he might. Chap. 177.
               
               How Croiſſant departed from Niſe with his Sword in his hand: And howe the Earle Remon was ſorrowfull for the death of his Sonne, and chaſed after Croiſſant, but he could not bee found. Chap. 178.
               
               How Croiſſant arriued in the Subburbs of a little Towne called Florencolle, & lodged among Ruffians and Villaynes, and how they fell at ſtrife▪ and how Croiſſant ſlew them and fledde, and was in great danger. And how hee came into the Cittie of Rome, whereas there was no man that would giue him one morſell of bread: and how he went into an old Pallaice and lay vppon a burden of ſtrawe. chap. 179.
               
               Howe the Emperour Guymart ſpake and rebuked the Burgeſſe that ſpake ill of the noble Croiſſant: and howe the Emperour bare me
                     •
                  te and drinke to the place whereas Croiſſant ſlept. And of the maruailous great Treaſure that hee found in a Chamber in the ſayde ould Pallaice▪ and of that which was ſhewed and declared to him by twoo Knightes whome he found there. Chap. 180.
               
               
                  How the two Knightes that kept this Treaſure, ſpake with the Emperour Guymart, and ſhewed him the manner how hee ſhould know Croiſſant. And of the maruaile that Croiſſant had when he awoake, and ſaw the meat and drinke by him. Chap. 181.
               
               The proofe that the Emperor Guymart made to knowe Croiſſant, vnto whome he gaue his faire Daughter in marriage, and deliuered him all his Signiorie and Inheritance, whereof great ioye was made at Rome. 
                  Chap. 182.
               
               How the Emperor Guymart promiſed Croiſſant, that within three daies he ſhould haue his Daughter in mariage: And how the Emperour Guymart led Croiſſant to the olde Pallaice, and ſhewed him the great Treaſure that the two Knightes kept for him. Chap. 183.
               
               Of the great Treaſure that they had, and how Croiſſant wedded the noble Damſell, daughter to King Guymart: and of the Feaſt that was there made. Chap. 184.
               
            
            FINIS.
         
      
      
         
            
            THE ANCIENT, Honorable, and famous Hiſtorie, of Huon of Bourdeaux, a Peere of Fraunce, and Duke of Guyenne. &c.
            
               Chap. I.
               
                  ¶ How the Emperour Charlemaine required his Barons that they would chooſe one among them to gouerne his Empire.
                  
               
               
                  
                     IN the time, by computation called ye yéere of grace, which was Seauen Hundred, Fifty and Six yeares after our Sauiors ſufferings: Charles the Great, more vulgarly knowen by the name of Charlemaine, a right royall, religious and warlike Prince, rained as KING in Fraunce, and Emperour of Roome. Whoſe courſe of time was applyed to many high and heroycall enterpriſes, wherein the fauour of heauen was euermore ſo

aſſiſtant to him, as his owne heart & good hopes crowned him with the honour of many ſuccesfull Victories: enabling all his endeauours with the ayd of diuers noble Princes and Barons, whoſe Chiualrie and right knightly perfourmances, entitled him to the conqueſt of Almaigne, Sclauonia, Spaine, Saxonie, and a great part of Affrike, in all which attempts it is not to be doubted, but both he and they had their handes full of buſie imployments. But let it ſuffice, God was their guide, Religion the cauſe, Honour the obiect, and perpetuall Fame the reward, which both led him and his traine to theſe worthy attempts, and ſtill brought them backe with the due to their valorous Enterpriſes: extending both his and their renowne to all parts of the world, and regiſtring their names in the Kalender of neuer dying memorie.
               AFter that this righte noble Emperour Charlemaine had loſt his deare Nephews Rowland and Oliuer, and diuers other Barons and Knightes in the vnfortunate and dolorous Battaile that was at Rownſeuall, where was ſo great and lamentable a loſſe, as all the twelue Peeres of Fraunce were there ſlaine, except the good Duke Naimes of Bauier: On a day the Noble Emperour held open Court at his chéefe Citie of Paris, where were aſſembled many Dukes, Earles, and Barons, being the Sonnes, Nephewes, and kindred to the Noble Princes before ſlayn and dead in the foreſaid Battaile, by the falſhood and great treaſon doone and contriued by Duke Ganelon, the Noble Emperour being euer after in gréefe and heauineſſe, by reaſon of the great annoyance and diſpleaſure that hée had by his ſaid loſſe, and alſo bicauſe he was growen verie féeble, through the great age that now was ſtollen vppon him. Thus when the King, Princes, & Barons

were there aſſembled, the Emperour called his Lorde▪ before him, and ſeating himſelfe in his royall Chaire of Eſtate, his Barons, Lordes and Knightes likewiſe placed in their ſeuerall degrees, hee called foorth Duke Naymes, and thus began.
               Honourable old Naymes, and all you my Barons hether ſummoned by our royall commaundement, I ſhall not néede to tell yée, bycauſe it is to you all moſt apparant, howe longe I haue gouerned this Kingdome of Fraunce, and likewiſe ſwayed the imperiall Diadem of Roome: In all which time I haue found your duty and ſeruice ſo agréeable, as I cannot but thanke Heauen for ſo gracious good fortune. And now bycauſe I know certainly, yt my life by courſe of nature cannot long endure, for this reaſon principally I haue cauſed you all to bée aſſembled here together, to declare to you my pleaſure and will, wherein I require and heartily deſire you, that yée will counſaile together and take aduice, which of you beſt may and will vndertake the Gouernance of my Realme, for I can no longer beare the trauaile and paine belonging to the ruling thereof, but will from hencefoorth liue the reſidue of mine age in peace and ſeruice of my Lord God: Wherefore as much as I may I deſire you all to aduiſe me which of you all ſhalbe thereunto thought moſt able. Yée all know, that I haue two Sonnes, that is to ſay, Lewes who is too young, and Charlot whome I loue well, and he is of age ſufficient to rule: but his manners and conditions are not méete to haue the gouernance of ſuch two Noble States as the Realme of Fraunce, & the holy Empire of Roome, for yée know well in dayes paſt, by reaſon of his pride, my Realme was likely to haue béen deſtroyed, and I to haue had warre againſt you all, when by his raſhneſſe he ſlewe Baldwin, ſon to the good Duke Ogier the Dane, whereon ſo many miſhaps enſued, that it will neuer be

raced out of remembrance. Therefore ſo long as I liue I will not conſent that he ſhall haue the gouernment, though he be rightful inheritor, & that after me he ought to haue the Signiorie: but inſtantly I entreat your noble opinions, what in this caſe I were beſt to doe.
            
            
               Chap. II.
               
                  ¶ The concluſion and anſweare that the Barons made▪ And what counſaile the diſhonorable Lord Earle Amerie gaue to the King, againſt the twoo Sonnes of Duke Seuin of Bourdeaux: whereby great miſchiefe afterward enſued. And of the good aduice that Duke Naymes gaue to the Emperour.
                  
               
               
                  WHen Duke Naymes, and all the Barons being aſſembled together in a priuate parte of the Pallaice, there they were ſomewhat long together: but at laſt they all concluded, that to Charlot the Kinges eldeſt Sonne appertayned the gouerning of the ſaid Realmes. Then they returned to the King, and ſhewed him the concluſion wherevpon they were agréed, of which the Emperour was right ioyfull. Then he called before him his Son, and ſhewed him many faire reaſons before all his Barons, but therewith ſtepped foorth a fellon Traytour, who had too much ſecrecie with the Emperour, and likewiſe had the gouernance of Charlot the Kinges Sonne, who did nothing but by his direction: this Knight was called Earle Amerie, and was Son to one of the Nephews of the Traytour Ganelon: In this manner then hee ſpake to the King. Right royall Emperour, whence proceeds it, that you are ſo forward in deliuerance of

your Kingdome, to the weake gouerning of Charlot your Sonne? forbeare this haſtineſſe: and firſt for a proofe of his ableneſſe in ſuch a caſe, giue him a Land that ought to be yours, and as yet is not, and where you haue as yet neither fealtie nor ſeruice. This Land is in the poſſeſſion of two proud Boyes, who theſe Seauen yeares paſſed would not ſerue you, nor ſince their Father Duke Seuin dyed, would doe you any obeyſance: the eldeſt is named Huon, and the other Gerard, they kéepe Bourdeaux and all the Land of Aquitaine, & thinke great ſcorne to hold their Lands of you. But my Lord, if you will giue me men and authoritie, I will bringe them as Priſoners into your Pallace, where you may doe your will with them, and then the Land that they hold you may giue to Charlot your Sonne. Amerie (quoth the Emperour) I giue you great thankes that you haue aduertiſed me of this matter: I will that you take of your beſt fréends, and beſide them you ſhall haue of mée thrée Thouſand Knightes, well choſen and prooued men of warre, and I will that you bring to mée the two Sonnes of Duke Seuin, that is to ſay, Huon and Gerard who in their pride ſet nothing by mée.
               When Duke Naymes (beeing there preſent,) heard the words of Amerie, and ſawe how the Emperour conſented to his deſire he ſtept foorth boldly, and beholding Amerie ſtearnly, thus ſpake. My Soueraigne Lord, the ill is great, but the ſinne farre greater, when men of no truth or certaintie are ſo highly liſtned vnto. As for Duke Seuin, is it not well knowne my Lord, what true and honorable ſeruice all his dayes he did you? and can you then bee ſo eaſilye woone to diſenherite his Children? Conſider good my Lord, that the reaſon why as yet they haue not tendered their dutie in your preſence, is nothing elſe but their want of years for ſuch allegiance, and their Mother likewiſe déerely reſpecting

them, is loath to leaue their companie ſo young. And would your Highnes but be aduiſed by me, you ſhould not ſo raſhly depriue them of their Landes: but rather, as beſt becommeth a vertuous Prince, and in ſome regard of their Fathers good Seruice, firſt ſend twoo of your Knightes to the Ducheſſe, & let them in your name commaund her Sonnes perſonall appearance at your Court, in caſe of ſeruice and dutifull homage: which if ſhe or they ſhall refuſe to doe, then may you iuſtly procéede otherwiſe againſt them. But I dare (my Lord) engage mine honour, that ſend them ſhée will, & that onely a Mothers loue and care of her Children, hath béen the reaſon of their abſence all this while.
            
            
               Chap. III.
               
                  ¶ How the Emperour Charlemaine ſent two Knightes to the Ducheſſe of Bourdeaux, to commaund her to ſend her two Sonnes to his Court.
               
               
                  
                     WHEN the Emperour Charles hadde heard Duke Naymes ſpeake, he ſaid: My Lord, I know for certainty yt Duke Seuin hath alwaies ſerued vs truely, and the reaſons that you haue ſhewed are iuſt: Therefore I graunt that it ſhall bée as you haue aduiſed. My Lord, (quoth the Duke) I moſt humbly thanke your grace. Then incontinent the king ſent for two knights, and gaue them in charge to go to Bourdeaux to doe his Meſſuage to the Ducheſſe, and to the Sonnes of Duke 
                     〈◊〉
                   the which they did & ſo departed from Paris, without reſting paſt one night in a place, vntill they arriued at Bourdeaux, & then incontinent they went to the Pallace, whereas they found the Ducheſſe, who was as

then but newly ryſen from dinner: and when ſhe was aduertiſed of their comming, ſhée came in haſt to méete them, accompanied with Huon her Sonne who was by her, and Gerard came after with a Sparrow-hawke on his fiſt. When the Meſſengers ſaw the Ducheſſe & her two goodly Sonnes, they knéeled downe, and ſaluted both her, and her two Sonnes from King Charlemaine, ſaying: Ladie, to you we be ſent from our Emperour Charles, who by vs ſendeth vnto you his ſalutations of honour and amitie. When the Noble Ladie vnderſtood that they were Meſſengers ſent from ye great Emperour Charles, ſhe aroſe and embraced them, and ſayd, that they were right welcome vnto her. Madame, (quoth they) our Emperour hath ſent vs vnto you, and commaundeth you to ſend your twoo Sonnes to ſerue him in his Court, for there are verie few in his Realme, but they are come to his ſeruice, except your Sonnes. And Ladie, ſince you know right well, that the Landes you enioy appertaining to your Sonnes, is holden of the Emperour Charles, by reaſon of his royall prerogatiue in Fraunce, great maruaile is in many that you haue not ſent them ere this time to doe him ſeruice, as other Dukes and Princes in like caſe haue done. In this reſpect he commaundeth you, both for your own good & conſeruation of their Landes, that you ſend them vnto him: or if you doe not, know then for certaine, that he will take frō you thoſe Lands you hould, & giue them to the Prince Charlot his Sonne: This is the ſumme of our Meſſuage, & wée attend your anſweare.
            
            
               Chap. IIII.
               
                  ¶ The anſweare that the Ducheſſe of Bourdeaux made to the Emperours Meſſengers.
                  
               
               
                  
                  
                     WHen the good Lady had well vnderſtood the Meſſengers, ſhe anſwered them gently in this maner. My Lordes and honourable Freendes, the reaſon why I haue not ſent my Sons to the Court before this time, to ſerue my Lord the King as dutie required, was in regarde of their tender yeares, and ſome reſpect of loue to Duke Seuin their Father, and bycauſe I knew certainlye, that my rightfull Lord the Emperour Charlemaine loued alwayes Duke Seuin, I neuer feared that he would take diſpleaſure with his Children, theſe thinges haue béene the principall cauſe why I haue not ſent them all this while to ſerue the King. Therefore let my entreats preuaile ſo much with you, as to be a meanes to the Emperour and al ye other Barons, to hold me and my Children excuſed in this caſe, for the fault is onelie mine, & not in them. Then Huon ſtept foorth before his mother and ſayd, Madame if it had béene your pleaſure, you might haue ſent vs before this time: that is true (quoth Gerardine) for wee are ould ynough to haue our knighthood. The Ladie heheld her two Sonnes, and wéeping ſaid to the Meſſengers: Sirs, you may returne to the King, howbeit you ſhall reſt you this night in my houſe and to morowe depart at your pleaſure, and you ſhall recommend me and my Sonnes to the Kings good grace, and to the other Barons and Knightes, and among other ſalute Duke Naymes, who is néere kinſman to my Sonnes, and deſire him for the loue of Duke Seuin, to ſtand a continuall fréend vnto them. Madame (quoth the Meſſengers) haue you no doubt of that, for Duke Naymes is a noble Man and a true Knight, nor will he at any time be in place where any ill opinion ſhal paſſe againſt them. Then the Ducheſſe commaunded her Sonnes,

that they ſhould make ye Kings Meſſengers good chéere, and to bring them into their Chamber to reſt them, the which they did, and were ſerued and feaſted as appertained to their woorth. Then the next morning they returned to the Pallace, whereas they found the Ducheſſe and her two Sonnes, and they humbly ſaluted the Ladie. When the Ducheſſe ſawe them, ſhe called Huon and Gerardin and ſaid: My Sonnes, here in the preſence of theſe two Knightes, I ſay that at Eaſter you ſhall go to our Soueraigne Lord the Emperour Charlemaine, and when you bée in the Court, ſerue your Soueraigne Lord well and truely as ſubiects ought to doe, bée diligent at all times to ſerue him faithfully, & kéepe companie with Noble men, ſuch as you ſée to be of good & vertuous condicions, be not in place where ill woords be ſpoken, or ill counſalie giuen, fly from the companie of them that loue not honour and troth, open not your eares to héere Lyers, or falſe Reporters, or Flatteres, haunt often the Church, and giue largly for Gods ſake, be liberall and courteous, and giue to poore Knights, fly the companie of Ianglers, and all goodneſſe ſhall follow thereby. I will there be giuen to each of theſe Knights a Courſer and a rich Gowne, as it appertaineth to the Meſſengers of ſo noble an Emperour as Charlemaine is, and alſo each of them to haue a hundred Florents. Madame, (quoth Huon) your pleaſure ſhalbe accompliſhed: then the two Sonnes cauſed to be brought before the Pallace two goodly Horſes, and preſented them to the two Knights, and gaue each of them a rich Gowne, and a hundred Florents. Whereof the Meſſengers were ioyfull and thanked the Ducheſſe and her two Sonnes, & ſaid that their courteſie ſhould be remembred in time to come, howbeit they knew well it was done for the honour of the King: then they tooke leaue of the Ducheſſe and of her two Sonnes, and ſo departed, and road without

let vntill they came to Paris, whereas they found the Emperour in his Pallace ſitting among his Barons: the King perceiued them, and incontinent called them to his preſence, & ere they had leaſure to ſpeake, the Kinge had them welcome home, and demanded of them if they had béen at Bourdeaux, and ſpoken with the Ducheſſe & the two Sonnes of Duke Seuin, & whether they would come and ſerue him in his Court or not? Dread Lord (quoth they) we haue béen at Bourdeaux, and done your meſſage to the Ducheſſe, who right humbly receiued vs, and gaue vs gentle entertainment: when ſhée had heard vs ſpeake, and knewe that wée were your Meſſengers, ſhée made vs the beſt chéere that ſhée could deuiſe, and ſayd that the cauſe why ſhée had not ſent her Sonnes to your Court before this time, was by reaſon of their young age, and ſhée humbly requireth your grace, to hold both her and her two Sonnes excuſed, and that at this next Eaſter ſhée will ſend them to your Court. As for her Sonnes, truſt mée my Lord, they are two ſuch louely Gentlemen, as wée tooke great delight in beholding them, eſpecially Huon the eldeſt, he is ſo fayre and ſo well fourmed, that nature cannot amend him. Alſo my Lord, for the loue of you, ſhée hath giuen each of vs a goodly Horſe, and a rich Gowne, and a hundred Florents of gould. My Lord, the goodneſſe, the valour, and the courteſie that is in the Ducheſſe, and in her Sonnes cannot be recounted: and on their behalfe are we to entreat your Maieſtie, to retaine them alwayes in your fauour and good grace, and to pardon the fault of their long abſence.
            
            
               Chap. V.
               
                  
                  ¶ How the Emperour was content with the report of the two Knights, and how the Traytour Earle Amerie went and complayned to Charlot the Kings Sonne.
               
               
                  
                     WHen the Emperour had heard the Meſſengers ſpeake, hée was right ioyfull and ſaid: I haue alwayes heard ſay, yt a good Trée bringeth foorth good fruit, I ſpeake it in the behalfe of Duke Seuin, who in his time was a valiant & true Knight, and by that I ſée that ye twoo Children reſemble their good Father. I perceiue they haue receiued my Meſſengers right honourably, and with great reuerence haue giuen thē no meane gifts, which ſhalbe vnto them auailable in time to come, for they ſhall no ſooner be come into my Court: but in deſpight of any that ſhall ſpeake againſt them, I will doe for them in ſuch wiſe, that it ſhall bée an example to all other to doe well, for I will make them (for loue I bare to their Father, of my priuie Counſaile) and turning then to olde Duke Naymes, ſayd: My Lord, alwayes your kindred haue béen good and true, and therfore I will, that Amerie bee baniſhed from my Court, for hée nor euer any of his lineage, gaue as yet any good counſaile. My Lord, (quoth the Duke) I knew wel the long abſence of Duke Seuins Sonnes, was for none other cauſe but by reaſon of their youth. When Earle Amerie heard the King ſpeake, and ſawe beſide howe hée was offended againſt him, hée was ſorrowfull, and ſo departed ſecretly from the Court, and ſware that he would prouide for the two Sonnes of Duke Seuin ſuch a traine, as ſhould coſt both their liues, and hazard the heauineſſe and trouble of all Fraunce beſide. So hee went to his lodging ſorrowfull and in great diſpleaſure, and then he imagined and ſtudied

on the matter, and how to bring about his Enterprize, then he departed from his lodging, and went vnto Charlot the Kinges Son, with whome he was right priuie, hée found him ſitting on a rich bed, communing with a young Knight, then Amerie ſhewing a verie ſad countenance, the teares in his eyes and trecherie in his heart, knéeling downe before Charlot, who had of him great pitie to ſée him in that caſe: the Prince tooke him vp, and demaunded wherefore he made that ſorrow, and whether any man had diſpleaſed him. My Lord, (quoth Amerie) my gréefe is not without great cauſe, for ye two Sonnes of Duke Seuin of Bourdeaux ſhall come to the Court, and (as I haue heard ſay) the King hath promiſed that at their comming they ſhall bée made of his priuie councell, ſo that none other about the King but they, ſhall haue any honour or reckoning made of them. And aſſure your ſelfe my Lord, that if the State be thus aduaunced: they that now are greateſt about his Maieſtie, ſhall then ſcarce haue a looke, or any countenance at all. So that within ſhort while, the beſt partes in your Fathers Kingdome will they be Lords of, and you your ſelfe if you ſuffer this, will hold no grace or fauour with the Emperour. Therefore my Lord I require you to helpe me now in this buſineſſe, for in time paſt, Duke Seuin their Father by great wrong and treaſon, tooke from me a ſtrong Caſtle of mine owne, and I neuer dyd him diſpleaſure, therefore you ought to ayd me in this ſerious matter, for I am of your linage, deriued of the Noble Quéene your Mother.
               When Charlot had well vnderſtood Earle Amerie, hée demaunded in what manner he might ayd him. Sir, (quoth he) I will ſhew you, I ſhall aſſemble the beſt of my linage, and you ſhall let me haue of yours thréeſcore Knights well armed, and I ſhall lye in the way to méete with the two Boyes, and I ſhall lay the ambuſhment

in a little wood, a league from Montleherry on the way to Orleance, by ye which way they muſt néeds come, & there we ſhall ſet on them and ſlay them, ſo that none ſhall dare to ſpeake thereof, and if it be knowne after, who dare ſpeake againſt you, or weare any healme in féeld againſt you? Sir (quoth Charlot) qualifie and appeaſe your ſorow, for I ſhall neuer haue ioy in my heart vntill I be reuenged of thoſe two Boyes, goe and make readie your men, and I ſhall prepare mine, and I will goe my ſelfe with you, the ſooner to make an end of this buſineſſe. When Amerie heard Charlot ſo liberally to offer himſelfe to goe in his ayd: he thanked him, and embraced his Leg, and Sicophant-like would haue kiſſed his Shooe, but Charlot would not ſuffer him: but tooke him vp, and ſaid. Sir haſt you, and now be diligent, that this buſineſſe may come to a good end. Amerie departed from Charlot right ioyfull, and at the day appointed he ceaſed not day, nor night, to aſſemble his men and his néereſt fréends, and in the Euening before he came to Charlot, who was as then alſo readie with his men, and as ſecretly as they might they departed about the houre of midnight out of Paris all armed, and they ſtayed not vntill they came to the place appointed, to tarie the comming of the two Sonnes of Duke Seuin. Now I will leaue to ſpeake of them, and returne to the twoo Sonnes of Duke Seuin, Huon, and Gerardin.
               
            
            
               Chap. VI.
               
                  ¶ How the two Sonnes of Duke Seuin of Bourdeaux tooke leaue of the Ducheſſe their Mother, and howe in their way they ouer-tooke the good Abbot of Cluny their Vncle, going towards Paris to the Emperour Charlemaine.
                  
               
               
                  
                  
                     YOu haue heard here before how ye Kings Meſſengers departed frō 
                  Bourdeaux, then the two Sons made them readie to goe to the Court, richly apparelled, and well fourniſhed of euerie thing néedfull, aſwell of gold and ſiluer and other apparell of ſilke as to their ſtate appertained: then there aſſembled the Barons of ye Countrey, to whom they recommended their Lands and Signiories, and did chooſe out ten Knights and foure Councellors to ride with them, to aid and to gouerne their buſineſſe. Then they ſent for the prouoſt of Gerone called Sir Guyre, to whom they recommended all the affaires of Iuſtice. Then when Huon and his Brother had choſen them that ſhould goe in their companie: they tooke their leaue of the Ducheſſe their Mother, and of the Barons of ye Countrey, who ſore did wéepe bycauſe of their departure, for the which they had good occaſion ſo to do, and more if they had knowne the hapleſſe aduenture, that afterward befell them on the way. Or had the good Ducheſſe but dreamed thereof: ſhee would neuer haue ſuffered them to departe from her, for after there fell ſuch miſchéefe, that it is a lamentable thing to recount it. Thus the twoo Brethren departed and kiſſed their Mother ſore wéeping. Then they tooke their Horſes and their companie, and in paſſing by the Stréets of the Towne, the people made great ſorrow for their departing, and ſore wéeping, prayed to God to be their guide and conduct. The wéepings and lamentations were ſo extreame, that the twoo Brethren could not haue ſo firme courage: but that they gaue many a ſore ſigh at the departing out of the Towne, and when they had ridden a certaine ſpace, and that their ſorrow was ſomewhat appeaſed, then Huon called his Brother Gerard & ſayd:

Brother we go to the Court to ſerue the King, wherefore wee haue cauſe to be ioyfull: therefore let vs twoo ſing a ſong to refreſh vs. Brother (quoth Gerard) my heart is not very ioyfull, to ſing or make any ſport at all, for this night I dreamed a maruailous dreame, mée thought thrée Leopardes aſſayled mée, and drewe my heart out of my bodie: but me thought you eſaped ſafe and ſound, and returned backe. Wherefore deare Brother, if ſo it be your pleaſure, to withſtand my dreame, which makes me dread our iourney to be dangerous: might I preuaile with you, we would ride backe againe to Bourdeaux to our Mother, who will bée ioyfull of our returne. Brother (quoth Huon) and God will, we ſhall not returne for feare of a dreame, it ſhould be foreuer to our reproach and ſhame, I will not returne to Bourdeaux vntill I haue ſéene the King. Therefore ſwéet Brother diſmay you not, but rather make good chéere, our Lord Ieſus Chriſt ſhall guide and conduct vs in ſauegard. Thus theſe two Brethren road night and day, ſo long vntill they perceiued before them ye Abbot of Cluny with a thirtie Horſe in his companie, as he was going to the Kinges Court.
               When Huon perceiued that companie, hee called his Brother Gerardin and ſaid: Loe yonder I ſée men of religion holding the way to Paris, and you knowe well when wee departed from the Ducheſſe our mother▪ ſhée charged vs that we ſhould alwaies company with good people, therefore it is good that we make haſt to ouertake them. Brother quoth Gerardin, your pleaſure he fulfilled, ſo they rode ſo long that they ouertooke the Abbot who regarded on the right ſide, and ſawe the two Brethren comming to ouertake him. Then hée ſteede ſtill and ſaw Huon, who came riding on before, Huon ſaluted him humbly, and the Abbot in like manner to him, and demaunded whether he r
                     •
                  ad ſo haſtily, & from

whence he came, and what he was, and who was his Father. Sir (quoth Huon) ſince it is your pleaſure to know, Duke Seuin of Bourdeaux was our Father, it is Seauen yeares ſince he departed this life. And Sir behold héere my Brother, who is younger then I, and we are going to noble King Charlemaines Court, to reléeue of him our Lands and Countrey, for he hath ſent for vs by two noble Knights, and Sir we are in doubt of ſome trouble by ye way: when the good Abbot vnderſtoode that they were Sonnes to Duke Seuin, he was right ioyfull, and in token of true amitie he embraced them one afte
                     •
                   another, and ſaid: Deare fréends haue no doubt, for by the grace of Ieſus Chriſt I ſhall conducte you ſafely to Paris, for Duke Seuin your Father was my Coozen Germaine, therefore I am bound to ayd you, and know for troth, that I am ſworne of the great councell with King Charlemaine, and if there be any that will mooue or ſtirr
                     •
                   againſt you, I ſhall ayd you to my power, wherefore you may ride ſurely in my companie without any doubt. Sir (quoth Huon) I thanke you: thus they road talking with the Abbot their kinſman, and that night they came to Montleherry. Then the next daye they aroſe béetimes and heard Maſſe, and afterward tooke their Horſes, and they were in all a foureſcore Horſes, & they road ſo long, vntil they came to a little wood-ſide, whereas Charlot and Earle Amerie lay cloſely ambuſhed, there they eſpyed Huon & Gerard riding before, whereof they were ioyfull. Then Amerie ſaid to Charlot: Sir, now is the time come, to bee reuenged of the dammage that Duke Seuin did to mée, yonder I ſée his twoo Sonnes comming, if they bée not incontinent ſlayne by vs, wée are not worthy to haue any Land or life: And Sir, by their death you ſhall be Lord of Bourdeaux, and of all the Duchy of Aquitaine.
               
            
            
               
               Chap. VII.
               
                  ¶ How by the councell of Earle Amerie they ran firſte at Gerardin Brother to Huon, and bare him to the earth, and ſore wounded him, whereof Huon was right ſorowfull.
               
               
                  
                     WHen that Charlot vnderſtood Earle Amerie, he ſtretched him in his ſtirrops, and tooke a ſpeare with a ſharpe head, and yſſued alone out of the woode: when Amerie ſawe that Charlot went out of the wood alone, he drew a little out of the way, and ſayd to his men: ſuffer Charlot alone, there néed none goe to ayd him. This ſaid the falſe Traytour, bicauſe he deſired nothing elſe: but that one of the Sonnes of Duke Seuin might ſlay Charlot, and ſo himſelfe detecting them of the murder, by this meanes he might compaſſe his damnable intent. Charlot came againſt theſe twoo Brethren, the Abbot of Cluny ſaw Charlot comming all armed, and ſaw in the wood a great number of armed men more, then hee ſtood ſtill, and called Huon and Gerard, and ſaid: Déere Nephewes, I perceiue in yonder wood a Knight all armed, and the wood full of horſemen, I cannot tell what they meane. Haue you done any wrong to any man? if you haue done, or hold any thing that is not your owne, ſtep foorth and offer him reaſon, and promiſe to make amendes. Sir, (quoth Huon) I know no man liuing that I or my Brother haue done vnto him any diſpleaſure, nor we know not that any creature doth hate vs. Then Huon ſaid to his brother: Brother ride on before, and méete with yonder Knight, & demaund what is his pleaſure. Gerard road foorth & met with Charlot, and demaunded what his pleaſure was to haue, or whether he was kéeper of that paſſage or not, and demaunded any tribute or not, if he

did he was readie to pay it. Charlot anſweared him fiercely and ſaid: What art thou? Gerard anſweared and ſayd: Sir, I am of the Citie of Bourdeaux, and Son to Duke Seuin, whome God pardon, and héere after commeth Huon mine elder Brother, and we are going to Paris to the Kings Court, to reléeue our Lands and our Fées, and to ſerue him, and if there be any that wil any thing with vs, let him come to Paris and we ſhall doe him reaſon. Hold thy tongue, (quoth Charlot) whether thou wilt or not I will haue reaſon for ſome wrongs done me by thy Father Duke Seuin, for he tooke thrée of my Caſtles from me, and I could neuer know the reaſon thereof. But now ſince thou art héere, I will be reuenged of the wrong that thy Father did to me, for as long as thou and thy Brother be aliue, I ſhall neuer haue ioy in my heart: therefore ſtand on thy ground, for before it bee night I ſhall make thy life depart from thy bodie. Sir, (quoth Gerard) haue pitie of me, you may ſée I am but naked without armour. It ſhall bée greatly to your ſhame and reproach, if I be thus ſlaine by you, it neuer commeth of a gentle courage, or a Knight to aſſaile any perſon without armour or weapon: howbeit Sir I crie you mercie, well you ſée that I haue neither Sword, Shéeld, nor Speare, to defend mée withall, you may ſée yonder comming my elder Brother, who ſhall be readie to make you amends if any harme hath béen done vnto you. Peace, quoth Charlot) there is as now nothing ſo deare vnto me, as can mooue mée contrarie But that ſhamfully I ſhall put thée to death, beware of mée. Gerard who was but young, was in great feare, and called vpon our Lord God, and turned his Horſe to come againe to his Brother. But Charlot who was in his deſperate moode, 
                     •
                  ouched his Speare, ran after Gerard, and ſtrooke him on the ſide with ſuch force, that the Speare ran through part of his bodie, and ſo bare him to the earth, weening he had béen ſlaine: howbeit the ſtroake was not mortall, although inſooth verie dangerous, for he was ſo ſore 
                     •
                  urt, that he could not remooue for paine that he felt. The

good Abbot of Cluny beheld Gerard in ſuch ſort borne to the ground, (ouercome with great gréefe) hée ſaid vnto Huon: Ah Coozen, I ſée yonder your Brother Gerard ſlaine, the fight whereof ſlayeth my poore heart. Alas Sir, (quoth Huon) for Gods ſake councell me in this heauie caſe, what will the Ducheſſe our Mother ſay, when ſhe knoweth that my Brother is ſlaine, who ſo louingly hath nouriſhed vs both. Ah my deare Brother Gerard, nowe I ſée well your dreame is too true. Alas that I had beléeued it, for if I had, this had not happened. Ah Sir, (quoth Huon) to the Abbot, I deſire you to aſſiſt mée, for if I ſhould likewiſe be ſlaine, yet I will goe and demaund of yonder Knight, for what occaſion he hath ſlaine my Brother, nor I ſhall neuer returne vntill I haue ſlaine him, or he mée. Ah faire Nephew, (quoth the Abbot,) beware what you doe, haue no truſt to bée ſuccoured by me, for you know well in this caſe, that I cannot ayd you, I am a Prieſt, and therefore may not bée where any man is ſlaine. Sir, (quoth Huon) of ſuch companie as yours is, we might well forbeare. Then Huon beheld heauily the Ten Knights that came with him from Bourdeaux, and ſaid: Sirs, you that are come hether with mée, & haue béen nouriſhed in my houſe: how ſay you, will you ayd mée to reuenge the death of my Brother, and to ſuccour me againſt theſe falſe murderers that hath laine in waite & ſlaine my Brother Gerard? Sir, (quoth they) were we ſure to dye in the quarell, yet we ſhould ayd and ſuccour you, therefore goe forth and haue no doubt: and then they road forth with ſuch ſmall defence as they had. Then Huon ſpurred foorth his Horſe with ſuch fierceneſſe, that he made the earth to tremble vnder him, and his Knights followed him with hardy courage, determining to doe valiantly. When the good Abbot ſaw his Nephew depart and his companie, hée had great pitie on him, and prayed our Lord God to defend them from death. And the Abbot with his companie followed ſoftly after Huon to ſée what end the matter ſhoulde came vnto. Huon road ſo long vntill he came whereas his

Brother lay ſore wounded. Then he cryed aloud: my right deare Brother, if there be any life in your bodie anſwere me and ſhew me how you féele your ſelfe? Brother (quoth Gerard) I am ſore wounded, I cannot tell if I may ſcape aliue, thinke on your ſelfe, it is no loſſe of mée, fly you away, yonder you may ſée how the wood is full of armed men, and they 
                     〈◊〉
                   for nothing but to ſlay you as they haue done me.
            
            
               Chap. VIII.
               
                  ¶ How Huon of Bourdeaux was ſorrowfull when he ſaw his Brother Gerard ſo ſore wounded, and how he ſlew Charlot: and howe he came before the King at Paris and appeached him of treaſon.
               
               
                  
                     WHen Huon heard his Brother, he was verie ſorrowfull, & ſaid: that he had rather dye then depart without reuenging of him, and God wil I ſhall not depart till I haue ſlayn him that hath brought you into this perill: then he ſpurred his Horſe and followed after Charlot, who was returning to the wood to his company: but when Charlot perceiued how Huon followed him, he turned his Horſe and beheld him fiercely. Then Huon cried with a hye voyce, and ſaid: Villaine, what art thou that haſt ſlaine my Brother, where wert thou borne? Charlot anſweared and ſayd: I was borne in Almaine, and I am Sonne to Duke Thy
                        •
                     rey: Huon beléeued he had ſayd troth, for Charlot had a diſguiſed Shéeld, becauſe he would not bée knowne. Ah, (quoth Huon) God giue thée ſhame for ye fact, why haſt thou ſlaine my Brother? Then Charlot anſwered boldly and ſayd, thy Father Duke Seuin tooke from me thrée Caſtles and would neuer doe my right: therefore I haue ſlayne thy Brother, and in likwiſe ſo ſhall I thée.
               
                  Then Huon in great rage ſaid, falſe, vntrue Knight and murderer, before it be night I ſhall quittance this wrong vppon thine owne head. Then Charlot ſaid, beware thée of me, for I defie thée. Huon who had no armour to defend him, tooke his Cloake of ſcarlet and wrapped it about his arme, and drew his Sword, and ſpurred his horſe, & came againſt Charlot with his Sword in his hand, and Charlot on the other part came againſt him with his Speare in the reſt, and ſtrooke Huon about the right arme, ſo that the ſtroake paſſed through the doubleneſſe of his Cloake, and through his Gowne and Shert, and myſt his fleſh. Thus Huon eſcaped that ſtroake and thanked God thereof: then he lifted vp his ſword with both his handes, and let the bridell of his horſe go, and ſo with all his might & vertue, he ſtroke Charlot on the healme in ſuch wiſe, that the cirkle nor coft of ſtéele could not defend him: but that ye ſword went into his brayn, and ſo he fell to the earth and neuer aroſe after: thus Charlot was ſlayne miſerably. Then the Traytour Amerie being in the wood, perceiued well how Charlot was ſlayne, whereof he thanked God and ſaid, Charlot is dead God bée thanked, for by that ſtroake I ſhall bring Fraunce into ſuch a trouble, that I ſhall attaine to all my deſires. Then Huon ſéeing Gharlot dead, returned to Gerard his Brother lying ſtill on the earth, brought him Charlots horſe, and demaunded if he might ryde or not. Brother, (quoth Gerard) I thinke yes, if my wounde were bounde faſt I would aſſay.
               Then Huon alighted, and tooke a péece of his ſheart, and therewith bound his brothers wound, & then Huons knights came vnto him, and holpe to ſet Gerard vpon his horſe: but for the paine that he ſuffered he ſwounded twice, then when he came againe to himſelfe, they ſet him vpon an amblinge Palfray, and a Knight behind him to ſuſtaine him vp right. Then he ſayd vnto Huon: Brother I deſire you let vs depart from hence, without going any further forward, rather let vs returne to Bourdeaux to the Ducheſſe our Mother, for

I doubt if we goe any further, that ſome great ill ſhall come vnto vs: I promiſe you if we be perceiued by them that bée in the wood, and that they knowe that you haue ſlayne him that hurt me: I feare me they will ſlay vs all. Brother, (quoth Huon,) by the grace of God I ſhall not returne for feare of death, vntill I haue ſéene the King to appeach him of treaſon, when vnder his conduct and commandement we be thus betrayed, and watched by the way to murder vs. Brother, (quoth Gerard) as your pleaſure is, ſo bée it. Then they road foorth the way to Paris faire and eaſily, bycauſe of Gerard who was ſore hurt. Then the Knightes that were ambuſhed in the wood, ſaid to ſir Amerie: Sir, what ſhall we doe? ſée Charlot is ſlaine and lyeth in the playne, and if we ſhall goe after them that hath done this déede, it ſhall bée ill done of vs if they eſcape away aliue. Then ſir Amerie anſweared and ſaid: Let them goe, God curſe them, let vs follow them a farre off, vntill they come to Paris, and let vs 
                     •
                  arie with vs the bodie of Charlot, and bring it to the King, and there you ſhall ſee what I ſhall ſay, and if you will agrée to beare witneſſe of that I ſhall ſay to the King, I will make you all ſo rich that yée ſhall neuer be poore after. They anſweared, they would fulfill his pleaſure, then they went out of the wood, and came there as Charlot lay dead, then they tooke him vp and layd him before Earle Amerie on his horſe necke, and ſo road foorth: but miſchéefe and miſhap followe them, for as much as in them lay, they laboured to haue Huon iudged to death. Thus they road the hye way to Paris, and the Abbot of Cluny, who was ridden on before, looked behind him, and ſawe the two Brethren comming after him, then he taried, and demaunded of Huon what aduenture hée had found. Sir, (quoth he) I haue ſlayne him that hath ſore hurt my Brother, where he thought to haue ſlaine me, but thanked be God. I haue left him dead in the place. Faire Nephew (quoth the Abbot) I am ſorrie thereof, but ſéeing it is done, if any hurt come thereby, and that you be accuſed before the King, I ſhall ayd you with all my power. Sir,

(quoth Huon) of that I thanke you, then Huon looked behind him, and ſaw where Earle Amerie with all his power came faire & eaſily after him, therewith his heart trembled. Then he ſaid vnto the Abbot: Sir, what ſhall I doe? yonder I ſée them approach that deſire my death, they bée the ſame that lay in the wood watching for vs. Faire Nephew (quoth the Abbot) haue no doubt, for they that come after vs come but a ſoft pace, they make no ſemblance to ouertake you, let vs ride on a good pace, we ſhal be anone at Paris, it is now but two miles thether. Then they road on, and reſted not vntill they came to the Pallaice, and béeing there alighted, Huon went vp, holding his Brother by the one hand, and the Abbot by the other hand. There they ſaw the King ſitting among his Barons, then Huon ſaluted Duke Naymes and all the other Barons and ſaid: Health and faire hap to all theſe noble Lords, but ſhame and diſhonour to my Lord the King, for there was neuer heard of a fowler treaſon, then the King hath practiſed againſt vs, ſéeing that by his Meſſengers & his Letters Patents he hath ſent for vs to doe him ſeruice, the which commaundement we haue in all dutie obayed as to our Soueraigne Lord, but by falſe treaſon waight hath béen layd ſecretly for vs, and a cloſe ambuſh to haue murdered vs by the way, firſt they aſſayled my brother héere preſent, & by them he was brought into ſuch danger, that they left him for dead, and afterward they ſet vpon me to haue ſlayne mée, but by the ayd of our Lord Ieſus Chriſt, and with my Sword I ſo defended me, that he that thought to haue ſlayne vs, I haue ſlayne him.
            
            
               
               Chap. IX.
               
                  ¶ How the King was ſore diſpleaſed with Huon, bycauſe hee had appeached him of treaſon: and how Huon ſhewed all the manner why he ſlewe the Knight that wounded his Brother.
               
               
                  
                     WHEN the King had heard Huon, he ſaid: Knight beware, and thinke well what thou haſt ſayd héere before all my Barons, for neuer in all my life did I either act, or giue my conſent to any treaſon. But by the faith that I owe vnto my maker, and by my beard, if it be ſo that thou canſt not prooue this that thou layeſt to my charge: I ſhall cauſe both thée and thy Brother to dye an euill death. When Huon heard the King how hée tooke his words, he ſtept foorth and ſayd: Great King, behold héere my Brother, who by thy meanes is ſore hurt and in ieopardie of his life: And ſo did take off his Brothers Gowne and his Dublet to his ſhyrt, and he did open the great wound, ſo that the bloud ran out aboundantly, euen that it enforced Gerardin to fall in a ſwound before the King and his Barons, through the great anguiſhe that he felt: whereof the Emperour tooke ſuch compaſſion, that he could not chooſe but much bemone him. And therefore immediatly ſent for his Surgeons, cauſing thē to ſearch his wounds, demaunding if they could ſaue his life or no, and when they had thorowly ſearched the wound, they ſaid: Sir, by the help of God within this moneth he ſhalbe whole and ſound. The King was glad of that anſweare, and beholding Huon ſaid: Since thou layeſt this déed to my charge, thou muſt thinke, that thou haſt touched the royall reputation of a King, and that in ſuch ſort, as verie hardly may the condition of Maieſtie

endure it. But by my Countreys honour, and by the Crowne that I iuſtly beare vpon my head, if I may knowe who hath done this heynous offence: I ſhall doe both thy Brother and thée ſuch right and iuſtice, as it ſhall remaine for a perpetuall memorie of due honour, and that your ſelues ſhall report, you haue no cauſe to complaine. My Lord, anſweared Huon, I humbly thanke you, for through obaying your commaundement this miſchéefe is fallen vnto vs. I cannot thinke nor know that any time of our life eyther I or my Brother did euer wrong or treſpaſſe to any creature: but thus (by your Kingly pacience) the caſe happened. After we departed from Bourdeaux, wée found no aduenture, but when we came within a League of Montleherry, wee met with our Vnckle the Abbot of Cluny, and ſo fell in companie with him, to conduct vs to the Court, and ſo we road together vntill we came on this ſide Montleherry, then we ſawe a little wood, and by the brightneſſe of the Sonne we ſaw the healmes, and ſpeares, and ſhéelds of them that were ambuſhed in the wood, and that one came out of the wood all armed his ſpeare in his hand, and ſhéeld about his necke, and hée came a ſoft pace towards vs, then all we ſtood ſtill, and ſent my brother to the knight to know whether they were Spies or men to kéepe the paſſage, to the entent, that if they demanded any Tribute, they ſhould haue right of vs, if they would haue any of vs. When my brother came néere to ye Knight, he demaunded what we were, and my brother ſaid how we were the Children of the Duke of Bourdeaux, and were comming by your commaundement to your Court to reléeue our Lands and Fées of your grace: then the Knight ſayd, how we were the ſame perſons that he ſought for, and ſayd how that a Seauen yeares paſſed, Duke Seuin our Father had taken from him thrée Caſtles, the which was neuer ſo: then my brother offered him, that if he would come to Paris before you and your Barons, he ſhould haue right done to him if he had any wrong done to him. Then the Knighte anſweared, that he would not doe ſoe, and therewith ſuddainly couched

his ſpeare, and ſtroake my brother as you ſée, he béeing vnarmed, ſo that he fell to the earth, wéening he had béen ſlain, and then he road againe faire and eaſily toward the wood. When I ſaw my brother borne to the earth, I had ſuch ſorrow at my heart, that I could tarie no longer to be auenged, then I demaunded of mine Vnckle if he would ayd me, he
                     •
                   anſweared and ſaid no, bycauſe he was a Prieſt, ſo hee and all his Monkes departed and left me alone, then I tooke the Ten Knightes that came with me out of my Countrey, and ſo I road as faſt as I could, to the entent that he ſhould not eſcape that had ſo wounded my brother, and aſſoone as hee ſaw that I followed him, he returned againſt me, then I demaunded of him what he was, he ſaid, he appertained vnto Duke Terrey of Arden, then I demaunded why he had ſlayn my brother, he anſweared and ſaid, in likewiſe he would
                     •
                   ſerue me, and therewith he couched his ſpeare, and ſtroake me on the ſide through my Gowne and Dublet, and hurt not my fleſh, as it was the pleaſure of God: then I wrapped my Mantle about mine arme, and drew out my Sword, and with both my hands as he paſſed by me, I gaue him ſuch a ſtroake that I cloue his head néere to the téeth, and ſo he fell downe to the earth dead. I know not what he is, but whatſoeuer he be, I haue ſlayne him, and if there be any that will demaund right in this cauſe, let him come into your royall Court before all your Péeres, and I ſhall doe him reaſon, if it be found that I haue done any wrong. When I had ſlayn him, I layd my Brother vpon the dead Knightes horſe, and ouertooke the Abbot mine Vnckle. Then as I road and looked behind me, I ſaw them that were ambuſhed in the wood come ryding after, & one Knight came before the reſt, bringing vppon his horſe the ſaid dead Knighte, I know well if they bée not come, they will ſoone be héere. When Kinge Charlemaine vnderſtood Huon, he had great maruaile what Knight it was that was ſlaine, and ſayd vnto Huon, know for troth I ſhall doe you reaſon, for I know none ſo great in my Realme whoſoeuer it be, but if I can prooue on him any

point of treaſon, I ſhall cauſe him to dye an euill death, for the matter toucheth me right néere, ſéeing vnder mine aſſurance and by my commaundement you are come hether. Then the King commaunded that Gerard ſhould be had to a goodly Chamber, and well looked vnto, the which was done.
            
            
               Chap. X.
               
                  ¶ How Charlot the Kings Son was brought before him dead, and of the great ſorrow that he made, and how Earle Amerie appeached Huon for the death of Charlot, and how the King would haue run vpon Huon, and of the good counſaile that Duke Naymes of Bauier gaue to the King.
               
               
                  
                     WHEN Huon of Bourdeaux
                   and the Abbot of Cluny his Vnckle heard the good will of the King, and the offer that he made, they knéeled downe to haue kiſſed his foote, and thanked him of his courteſie, but the King tooke thē vp, then the Abbot ſayd, My Lord, all that my Nephew Huon hath ſayd is true, the King ſaid, I beléeue you well, the Kinge did to them great honour, and feaſted them in his Pallaice royally: but hée had great deſire to know the troth of this caſe, and ſaid: Huon, and you the Abbot of Cluny, know for certaintie, I haue a Sonne whome I loue entirely, if you haue ſlayne him in doing ſuch a villainous deede as to breake my aſſurance, I doe pardon you, ſo that it be as you ſay. My Lord, (quoth Huon) for that I thanke your grace, and ſurely the truth is as I haue ſhewed you. Then the King ſent for Charlot his Sonne, ſo he was ſearched for in his lodging, & newes were returned, how he was departed out of the Towne the night before, ſo the Meſſenger departed, and when th
                     •
                  y came into

the ſtréete, they ſaw where Earle Amerie came ryding with Charlot dead on his horſe necke, & they heard in the Stréetes Lords, Knights, Ladies, and Damſels making great cries, and pitious complaints for Charlot the Kings Son whom
                     •
                   they ſawe dead. The Meſſengers were amazed at theſe exclamations, but at laſt they perceiued it was for the death of Charlot, then they returned to the Pallaice, But by reaſon of the outcries and pityous moane the people made, with often repetition of Charlots name, (all which the Emperour leaning at a windowe confuſedly heard) his heart waxed woondrous heauie, ſaying: Mée thinkes I heare ſuch ſorrow as hath not béen vſuall, and my Sonne Charlots name is toſſed too and fro in this outcry, it maketh me feare that it is my Sonne whome Huon hath ſlain. Then calling Duke Naymes vnto him, requeſted him to goe foorth, and reſolue him in this matter.
               Then Duke Naymes departed, and incontinent hée encountred Charlot borne dead betwéene foure Knightes vpon a Shéeld, when he ſawe that, he was right ſorrowfull, ſo that he could not ſpeake one word, then the vnhappie Earl
                     •
                   
                  Amerie went vp into the Hall, and came before the King and all his Barons, and there he layde downe Charlot. When Charles ſawe his Sonne ſo ſlayne, the dolour and ſorrow
                     •
                   that he made was vnſpeakable, it was pitie to ſée him, and Duke Naymes was as ſorrowfull as any other ſeéing the pityfull aduenture, and alſo the moane that the Lords made: then he came to the King and ſaid. Good my Lord, comfort your ſelfe in this miſaduenture, for by ouer-gréeuing at this ill hap, you can winne nothing, nor recouer your Childe againe, you know right wel, that my Coozen Ogier the Dane ſlew my Sonne Bertrand, who bare your Meſſuage of defiance to ye king of Pauey, yet I did ſuffer it without any great ſorrow making, bycauſe I knew well ſorrow could not recouer him againe. Naymes (quoth the king) I cannot forget this, I haue great deſire to know the cauſe of this déede. Then Duke Naymes ſayd to Duke Amerie: Sir, know you

who hath ſlayne Charlot, and for what cauſe? Then Earle Amerie ſtept foorth and ſaid with a loud voyce; Great King Charlemaine, why demand you any further, when you haue him before you that hath ſlayne your Sonne? and that is Huon of Bourdeaux, who ſtandeth héere in your preſence. When the King heard what Earle Amerie had ſayd, he looked fiercely vpon Huon, and had ſtrokē him with his Scepter, but for Duke Naymes, who blamed the King and ſayd: Forbeare my Lord, what meane you to doe this day? to receiue the Children of Duke Seuin into your Court, and hath promiſed to doe them right and reaſon, and n
                     •
                  w would ſlay them? ſo may all ſuch as ſhall heare of the matter ſay, that you haue ſent for them to no other end but to murder them, and that you ſent your Sonne to lye in waight for them, to haue ſlayne them. By this may be diſcerned, that you forget 
                     〈…〉
                   Maieſtie of a King, and expreſſe actions vnſéeming Charlemaine: demaund of Earle Amerie the cauſe why he had foorth Charlot your Sonne, and why that he aſſailed the two Brethren. Huon being there in preſence, was greatly abaſhed at the Kings furie, receiuing him firſt ſo kindly, and now would kill him, he was in great feare, and as much as he might he drew backe from the King, and was greatly agreeued for that he had ſlayne the Kings Sonne not knowing him. And blame him not to be much troubled in mind, when he ſawe no man that appertained to him, to ayd him, or to maintaine his right, but onely the good Abbot of Cluny his Vnckle, who could giue him none other ayd but with his words: yet he tooke on him courage, and right humbly ſaid to the King. My Lord, I require your grace touch me not, but know for troth, he that lyeth there dead before you, I ſlewe him in my defence, and not knowing that he was your Sonne Charlot, for if I had known him, I would in no wiſe haue touched him, and you may well know my Lord, if I had knowne that it had béene he, I would not haue come to you for reſcue, I would rather haue fled away ſo farre that no man ſhould haue heard any tydings of me: therefore for

Gods ſake I require you as heartily as I can, let mee haue right, I ſubmit my bodie to abide the iudgment of your noble Péeres, & if it can be prooued that I ſlew Charlot knowing him to be your Son, then my Lord, let me haue a ſhamfull death: then all the Peeres & Barons being there, ſaid with a hye voyce, how he had ſpoken reaſonably, and that if Earle Amerie would any thing ſay to the contrarie, it was time then to ſpeake and to ſhewe it.
            
            
               Chap. XI.
               
                  ¶ How the Traytour Earle Amerie charged Huon before the Emperour, that he trayterouſly with treaſon pretended had ſlayne the Kinges Sonne, and in that quarrell he appealed Huon to battaile.
               
               
                  
                     WHEN the King had heard Huon ſpeake, he beheld Duke Naymes, and deſired him to giue his aduice. My Lord, (quoth ye Duke) I can ſay none other thing vnto you but as I ſayd before: demaunde Earle Amerie why he led forth your Sonne all armed, and kept the ambuſhment in the wood to ſet vpon the two Brethren, or elſe what was it that hee ſought for there. Then Earle Amerie ſaid: My Lord, I ſhall ſhew you the troth, and if I doe otherwiſe, let me dye a ſhamefull death. True it is, this night paſſed your Son ſent for me, deſiring me to ryde with him on hawking, and I deſired him to abide vntill the morning, but he ſaid that he would néeds go afore night, then I graunted to goe with him, ſo that he would ryde armed, for I doubted the men of Arden, to the entent that if we met with any of them, wee might be able to reſiſt them, and ſo we did, thus we road out of this towne and came into a little wood, and there we caſt off our Hawkes, and there

we loſt one of them, and therewith the ſame way came the Children of Duke Seuin, and there we ſaw Huon the eldeſt who is héere preſent, who had taken vp our Hauke, & your Sonne came in courteous maner vnto him, and deſired him to render againe his Hauke, but the Traytour would not in no wiſe, then Gerard the yonger brother came to your Son, and they ſtroue ſo together that your Sonne ſtroke him, then Huon without any word ſpeaking, lifted vp his ſword and ſo villaynouſly ſlew your Sonne: then hée and his Brother ranne away ſo faſt, that we could not ouer-take them, whereof we were ſory. Thus he knew well your Sonne, and he ſlewe him, and if he will ſay to the contrarie, heere is my Gage, which I preſent héere before you, and if hée be ſo hardy as to take it vp, I ſhall make him confeſſe ere it be night, that it is true that I haue ſaid: and this I will prooue with my bodie againſt his.
            
            
               Chap. XII.
               
                  ¶ How the Abbot of Cluny would prooue that the ſaying of Earle Amerie was falſe and vntrue: and how the Earle did caſt his Gage againſt Huon, who tooke it vp.
               
               
                  
                     AFter that Earle Amerie had ended his tale, the Abbot of Cluny ſtept forth and ſaid to the King: My Lord, you neuer heard ſo falſe a tale before as this Traytor Amerie hath ſayd, for I and foure more of my Monks being Prieſts here preſent, are readie to ſweare and take our ſolempne oathes, that the ſaying of this Traytour is falſe, and therefore there ought no Gage to be laid in that cauſe, ſéeing there is true witneſſe of the matter. Abbot (quoth the King) the witneſſe is to be beléeued: Sir Amerie how ſay you thereto? My Lord, (quoth he) I would be loath

to ſpeake againſt the Abbot, but the troth is as I haue ſayd, the Abbot may ſay as it pleaſe him: but if Huon be ſo hardie to deny this that I haue ſaid before you, let him come into the field againſt me, and before it be night, I ſhall cauſe him to confeſſe it openly. When the Abbot heard this, he grew offended, and looking ſtearnly vpon Huon, ſayd: Faire Nephew offer your gage, for the right is with thée, and if thou be vanquiſhed in this quarell, if euer I returne into mine Abbey, there is no Saint in my Church, but I ſhall with a ſtaffe beat and breake them al
                     •
                   to peeces, for if God will ſuffer ſuch a wrong, I ſhall giue ſuch ſtr
                     •
                  akes vpon the ſhryne of Saint Peter, that I ſhall leaue neither gould nor precious ſtone whole together. Vnckle, (quoth Huon) & God will, I ſhall not let to take vp his gage, for I ſhall prooue that falſly and vntruly, Sir Amerie lyeth, as an euill and a falſe Traytour, and ſhall make him to confeſſe, that I neuer knew that he that I flew was the Kinges Sonne. Then the King ſaid, that Huon muſt giue hoſtage. My Lord, (quoth Huon) you ſhall haue my Brother, I cannot deliuer you any that is ſo néere or deare to me as he is, for héere I haue neyther Coozen nor Kinſman that will lay in hoſtage for mée. Faire Nephew (quoth the Abbot) ſay not ſo, for I and my Monkes will be pledges for you, and if any thing ſhould fall vnto you otherwiſe then well, which God forbid, then ſhame haue King Charlemaine, without hée hang vppon gallowes both me and all my Monkes. Go too Abbot (quoth the King) you ſay ill, for I would neuer doe that: then ſayd the King to Amerie, bring in pledges for your part. The Traytour anſweared: My Lord, héere be two of my Nephewes ſhall be pledges for me. I am content (quoth the King) vppon this condition, that if thou be vanquiſhed or diſcomfited, I ſhall cauſe them to dye an euill death. Then the pledges ſayd, that they would be no pledges vpon that condition, let other be pledges who would: but they ſaid, if the king would take them on the looſing of their Lands, they were content, and the King graunted them.
            
            
               
               Chap. XIII.
               
                  ¶ How thoſe two Champions came into the feeld whereas they ſhould fight, accompanied with their freends.
               
               
                  
                     THus as ye haue heard, both parties deliuered pledges, then the King to be in the more ſuertie, put them both in a Tower vntill the day of the Battaile: then the feeld was ordained, for the King hadde ſworne that his Sonne ſhould not be buried, vntill he that were vanquiſhed were hanged, if he were not ſlaine in the feeld. Then he commanded Duke Naymes to be ready with an hundred Knights to kéepe the féeld, and to ſée that no treaſon ſhould be done: for he ſaid, he had rather looſe the beſt Citie of his Realme. My Lord (quoth Duke Naymes) by the grace of God the matter ſhalbe ſo ordered for the ſuertie of both parties, that none ſhall haue wrong: the which thing was done ſo diligently, that euerie thing was ready, ſo both parties were brought into the Church of our Ladie in Paris, accompanied with their fréends, as ſuch a caſe requireth: with Amerie was his next fréends, all iſſued of ye genealogie of Ganelon, and when they both had heard Maſſe, each tooke a draught of wine, and then they were richly armed & mounted vpon good Horſes, and ſo tooke the way to the féeld, the Stages were filled, and the King and his Barons there preſent, abiding for the two Champions, who came one after another through the Stréets. Firſt came Earle Amerie, and he road vntil he came into the féeld, and then he alighted and ſaluted the King and all his Barons. Then Huon came anone after, accompanied with a goodly ſort, there were leaning in the windowes Ladies and Damſels a great number, all who prayed our Lord Ieſus Chriſt to ayd and defend

                  Huon from the Traytour Amerie. The people complained, and thought it vnpoſſible that Huon ſhould reſiſt againſt Earle Amerie, bycauſe Huon was ſo faire and young, but of the age of foure and twentie yeares. But as he was faire, ſo was he well made of bodie, no Knight more gallant and ſéemely, nor none more repleat with vertue: therefore hée was much bemoned both of men and women that ſawe him paſſe by. And becauſe Earle Amerie was a big boned man, a valiant and an expert Knight in armes, none ſtronger in all the Kinges Court, he was inward with the King & wel-beloued: euerie one greatly pityed that he was ſuch a traytour, for a worſe could not be found in any Realme, hée had great truſt in his owne ſtrength, and little regarded Huon of Bourdeaux, thinking hee ſhould not long endure againſt him. But there is a common prouerbe, which hath beguiled many a man, it is ſayd, that a ſmall rayne abateth a great wind, for if our Lord Ieſus Chriſt will ſaue Huon, the force and puiſſance of Earle Amerie ſhal doe Huon but little hurt, for the right excellent partes and great courage that was in Huon, defended him, as you ſhall heare hereafter.
            
            
               Chap. XIIII.
               
                  ¶ How the two Champions made their oathes vppon the reliques, that their ſaying was true, and what the King ſaid.
               
               
                  
                     THus Huon road vntill hee came into the féelde, where he ſaluted the King & all the Barons right humbly, then he approached to the relikes, and there made his ſolempne oathe in the preſence of Duke Naymes of Bauier, who was kéeper of the féeld, affirming that when he ſlew Charlot, he knew him not to be the Kings Sonne, and that as he was true Knight, and loyall liegeman

to the Emperour, whatſoeuer Earle Amerie had ſayd was falſe and vntrue, and that he lyed like a falſe Traytor, and ſo kiſſed the Reliques. When Huon had thus taken his oath, Earle Amerie ſtept foorth all afraid, and ſwoore that Huons oath was falſe, and that ſurely he knew it was Charlot when he ſlewe him, bycauſe he claymed his Hauke, the which Huon had taken vp, and that he would cauſe him to confeſſe ere it were night. When he had ſworne, he thought to haue returned to his Horſe, but ſtumbled ſo, that he had néere hand fallen to the earth. All that ſawe it, tooke it for an ill ſinne, and iudged in their minds, that the matter was likely to goe euill againſt Earle Amerie. When both theſe Champions had taken their oathes, and that Duke Naymes had cauſed the féeld to be auoided, hauing ſet the Kéepers of the féeld in due order as appertained thereto: then the twoo Champions leapt vpon their Horſes, their Speares in their hands, & their ſhéelds about their necks, thē a cry was made, that none ſhould be ſo hardie to mooue or to make any token vnto any of the partes vpon paine of death. After this crie made, the noble Emperor Charlemaine being full of yre and diſpleaſure, cauſed againe to be proclaimed, that if it fortuned that the vanquiſher ſhould ſlay his enimie in the féelde, before he confeſſe the treaſon for the death of his Sonne: that then the vanquiſher ſhould looſe all his Lands, and himſelfe to bée baniſhed out of the Realme of Fraunce, and out of the Empire of Roome, foreuer. After proclamation was ended, Duke Naymes and the other Barons & Péeres came to the King and ſaide: Alas my Lord, what will you doe? this that you haue proclaymed, is againſt all the Statutes of the noble Realme of Fraunce and Empire of Roome, for often times it happeneth, that one of the Champions is ſlaine, and haue no power to ſpeake, ſhall therefore the conquerour bée ſo much iniuried? for the great renowne which ſo long time hath béen ſpread abroad of you, let it not now be wronged & blemiſhed? let it not be ſayd, that you who haue liued in ſo great dignity all the daies of your life, that now in your latter

dayes you ſhould become weaker then a Childe: of the which words the King tooke ſmall regard.
            
            
               Chap. XV.
               
                  ¶ How Huon of Bourdeaux and the Earle Amerie fought together before Kinge Charlemaine: and how the Traytour Amerie was ſlain by the noble proweſſe and chiualrie of Huon.
                  
               
               
                  
                     WHen King Charlemaine had heard Duke Naymes, hee ſwoore by Saint Denis of Fraunce, and by his crowne and beard, that it ſhould be as he had ſaid, nor otherwiſe he would not doe it. Then the noble Barons were ſorrie and ſore diſpleaſed, and they departed from the King and ſaid: that by all likelyhood from thence forward Right ſhould haue no place in his Court. Many noble Princes and Barons murmoured ſore at the Proclamation that was made, & the two Champions drew apart and each of them fiercely regarded other. Then Earle Amerie ſpake aloud and ſaid: thou Huon of Bourdeaux falſe trayterous Knight, this day I ſhall cauſe thée to confeſſe thy falſeneſſe, howbeit I haue great pitie of thée, in regard of thy youth, if therefore thou wilt confeſſe this murder that thou haſt done, I ſhall deſire King Charlemaine to haue compaſſion vpon thée. When Huon heard the Traytour ſo ſpeake, for anger he bluſhed red and ſayd: Ah thou falſe and moſt diſloyall Knight, thy venomous words ſo full of bitterneſſe doe nothing at all abaſh me, for that good right that I am in ſhall ayd me by the helpe of our Lord Ieſus Chriſt, and I ſhall ſo puniſh thy treſpaſſe, that this day I ſhall make thée to confeſſe thy falſeneſſe, haue thereof no doubt. Therewith 
                     •
                  ouched their Speares, and gaue ſuch carrier to their horſes,

that it ſéemed the thunder had fallen from heauen, and with their ſharp Speares they encountred in ſuch wiſe, that their Speares brake to their hands, ſo that the ſhiuers flew vp high into the ayre and into the Kings Stage, and both their Horſes fell to the earth, and the Knights ſore aſtonied with their falling. Then verie boldly they reléeued themſelues with their Swords in their handes, and ſo approached each to other, and fought each with other ſo long while, that Huons Horſe ſtrangled ſir Ameries Horſe, who when he ſaw his horſe ſlaine, ſtoutly ſtept to Huon for to haue ſlaine him: but Huon met him valiantly, and lifting vp his Sword, gaue the Earle ſuch a ſtroake that he was aſtonied therewith, and ſtaggred backe more then two paces and a halfe, hardly holding himſelfe from falling to the earth, ſo that all that ſaw
                     •
                   them, had maruaile of Huons vertue & force, ſéeing the great ſtrength yt was in ſir Amerie. Then when Earle Amerie felt himſelfe in ſuch perill, he began to deſpiſe the name of God, and of the glorious Virgin Marie: howbeit as well as hée might hée approached to Huon, and with his Sword gaue Huon ſuch a ſtroake on the helmet, that all the flowers and precious ſtones there flew abroad in the féeld, and the cirkle of the helmet all to broken, and the ſtroake was ſo puiſſant that Huon was therewith ſore aſtonied, and perforce was faine to fall on one of his knées to the earth, the other Legge but weakly ſupporting him. There was preſent in the féeld Lords and Knights, & one of the Abbot of Clunyes ſeruants, who when he ſaw the great ſtroake that Huon had receiued, he departed out of the féeld, and went into the church whereas he found his maiſter the Abbot at his prayers for the good ſpéed of Huon his Nephew, to whome the ſeruant ſaid. Ah my Lord, pray heartily to our Lord Ieſus Chriſt to ſuccour your Nephew, for I ſaw him faine to knéele vpon one of his knées, in great doubt of death. Then the good Abbot without any anſweare, lifted vp his hands toward Heauen deuoutly, and weeping, prayed to God to ayd and defend the honour of his Nephew, and to maintaine his right. Thus

                  Huon béeing in the féeld in great doubt of his life, féeling the ſturdie ſtrength of Earle Amerie: called with a good heart to our Lord Ieſus Chriſt, requiring him to aide his right, the which he knew to be moſt true. When Earle Amerie ſawe that Huon had receiued of him ſuch a heauy ſtroake, he ſaid: Huon I beléeue thou wilt not endure long, better it were that thou confeſſe the déede before I ſlay thée, for ere it bée night I ſhall cauſe thée to waue in the wind. Hold thy tonge thou falſe Traytour (quoth Huon) thine ilneſſe ſhall not aid thée, for I ſhall bring thée to that point, that all thy fréends ſhall haue ſhame of thée. Then Huon aduaunced him and made ſemblance to haue ſtriken Amerie on ye helmet, and Amerie lifted vp his Shéeld to haue receiued the ſtroake, but when Huon ſaw that, he turned his ſtroake to a reuerſe, and ſtroake Amerie vnder the arme with his ſharpe Sword, ſo that he ſtroake off his arme, the which fell downe in the féeld Shéeld and all.
               When Earle Amerie ſawe & felt that maruailous ſtroake, and that he had loſt his left arme, and ſaw it lye in the féeld, hee was full of paine and ſorrow, and aduiſed himſelfe of a great treaſon, then he ſpake to Huon and ſaide: Ah Noble Knight haue pitie of me, for wrongfully and without cauſe I haue appeached thée of the death of Charlot the kings Son, for I know in troth you knew him not, but he is dead by my meanes, for I brought him into the wood to haue murdered you and your Brother: I am readie to acknowledg this before the King and all his Barons, and to diſcharge you thereof: therefore I pray you kill me not, I yéeld me vnto you, take heere my Sword. Then Huon came vnto him, and put downe his arme to haue taken the Sword, but then the falſe Traytour Amerie with a reuerſe ſtroake, ſtrooke Huon vpon the arme, thinking to haue ſtriken it off, but he fayled: howbeit he gaue him a great wound in the arme, ſo that the bloud ran downe. When Huon ſaw this horrible treaſon, he ſaid: O thou vntrue and falſe Traytour, thine 
                     ••
                  eſſe can no longer ſaue thée, for thou ſhalt n
                     •
                  uer doe treaſon

more: then Huon lifted vp his Sword, & gaue the Earle ſuch a maruailous ſtroke betwéen the healme and the ſhoulder, that he ſtrooke off his head cleane from the bodie, ſo that the healme and head fel one way, and the body another way. Alas what hap was it to Huon, that he did not remember before he ſlew Amerie, the Proclamation that the Emperor had made before, for afterward Huon ſuffered ſo muche wrong and iniurie, as might mooue the verie hardeſt heart to compaſſionate his caſe, and as you ſhall more at large vnderſtand in the following diſcourſe.
            
            
               Chap. XVI.
               
                  ¶ How after the Emperour Charlemaine had ſeene Earle Amerie was ſlaine, he commaunded expreſly, that Huon ſhould auoid the Realme and Empire, and to be baniſhed thence for euer.
               
               
                  
                     WHen that Duke Naymes, who kept the féeld, ſaw how by Huon the Earle was ſlaine, he was right ioyfull, and came to Huon and demaunded how hée did. Sir, (quoth he) thanked be God I féele no dolour nor gréefe: then they brought him to the Pallaice to the King, who was departed out of the féeld. When he ſaw the Earle ſlaine, and was thereof right ſorrowfull, then he demanded of Huon and of Duke Naymes, if they had heard Earle Amerie confeſſe the treaſon that hée had layde to Huon for the death of Charlot his Sonne. My Lord, (quoth the Duke) I thinke he did confeſſe it, but I heard it not, for Huon preſſed ſo ſore vpon him, that he had no leaſure to doe it. Then Charlemaine ſayd: Ah Earle Amerie, I know certainely thou didſt neuer that treaſon, nor neuer thought it: wherefore thou art ſlaine wrongfully and

without cauſe, for there was neuer a truer Knight thē thou wert, & I am ſure if thou hadſt done it, thou wouldeſt haue confeſſed it before me. Then the King ſayd vnto Huon, I charg thée incontinent to auoid my Realme, out of the which I baniſh thée foreuer, nor ſhalt thou euer enioy one foote of Land in Bourdeaux nor in Aquitaine, & alſo I forbid thée that thou neuer be ſo hardy as to go to Bourdeaux, for by my honour and crowne, if I may know that thou goeſt thether, I ſhall make thée to die an euill death, nor there is no man liuing, though he be neuer ſo néere a fréend vnto me, but if he make any requeſt for thée, I ſhall neuer loue him, nor he ſhall neuer after come in my ſight. Then Huon ſaid, Alas my Lord, what iuſtice is this? haue I done any more then knighthood bound me too? haue not you and your Barons ſéene him diſcomfited in playne Battaile, that hath brought you into all this trouble? vndoubtedly my Lord, if you doe to me as you ſay, God in heauen be my witnes, that neuer more wrong was done to any noble man. This is but bad remembrance of the good ſeruice that the noble Duke Seuin my Father hath done vnto you, for by this you ſhew great example to all your noble Barons and Knights, for them to be well aduiſed, how from henceforth they order themſelues, and how to truſt in you, when that by your owne obſtinate opinion, founded vpon an euill ground, and againſt all Statutes royall and imperiall, thus to execute your owne vnreaſonable will. Certainly if it were any other Prince beſide you, that ſhould doe me this great wrong: ere I would conſent ſo to be dealt withall, many a Caſtle and many a good towne ſhould be deſtroyed and brought to ruine, & many poore men more impoueriſhed and diſenherited, and many a good Knight brought to death.
               When Huon had thus ſpoken to the King, Duke Naymes ſtept foorth and ſayd to the King: My Lord, what meane you to doe? you haue ſeene that Huon hath done no more then his dutie, hauing brought his enemy to confuſion and ſlayn him, you may wel thinke that it was the worke of God, that ſuch

a Child ſhould bring to ſhame and diſcomfite ſuch a puiſſant Knight as was Earle Amerie. Therefore my Lord, if you doo as you haue ſaid, neither I nor any other man ſhall euer truſt you, but euerie one farre & néere that ſhall heare of this crueltie, will report that in the end of your daies you are become ſenceleſſe, & more like a Tyrant then a wiſe Prince. Then Huon deſired▪ all the Barons that were there preſent, that they would all require the King to haue more reſpect of him, ſéeing they were all bound ſo to doe, in that he was one of the Péeres of the Realme. Then al the Princes and Barons (holding Huon by the hand) knéeled downe before the King, and Huon ſaid: Séeing it is ſo my Lord, that your diſpleaſure is ſuch againſte me as you haue expreſſed: Let your Barons and my ſelfe obtaine but this fauour at your handes, that I may be confined to my owne natiue Countrey for euer, there to lead a poore & priuate life, neuer to be admitted to your preſence againe, & for this grace we ſhall all right humbly thanke you.
            
            
               Chap. XVII.
               
                  ¶ How King Charlemaine ſent Huon to doe a meſſuage in Babylon to the Admirall Gaudiſe.
                  
               
               
                  
                     WHEN the Emperor had heard Huon ſpeake, he ſaid incontinent: auoid out of my ſight, for when I remember my Sonne Charlot whome thou haſt ſ
                     •
                  aine, I haue no part of mée but it trembleth for the diſpleaſure I haue to thée, and I charge all my Barons héere preſent that they neuer ſpeake to me more for thée. When Duke Naymes heard the King ſay ſo, he ſaid vnto all the Barons: My Lords, you that he héere preſent, haue well heard the great vnreaſonableneſſe

that ye King offers to one of our Péeres, ye which as yée know well it is againſt right and reaſon, and a thing not to be ſuffered. But bycauſe we know certainly the King is our Soueraigne Lord, we muſt ſuffer his pleaſure: but from hencefoorth, ſince he will vſe himſelfe ſo, and do things againſt all reaſon and honour: I will neuer abide an houre longer with him, but will depart and neuer returne againe into the place, whereas ſuch extremitie & vnreaſonablenes is vſed: I will goe into my Countrey of Bauier, and let the King doe from hencefoorth as he liſt. Then all the Barons departed with the Duke from the King, without ſpeaking any one word, and ſo left the King alone in his Pallaice.
               When the King ſawe the Duke depart & his other Lords, he was right ſorrowfull and in great diſpleaſure, and ſaid to the young Knights that were left about him, howe that he ought in nature to take heauylie the death of his Sonne who was ſlaine ſo diſloyally, and could not likewiſe but gréeue, to ſée how his Barons had abandoned him and left him alone: therefore there is no remedie I ſée well, but I muſt be forced ſomewhat to follow their wils, & therewith he wept pitiouſly, and incontinent went foorth and followed them, ſaying: Duke Naymes and all you my Barons I deſire you to returne againe, for of force I muſt graunt your requeſts, although it be againſt that promiſe yt I made before. Then the Duke and all the reſt returned to the Pallaice with the King, who ſat downe on a bench of gould and his Barons about him. Then he ſent for Huon, who knéeled downe before the King, requiring him humbly of mercie and pitie, to whom the King ſaid: Huon, ſéeing thou wouldeſt be at peace with me, it is requiſit that thou performe whatſoeuer I enioyne thée. Elſe my Lord, (ſaid Huon) God forbid, there is no man in the world owes you more obedience then I doe, or ſhall more gladly vndertake whatſoeuer your highneſſe ſhall pleaſe to commaund me, dreadleſſe of death or any danger, be it to goe to Hell gates, to fight with the fiendes there as ſometime did Hercules, if I may thereby be reconciled to

your grace. Huon (quoth the King) I thinke to ſend thée into a worſe place, for of fiftéene Meſſengers that I haue ſent, there was neuer any returned againe: I ſhall ſhew thée whether thou ſhalt goe, ſéeing thou wilt that I ſhall haue mercie of thée. Thou muſt goe to the Citie of Babylon, to the Admirall Gaudiſe, and there doe as I ſhall appoint thée, but beware on paine of thy life that thou fayle not to doe it. When thou commeſt thether, mount vp into his Pallaice, and there tarrie vntill he be at his dinner, and when thou ſeeſt him ſit at the table, then thou to be armed with thy ſword naked in thy hand, and the verie greateſt Lord that thou ſéeeſt ſit at his Table, whether he be King or Admirall, thou ſhalt ſtrike off his head: and after that, enquire for faire Eſcleremond Daughter to the Admirall, and kiſſe her there openly in his preſence and before all other there preſent, for I giue thée to vnderſtand ſhe is the faireſt mayd that is now liuing, this being done, thou ſhalt ſay to the Admirall Gaudiſe, that I commaund him to ſend me, a thouſand Haukes, a thouſand Beares, and a thouſand Waighters all chained, and a thouſand young Varlets, and a thouſand of the faireſt maydens in his realme. And alſo thou to bring me thy handfull of the heare of his beard, and foure of his greateſt téeth. Alas my Lord, (quoth the Barons) wée ſée well you deſire greatly his death, when you charge him with ſuch a Meſſuage. That is true, (quoth the King) for without I haue his beard and his great téeth brought me hether vnfaynedly: Let him neuer returne into Fraunce, nor come into my preſence, for if he doe, he ſhalbe hanged and drawen. My Lord, (quoth Huon) haue you ſhewed me all your pleaſure? Yea, (quoth the King) my will is as I haue ſaid, if thou wilt haue peace with me. My Soueraigne Lord, (quoth Huon) by the grace of God I ſhall finiſh your meſſuage, the feare of death ſhall not let me to doe it. Huon (quoth the King) if God of his grace will ſuffer thée to returne againe into Fraunce, I charge thee be not ſo hardy to come vnto Bourdeaux
                  ▪ nor to any part of thy Countrey vntill thou haſt ſpoken with mée,

if I finde thée dooing contrarie, I ſhall cauſe thée to die an ill death, and vpon this, I will thou layeſt vnto me good hoſtages. My Lord, (quoth Huon) héere be Ten Knights, whom I ſhall leaue with you for ſuerty, to the entent that you ſhall be content with me: howbeit my Lord, I require your grac
                     •
                   to ſuffer the Knights that came with me from Bourdeaux to goe with me to the holy Sepulchre. I am content (quoth the King) that they go with thée thether or elſe-where. My Lord (quoth Huon) I thanke your grace. Then Huon made him readie to fourniſh his voyage.
            
            
               Chap. XVIII.
               
                  ¶ How Huon of Bourdeaux tooke leaue of the King and of the Barons, and rode with the good Abbot to Cluny.
                  
               
               
                  
                     AFter that King Charlemaine
                   had giuen Huon the charge of his meſſuage: the King called before him Gerardine Brother to Huon, and deliuered to him the gouernance of all his Brothers Lands in his abſence vntill his retourne. And thus whē 
                  Huon was readie, he came to the King and to the Barons, to take his leaue of them and the Abbot of Cluny, who ſaid they would goe with him part of his way, ſo likewiſe did Twelue of the greateſt Princes & Ladies accompanie him for twoo daies iourney: and when they came to the towne of Troy in Champaine, Duke Naymes tooke leaue of his Coozen Huon, and gaue him a Sommer charged with gould, and kiſſed him at their departing. Then Gerard his Brother tooke his leaue and alſo kiſſed him: but know for troth the kiſſe that he gaue him, was like to the kiſſe that Iudas gaue to his Maiſter, the which was dearely bought as héereafter yée ſhall heare. Thus Duke Naymes and Gerard departed & tooke their way to Paris, but the Abbot and Huon reſted not

vntill they came to the Abbie of Cluny, where they were receiued with great ioy and well feaſted. Then the next morning Huon departed, and tooke leaue of his Vncle ſore wéeping, deſiring him to recommend him vnto his Mother the Ducheſſe and to Gerard his Brother: the Abbot promiſed ſo to doe, and gaue Huon his Nephew a Mulet charged with money currant in Fraunce: thus he departed and tooke the way to Roome. Now leaue we to ſpeake of Huon, and ſhew of Duke Naymes and Gerard, who returned to Paris, where Gerard required the King, that it would pleaſe him to receiue his homage for the Lands of Bourdeaux, to the entent that he might be aduaunced, and to be in the State of one of the Péeres of Fraunce, the which thing Duke Naymes would not conſent nor agrée vnto, but ſaid to the King: My Lord, you ought not to ſuffer that Huon ſhould be diſenherited, whereof Gerard was not content, but Duke Naymes ſet litle thereby, for he loued Huon entirely, ſo this homage was delayed. Then Gerard returned to Bourdeaux, where he was well receiued: but when the Ducheſſe ſaw him & not Huon to returne, ſhe was ſorrowfull in her heart, and then ſhe demanded of Gerard, why that Huon his brother was not returned with him? Then Gerard ſhewed her all the whole matter and aduenture, and of the departing of Huon, & of the manner of his voyage, whereof the Ducheſſe had ſuch ſorrowe, that ſhe fell ſicke, and ſo lay nine and Twenty daies, and on the Thirtieth daye ſhe dyed, and rendred vp her Soule vnto God: whereof all the Countrey was ſorrowfull. Gerard nobly buried her in the Church of Saint Seueryn by ye Duke her huſband. Amon after married him to the Daughter of Duke Gilberd of Cecill, who was the greateſt Traytour and moſte cruell that might be heard of. And Gerard Amons Sonne in law learned his wayes, and followed his condition, for he dealt ſo ill with the towne of Bourdeaux, and with the Countrey about, that pitie it was to heare the poore people, to wéepe for the loſſe of Duke Seuin and of the Ducheſſe, and prayed to God for the good returne of their Lord Huon:

Nowe wee ſhall leaue to ſpeake of them and returne vnto Huon.
               
            
            
               Chap. XIX.
               
                  ¶ How Huon of Bourdeaux came to Roome, and was confeſſed of the Pope who was his Vncle, and of his departing, and how he came to Brandis, where he found his Vncle Garyn of Saint Omers, who for loue of Huon paſſed the Sea wyth him.
               
               
                  
                     Here before you haue heard, how Huon departed from his Vncle ye Abbot of Cluny, and ſo longe hée road with his Knights, that he came to the City of Roome: where hee was lodged in a good Hoſtrey. Then Huon aroſe in the morning, accompanied with Guichard whom he loued well, and with the other Knights that came thether with him, and went to the Church of Saint Peter and heard Seruice, and when that Seruice was done, the Pope came out of his Oratorie: then Huon came vnto him and humbly ſaluted him, the Pope beheld him and demaunded what he was? Sir, (quoth he) my Father was Duke Seuin of Bourdeaux, who is deceaſed: then the Pope ſtept vnto him & embraced him, and ſayd. Faire Nephew you are welcome, I pray you ſhew me how doth my Siſter the Ducheſſe your Mother, and what aduenture hath brought you hether? Sir, (quoth he) I deſire your holyneſſe, that you will heare my confeſſion a part, for I haue great néede thereof. Faire Nephewe (quoth the Pope) it pleaſeth me right well to héere you: then the Pope tooke him by the hand, & went with him into his Oratorie, and there Huon ſhewed him all the aduenture that he had ſince he came from Bourdeaux, and of the voyage that Charlemaine had ſet

him to doe, and what he had to ſay to the Admirall Gaudiſe: all which being declared and done, he required pardon and penaunce for his ſinnes. The Pope ſaid, he would aſſigne him no penaunce, for the Emperour Charles had done that alreadie, and which was ſo great, that no humane bodie could ſuffer it, nor durſt vndertake to doe it. Then the Pope gaue him abſolution of all his ſinnes, and louingly led him into his Pallaice, where he was honourably receiued with great ioy.
               After they had dyned and deuiſed together a great ſpace, the Pope ſaid vnto Huon: Faire Nephew the way that you muſt goe, is to goe to the Porte of Brandis, there ſhall you find my Brother Garyn of Saint Omers, who is your Vncle, to whome I ſhall write a Letter, to the entent that he ſhall haue knowledge of you, for I know well he will haue great ioy of you, he hath the kéeping of the Orientall Sea, he ſhal adreſſe you, and deliuer you Ship or Galley ſuch as ſhall bée neceſſarie for you. Moſt holy Father, (quoth Huon) of this I thanke you. Well (quoth the Pope) this night you ſhall abide h
                     •
                  ere with me. Sir, (quoth he) I require you to let me depart, for greatly I deſire to ſée mine Vncle Garyn. When the Pope ſaw that he would néedes depart, he deliuered him his Letter, and ſayd: Faire Nephew, ſalute from me my Brother Garyn your Vncle. Sir, (quoth he) I ſhall do your commaundement: then the Pope gaue to Huon great and rich preſents, and to all them that were with him, and hée kiſſed his Nephew at his departing, Huon tooke leaue of thē all wéeping, and ſo departed, and entred into the Riuer of Tiber in a rich Shippe, the which the Pope had well garniſhed for him.
               Thus hee had good winde, ſo that anone they arriued at Brandis, but whiles he was on the water, hee wept ſore and pityouſly complayned, in that he was ſo departed out of his Countrey: then his men comforted him, and ſhewed many faire examples to comfort him. Sir, (quoth Guichard) leaue your ſorrow, for gréefe and ſadneſſe cannot auaile you, you

muſt put all to the mercie of our Lord God, who neuer forgetteth them that loue him: ſhew your ſelfe a man and no Child, to the entent that we that be with you may be reioyced, for the ſorrow that we ſée you in, doth ſore trouble vs. Deare fréend (quoth Huon) ſince it is ſo, I ſhall follow your will: and thus they arriued at the Port of Brandis. Then they yſſued out of their Shippe, and tooke out their Horſes, and there they ſaw Garyn ſitting before the Port, in a lodge (well and richly hanged) in a goodly Chaire. When Huon ſaw him ſitting, he ſaluted him, thinking that he was Lord of that Countrey: then Garyn beheld Huon and began to wéepe, and ſaid. Sir, it doth not appertaine vnto me, that you ſhould doe me ſo great honour as you doe: for by that I ſée in you, I am conſtrained to wéepe, bycauſe you reſemble ſo much to a Prince of the Realme of Fraunce, called Duke Seuin, who was Lord of the Citie of Bourdeaux, the great loue that euer I bare vnto him, cauſed me to wéepe: therefore I require you tell me, where you were borne, and who be your Parents and fréends? for Duke Seuin wedded my Siſter the Ducheſſe Aclis. Sir, (quoth Huon) ſéeing you will néedes know what I am, I may well ſhew it vnto you, for that Duke was my Father, and the Ducheſſe Aclis is my Mother, we are two brethren, I am the eldeſt, & the younger is ſtill at Bourdeaux to kéepe our Land. When Garyn vnderſtood that Huon was Sonne to Duke Seuin of Bourdeaux, the ioy that he had could not be expreſſed, then he embraced Huon all wéeping and ſaid: Right deare Nephew, your comming is to me the greateſt ioy in this world, ſo he knéeled downe and would haue kiſſed Huons féete: but Huon reléeued him incontinent. The ioy that was betwéene them two was ſo great, that all that ſaw it had maruaile thereof. Then Garyn demaunded of Huon and ſaid: Faire Nephew, what aduenture hath brought you into theſe parts? Then Huon ſhewed him from point to point all his buſineſſe, and the cauſe why he was entred into that Enterprize.
               When Garyn had heard all, he began to wéepe, and yet to

comfort his Nephew, he ſaid: Faire Huon, whereas lyeth great perils, there lyeth great honour, God ayd you to eſchew and to finiſh this great buſineſſe, all is poſſible to God, and to man by meanes of his grace, a man ought neuer to b
                     •
                   abaſhed for worldly matters. Then Huon deliuered his Letters to his Vncle Garyn, who gladly receiued them, and read the contents thereof at large. Then he ſaid, Faire Nephew, there néede none other recommendations but the ſight of your preſence, for it appeareth well by your countenance, that you be the ſame perſon that our holy Father maketh mention of, ſurely your comming ſéemeth to mée faire and good, and you be arriued at a good Port, for I promiſe you faithfully, I loue well my Wife and my Children: but the great loue that I haue vnto you for the loue of your Father Duke Seuin, and the Ducheſſe your Mother, who was mine owne deare Siſter, I abandon all that I haue to ſerue you and kéepe you companie, both with my bodie and all that I haue. Knowe for truth, I haue thrée good Galleys & three great Shippes, well fourniſhed of euerie thing for the warre, the which I ſhall lead with you, for as longe as life abideth in my bodie, I ſhall not abandon you: but I ſhall ayde you in all your Enterprizes. Faire Vncle, (quoth Huon) for the great courteſie that you offer mée, I can but thanke you: then Garyn tooke Huon by the hand, and led him into his Caſtle, whereas hée was richly receiued. Garyns Wife and foure of her Sonnes came vnto Huon, and he full courteouſly kiſſed the Ladie and her foure Children his Coozens, great ioy was made there in the Hall, and the Tables ſet for Supper. Then Garyn called his Wife and ſaid, Madame, this young Knight that you ſée héere, is my Nephew and Coozen to your Children, who is come hether for refuge, to haue counſaile and ayd of me in a Voyage and Enterpriſe that he hath to doe, and by the grace of God, I ſhall go with him to ayd and to conduct him: wherefore I pray and commaund, that you take in rule all my affaires and kéepe your Children. Sir, (quoth ſhe) ſéeing it is your pleaſure thus to

doe, and that you will goe with him, your will let be fulfilled: howbeit I had rather you abode then went, this ſhée ſpake ſore wéeping.
               The next day in the morning, Garyn (who had great will to ſerue and pleaſe his Nephew) ordained a great Shippe to be made readie well fourniſhed with Biſket, Wines and fleſh, and all other manner of victuals, and with munition of warre as it appertained, and put therein their horſes and armour, gould and ſiluer, & other riches neceſſarie for them: then they tooke leaue of the Ladie, and ſo leſt her ſore wéeping. Thus Garyn and Huon entred into their Ship and all their companie, there were Thirtéene Knightes and Twoo Varlets to ſerue them, for they would haue no greater number.
            
            
               Chap. XX.
               
                  ¶ How Huon of Bourdeaux departed from Brandis, and Garyn his Vncle with him: and how he came to Ieruſalem, and from thence into the Deſerts, whereas hee founde Gerames, and of their conference.
               
               
                  
                     WHen Huon and Garyn were entred into their Ship, they hoyſed vp their Sailes, and ſayled night and daye, ſo that at laſt they arriued ſafely at the Port of Iaffe, where they tooke landing and drew out their horſes, and road foorth ſo the ſame day, that they came to Rames, and the next day to the Citie of Ieruſalem: that night they reſted, and the next day they did their Pilgrimage to the holy Sepulchre, and there deuoutly heard Seruice, and offered according to their deuotion. When Huon came before the holy Sepulchre, he kneeled downe vpon his bare knées, and all wéeping made his prayers to our

Lord God, requiring him to ayd and comfort him in his voyage, ſo that he might returne againe into Fraunce, and to haue peace with King Charlemaine. And when they all had made their prayers and offered, Huon and Garyn went into a little Chapell vpon the mount of Caluerye, whereas nowe lyeth the bodies of Godfrey of Bullen, and Bauldwin his Brother: there Huon called vnto him all thoſe that came with him out of Fraunce, and ſaid. Sirs, you that for the loue of mée, haue left your Fathers and Mothers, Wiues and Children, Lands and Signiories, for this courteſie that you haue ſhewed mee, I thanke you. Now you may returne into Fraunce againe, and humbly recommend mée to the Kinges good grace, and vnto all the other Barons: and when you come to Bourdeaux, do my dutie to the Ducheſſe my Mother, and to Gerard my Brother, and vnto the Lords of my Countrey. Then Guichard and all the other Knights anſweared Huon, and ſaid: Sir as yet we will not leaue you, neither for death nor life, vntill we haue brought you vnto the red Sea: why then (quoth Huon) for the great ſeruice and curteſie that you offer mee, I thanke you. Then Garyn called two of his ſeruants, and commaunded them to returne vnto his wife, and to deſire her to be of good chéere, and that ſhortly he would returne, the which thing they did, and returned and did their meſſuage.
               When Huon vnderſtood that his Vncle Garyn was diſpoſed to abide with him he ſayd: Faire Vncle, you ſhall not néede to trauaile ſo much, I would councell you to returne vnto your Wife and Children. Sir, (quoth Garyn) & God will I ſhall not leaue you no day, vntill you returne your ſelfe. Vncle, (quoth Huon) I thanke you of your courteſie: then they went to their lodging and dyned, and after dinner tooke their horſes, and ſo road by Hils and Dales, ſo that if I ſhould recount all the aduentures that they found in their way, it ſhould be too long a proceſſe to ſhew it: but as the true Hiſtorie witneſſeth, they ſuffered much paine and trauaile, for they paſſed ſuch Deſerts, whereas they found but

ſmall ſuſtenance, whereof Huon was right ſorrowfull, for the loue of them that were with him, and began to wéepe, and to remember his owne Countrey, ſaying: Alas noble King of Fraunce, great wrong and great ſinne you haue done me, thus to driue me out of my Countrey, and to ſend mée into a ſtrange Land, to the entent to ſhorten my dayes: I pray God to pardon you therefore, then Garyn and the other Knights comforted him, and ſaid: Alas Sir, diſmay you not for vs, God is puiſſant ynough to ayd vs, hée neuer fayleth them that loueth him.
               Thus they road forth in the Deſert ſo long, vntill at laſt they ſaw a little Cottage, before the which ſat an old ancient man with a long white beard, and his heare hanging ouer his ſhoulders: when Huon perceiued him, he drew thether, and ſaluted the olde man in the name of God and of the bleſſed Virgin Marie: then the ancient man lifted vp his eyes and beheld Huon, and had great maruaile, for of a long ſeaſon before he had ſéene no man that ſpake of God, then he beheld Huon in the face, and began ſore to wéepe, and ſtepping vnto Huon, tooke him by the Leg & kiſſed it more then twentie times. Fréend (quoth Huon) I deſire you ſhew me why you make this ſorrow? Sir, (quoth he) about thirtie yeares paſſed I came hether, and ſince that time I neuer ſawe man beléeuing on the Chriſtian faith, and now the regarding of 
                     •
                  our viſage, cauſeth me to remember a noble Prince that I haue ſéene in Fraunce, who was called Duke Seuin of Bourdeaux: therefore I require you ſhew me if euer you ſaw him, I pray you hide it not from me. Fréend (quoth Huon) I pray you ſhew me where you were borne, & of what lineage and Countrey you be of? Nay ſir, (quoth he) that will I not doe, firſt you ſhal ſhew me what you be and where you were borne, and why you come hether? Fréend (quoth Huon) ſéeing it pleaſeth you to know I ſhall ſhew you: then Huon and all his companye alighted, and tyed theyr Horſes to Trées.
               When Huon was alighted, he ſat downe by the old man

and ſaid. Fréend, ſince you will néedes know my buſineſſe, I ſhall ſhew you: know for troth, I was borne in the Citie of Bourdeaux, and am Son to Duke Seuin, and Huon ſhewed him all his whole caſe and Enterprize, and of the death of Charlot, and how he diſcomfited Earle Amerie, and howe that Charlemaine hadde chaced him out of Fraunce, and of the Meſſuage that he was charged to ſay vnto the Admirall Gaudiſe, affirming all to be for certaintie. When the oulde man hadde well heard Huon, he began ſore to wéepe. Sir, (quoth Huon) ſince it pleaſeth you to know of my ſorrowe, Duke Seuin my Father is dead ſeauen yeares paſt, my Mother I truſt be aliue, and a Brother of mine whome I haue left with her. And nowe ſir ſéeing you haue heard of mine affaires, I require you giue me your counſaile and aduice, and alſo if it pleaſe you, to ſhew me what you be, and of what Countrey, and how you came into theſe parts? Sir, (quoth the old man) know for troth, I was borne in Geron
                     
                        •
                     ill, & am brother to the good Prouoſt Guyer: & when I departed thence I was a young Knight, & haunted the Iuſtes and Tourneys, ſo that on a daie it fortuned at a Tourney that was made at Poytiers, I ſlew a Knight of a noble bloud, wherefore I was baniſhed out of ye Realme of Fraunce. But my brother the Prouoſt made ſuch a requeſt to Duke Seuin your Father, that by his meanes my peace was made with the King, and my land ſaued, vpon condition that I ſhould goe to the holy Sepulchre, to puniſh my bodie for the Knight that I flew, and to forgiue my faults. Thus I departed out of my countrey, and when I had done my voyage, I thought to haue returned, but as I departed out of the Citie of Ieruſalem, to take the way to Acres, paſſing by a wood betwéene Ieruſalem and Naples, there came vpon me ten Sarazins, who tooke me and brought me to the Citie of Babilon, whereas I was in priſon two yeares complet, whereas I ſuffered much pouertie and miſerie: but our Lord God, who neuer fayleth them that ſerueth him, and haue in him full affiance, he ſent me the grace, that by the meanes of a right noble Ladie

I was brought out of priſon in a night, and ſo I fled into this Forreſt, whereas I haue béene this thirtie yeares, & in all this ſpace I neuer ſaw nor heard man beléeuing in Ieſus Chriſt: thus I haue ſhewed you all mine affaires.
               When Huon had heard the Knights tale, he had great ioy, and embraced him and ſaide, howe often times he had ſéene Guyre his Brother the Prouoſt wéepe for him, and when I departed from Bourdeaux, (quoth he) I deliuered vnto him all my Lands to gouerne: wherefore I require you ſhewe mée your name? Sir, (quoth he) I am called Gerames, and now I pray you ſhew me your name? Sir, (quoth he) I am named Huon, and my younger Brother is called Gerard. But ſir, I pray you ſhew me how you haue ſo long liued héere, & what ſuſtenance you haue had? Sir, (quoth Gerames) I haue eaten none other thing but rootes & fruites that I haue found in the wood: then Huon demaunded of him if he could ſpeake the language Sarazin? Yes ſir, quoth he) as well or better then any Sarazin in the Countrey, nor there is no way but that I know it.
               When Huon had heard Gerames, then he demaunded further of him, if he could goe to Babilon? Yes ſir, (quoth Gerames) I can goe thether by two wayes, the moſt ſureſt way is hence about fortie dayes iourney, and the other is but fiftéene dayes iourney: but I councell you to take the longe way, for if you take the ſhorter way, you muſt paſſe thorow a wood about ſixtéene Leagues of length, but the way is ſo full of the Fayryes and ſ
                     •
                  rang things, that ſuch as paſſe that way are loſt, for in that wood abideth a King of the Fayryes named Oberon, he is of height but of thrée foote, and crooked ſhouldered, but yet he hath an Angell-like viſage, ſo that there is no mortal man that ſéeth him, but that taketh great pleaſure to behold his face, and you ſhall no ſooner be entred into that wood, if you go that way, but he wil find ye meanes to ſpeake with you, and if you ſpeake vnto him, you are loſt for euer, & you ſhall euer find him before you, ſo that it ſhall be in manner impoſſible that you can ſcape from him, without

ſpeaking to him, for his words be ſo pleaſant to heare, that there is no mortall man yt can well ſcape without ſpeaking vnto him. And if he ſée that you will not ſpeake a word vnto him: then he will be ſore diſpleaſed with you, and before you can get out of the wood, he will cauſe raine & wind, hayle and ſnowe, and will make maruelous tempeſts, with thunder and lightenings, ſo that it ſhall ſéeme vnto you that all the world ſhould periſh, and he will make to ſéeme before you a great running Riuer blacke and déepe: but you may paſſe it at your eaſe, and it ſhal not wet the feet of your horſe, for all is but fantaſie and enchauntments that the Dwarfe ſhall make, to the entent to haue you with him, and if you can kéepe your ſelfe without ſpeaking vnto him, you may then well eſcape. But Sir to eſchew all perils, I councell you to take the longer way, for I thinke you cannot eſcape from him: and then you be loſt for euer.
               When Huon had well heard Gerames, he had great maruaile, and he had great deſire in himſelfe to ſée that Dwarfe King of the Fayryes, and the ſtrang aduentures that were in that wood: then he ſaid vnto Gerames, that for feare of any death hée would not leaue to paſſe that way, ſéeinge hée might come to Babilon in fiftéene dayes, for in taking ye longer way hée might perchaunce find more aduentures, and ſince he was aduertiſed, that with kéeping his tongue from ſpeaking, he might abridge his iourney: he ſayd, that ſurely he would take that way whatſoeuer chaunce befell. Sir, (quoth Gerames) you ſhall doe your own pleaſure, for which way ſoeuer you take, it ſhall not be without me, I ſhall bring you to Babilon to the Admirall Gaudiſe, I knowe him right well, and when you bée come thether, you ſhall ſee there a Damſell, (as I haue heard ſay) the moſt faireſt creature in all Inde, and the onely and moſt ſwéeteſt, and moſt courteous that euer was borne, and it is ſhee that you ſéeke, for ſhee is Daughter to the Admirall Gaudiſe.
               
            
            
               
               Chap. XXI.
               
                  ¶ How Gerames went with Huon and his companie, and ſo came into the wood, whereas they found King Oberon, who coniured them to ſpeake vnto him.
               
               
                  
                     WHen Huon had well heard Gerames, how he was minded to goe along with him: hée was thereof right ioyfull, and thanked him of his courteſy and ſeruice, and gaue him a goodly horſe, whereon he mounted, and ſo road foorth together, ſo long that they came into the wood whereas King Oberon haunted moſt. Then Huon who was wearie of trauaile, and what for famine and for heate, the which he and his companie had endured two dayes without bread or meat, ſo that he was ſo féeble that he could ride no further, and then he began pityouſly to wéepe, and complayned of the great wronge that Kinge Charlemaine had done vnto him, and then Garyn and Gerames comforted him, and had great pitie of him, and they knew well by the reaſon of his youth, hunger oppreſſed him more then it did to them of greater age. Then they alighted vnder a great Oake, to the entent to ſearch for ſome fruit to eate, they glad thereof let their horſes goe to paſture. When they were thus alighted, the Dwarfe of the Fayry Kinge Oberon came ryding by, and had on a Gowne ſo rich, that it were maruaile to recount the riches and faſhion thereof, & it was ſo garniſhed with precious ſtones, that the clearneſſe of them ſhined like the Sonne. Alſo he had a goodlie bow in his hand, ſo rich that it could not be eſtéemed, and his arrowes after the ſame ſort, and they were of ſuch a nature or qualitie, that any beaſt in the world that he would wiſh for, the arrowe would arreſt him. Alſo he had about his necke

a rich Horne hanging by two Laces of gold, the Horne was ſo rich and faire, that there was neuer ſéene any ſuch, it was made by foure Ladies of ye Fayries in the Iſle of Chafalone, one of them gaue to ye horne ſuch a propertie, that whoſoeuer heard the ſound thereof, if he were in the greateſt ſickeneſſe in the world, he ſhould incontinent be whole and ſound: the Ladie that gaue this gift to the Horne, was named Glorianda. The ſecond Ladie was named Tranſlyna, ſhe gaue to this Horne another propertie, and that was, whoſoeuer heard this Horne, if he were in the greateſt famine of the worlde, he ſhould be ſatisfied as well, as though he had eaten al that he woulde wiſhe for, and ſo likewiſe for drinke as well, as though he had droonke his fil of the beſt wine in al the world. The third Ladie named Margala gaue to this Horne yet a greater gift, and that was, whoſoeuer heard this Horne, though he were neuer ſo poore or feeble by ſickneſſe, he ſhould haue ſuch ioy in his heart, that he ſhould ſinge and daunce. The fourth Ladie named Lempatrix, gaue to this Horne ſuch a gift, that whoſoeuer heard it, if he were an hundred dayes iourneys of, he ſhould come at the pleaſure of him that blew it farre or néere.
               Then King Oberon, who knew well, and had ſéene the fourtéene Companions, he ſet his Horne to his mouth, and blew ſo melodious a blaſt, that the fourtéene Companions being vnder the Trée had ſo perſit a ioy at their hearts, that they al roſe vp and began to ſing and daunce. Ah good Lord, (quoth Huon) what fortune is come vnto vs? me thinke we be in Paradiſe, right now I could not ſuſtaine my ſelfe for lacke of meat and drinke, and nowe I féele my ſelfe neither hungrie nor thirſtie, from whence may this come? Sir, (quoth Gerames) knowe for troth, this is done by the Dwarfe of the Fayrye, whome you ſhall ſoone ſee paſſe by you. But Sir, I require you on ieopardie of looſing of your life, that you ſpeake to him no word, without you purpoſe to abide euer with him. Sir, (quoth Huon) haue no doubt of me, ſéeing I know the ieopardie. Therewith the Dwarfe began to

crie aloude and ſaide: Yée fourtéene men that paſſe by my wood, God kéepe you all, and I deſire you ſpeake with mée, and I coniure you thereto by God almightie, and by the chriſtendome that you haue receiued, and by all that God hath made: anſweare mée.
            
            
               Chap. XXII.
               
                  ¶ How King Oberon was right ſorrowfull and ſore diſpleaſed, in that Huon would not ſpeake: and of the great feare that he put Huon and his companie in.
               
               
                  
                     WHEN that Huon and his companie heard the Dwarfe ſpeake, they mounted on their Horſes, and road away as faſt as they might, without ſpeaking of any word, and the Dwarfe ſéeing how that they road away and would not ſpeake, hée was ſorrowfull and angrie. Then hée ſet one of his fingers on his Horne, out of the which yſſued ſuch a winde and tempeſt ſo horrible to heare, that it bare downe Trées, and therewith came ſuch a raine and hayle, that it ſéemed that heauen and the earth had fought together, and that the world ſhould haue ended, the beaſts in the woods brayed and cryed, and the foules of the ayre fell down dead for ye feare that they were in, there was no creature but he would haue béen afrayd of that tempeſt. Then ſuddainly appeared before them a great Riuer, that ran ſwifter then the birds did flye, and the water was ſo blacke and ſo perilous, & made ſuch a noyſe, that it might be heard ten Leagues of. Alas (quoth Huon) I ſee well now we be all loſt, wée ſhall héere be oppreſſed without God haue pitie of vs, I repent me that euer I entred into this wood, I had béen better to haue trauailed a whole yéere, then to haue come hether. Sir, (quoth Gerames) diſmay you not, for all this is done by the Dwarfe of the Fayrye. Well, (quoth

                  Huon) I thinke it beſt to alight from our horſes, for I thinke we ſhall neuer eſcape from hence, but that we ſhalbe all oppreſſed. Then Garyn and the other Companions had great maruaile, and were in great feare; Ah Gerames, (quoth Huon) you ſhewed mee well, that it was great perill to paſſe this wood, I repent mée nowe that I had not beléeued you.
               Then they ſawe on the other ſide of the Riuer a faire Caſtell, enuyroned with fourtéene great Towers, and on euerie Tower a clocher of fine gould by ſéeming, the which they long regarded, and by that time they had gone a little by the Riuer ſide, they loſt the ſight of the Caſtle, it was cleane vaniſhed away: whereof Huon and his companie were ſore abaſhed. Huon, (quoth Gerames) of all this that you ſée diſmay you not, for all this is done by the crooked Dwarfe of the Fayrye, and all to beguile you, but he cannot gréeue you, ſo you ſpeake no word: howbeit ere we depart from him, he will make vs all abaſhed, for anone he will come after vs like a mad man, bicauſe you will not ſpeake vnto him: but ſir I require you as in Gods name, be nothing afrayd, but ride foorth ſurely, and euer beware that you ſpeake vnto him no word. Sir, (quoth Huon) haue no doubt thereof, for I had rather he were deſtroyed, then I ſhould ſpeake one word vnto him, then they road to paſſe the Riuer, and they founde there nothing to let them, and ſo road about fiue Leagues. Sir, (quoth Huon) wée may well thanke God that wee bée thus eſcaped this Dwarfe, who thought to haue deceiued vs, I was neuer in ſuch feare during my life god confound him: thus they road deuiſing of the little Dwarfe, who had done them ſo much trouble.
            
            
               
               Chap. XXIII.
               
                  ¶ How Kinge Oberon
                     ▪ Dwarfe of the Fayry purſued ſo much Huon, that he conſtrained him to ſpeake to him at laſt.
               
               
                  
                     WHen Gerames vnderſtood the companie, howe they thought they were eſcaped from the Dwarfe, he began to ſmile, and ſaid: Sirs, make no braging that you be out of this danger, for I beléeue you ſhall ſoone ſée him againe, and aſſoone as Gerames had ſpoke the ſame words, they ſawe before them a bridge the which they muſt paſſe, and they ſawe the Dwarfe on the other part, Huon ſawe him firſt and ſaid, I ſée that Diuell who hath done vs ſo much trouble. Oberon heard him and ſaide: Fréend thou doeſt me iniurie without cauſe, for I was neuer Diuell nor ill creature, I am as other be, but I coniure thée by the diuine puiſſance, to ſpeake vnto me. Then Gerames ſaid: Sirs, for Gods ſake let him alone, nor ſpeake no word to him, for by his faire language he may deceiue vs all, as he hath done many other, it is pity that he hath liued ſo long. Then they road forth a good pace, and left the Dwarfe alone ſore diſpleaſed, in that they would not ſpeake to him: then he tooke his Horne and ſet it to his mouth and blew it. When Huon and his companie hearde it, they had no power to ride any further, but they began all to ſing. Then Oberon the Dwarfe ſaid, yonder company are fooles & proud, that for any ſalutation that I can giue them, they diſdaine to anſweare mée: but by the God that made me, before they eſ
                     •
                  ape me, the refuſall of my words ſhalbe déere bought. Then he tooke againe his Horne, and ſtrooke it thrée times on his bowe, and cryed out aloud & ſaid: Yée my men, come and appeare before me. Then there came to

him about foure hundred men of armes, and demaunded of Oberon what was his pleaſure, & who had diſpleaſed him? Sirs, (quoth Oberon) I ſhall ſhew you: howbeit I am gréeued to ſhewe it, héere in this woode there paſſed fourtéene Knights, who diſdaine to ſpeake vnto me: but to the entent that they ſhall not mocke me, they ſhall déerely buy the refuſing of their anſweare: Wherefore I will you goe after them, and ſlay them all, let none eſcape. Then one of his Knights ſaid: Sir, for Gods ſake haue pitie of them. Certainly (quoth Oberon) mine honour ſaued, I cannot ſpare them, ſince they diſdaine to ſpeake vnto me. Sir, (quoth Glorianda) for Gods ſake doe not as you ſay: but ſir worke by my counſaile, and after doe as it pleaſeth you. Sir, I counſaile you yet once againe goe after them, then if they do not ſpeake, we ſhall ſlay them all: for ſurely Sir, if they ſée you returne againe to them ſo ſhortly, they will be in great feare. Fréend (quoth Oberon) I ſhall do as you haue counſailed mee. Thus Huon and his company road forth a great pace, and Huon ſaid: Sirs, we are now from the Dwarfe about fiue Leagues, I neuer ſawe in my life ſo faire a creature in the viſage, I haue great maruaile how he can ſpeake of almightie God, for I thinke he be a Deuill of hell, & ſince he ſpeaketh of God, mée thinkes we ought to ſpeake to him, for I thinke ſuch a creature can haue no power to doe vs any euill, I thinke hee be not paſt the age of fiue yeares. Sir, (quoth Gerames) as little as he ſéemeth, and that you take him for a Child, he was borne fortie yeares before the natiuitie of our Lord Ieſus Chriſt. Surely (quoth Huon) I care not what age he be of, but if he come againe, ill hap come to me if I kéepe my words and ſpeach from him, I pray you be not diſpleaſed.
               And thus as they road deuiſing fiftéene dayes, ſuddainly Oberon appeared vnto them, and ſaid: Sirs, are you not yet aduiſed to ſpeake vnto mée? yet againe I am come to ſalute you in the name of the God that made and fourmed vs, and I coniure you by the puiſſance that he hath giuen me, that

you ſpeake to me, for I repute you for fooles, to thinke thus to paſſe thorow my wood, and diſdaine to ſpeake to mée. Ah Huon, I know thée well ynough, and whether thou wouldſt goe, I know all thy déedes, howe thou ſleweſt Charlot, and after diſcomfited Amerie, and I knowe the Meſſuage that Charlemaine hath charged thée to ſay to ye Admirall Gaudiſe
                  ▪ the which thing is impoſſible to be done without mine ayd: 
                     •
                  or without me thou ſhalt neuer accompliſh this Enterprize. Speake to me, and I ſhall doe thée that courteſie, that I ſhall cauſe thée to atchiue thine Enterprize, the which is elſe impoſſible without mée, and when thou haſt atchiued thy Meſſuage, I ſhall bring thée againe into Fraunce in ſafegard. I know the cauſe that thou wilt not ſpeake to mée, it is by reaſon of old Gerames who is there with thée: therefore Huon beware of thy ſelfe, go no further, for I know well it is thrée dayes paſſed ſince thou diddeſt eate any meate to profit thée, if thou wilt beléeue me, thou ſhalt haue ynough of ſuch ſuſtenance as thou wilt wiſh for: and aſſoone as thou haſt dyned, I will giue thée leaue to depart, if it be thy pleaſure, of this haue no doubt. Sir, (quoth Huon) you bee welcome. Ah (quoth Oberon) thy ſalutation ſhalbe well rewarded, knowe for truth, thou neuer diddeſt ſalutation ſo profitable for thy ſelfe, thou mayeſt thanke God, that he hath ſent thée that grace.
            
            
               Chap. XXIIII.
               
                  ¶ Of the great maruailes that Oberon ſhewed vnto Huon, and of the aduentures that fell.
               
               
                  
                     WHen Huon had well heard Oberon, he had great maruaile, and demanded if it were true that hee had ſaide? Yes truly (quoth Oberon) of that make no doubt. Sir, (quoth Huon) I haue great maruaile

for what cauſe you haue alwayes purſued vs. Huon (quoth Oberon) know that I loue thée well, bicauſe of the truth that is in thée, and therfore naturally I loue thée, and if thou wilt knowe who I am, I ſhall ſhew thée. True it is, Iulius Caeſar engendred me on the Ladie of the ſecret Iſle, who was ſometime well beloued of the faire Florimont, of Albania. But bicauſe that Florimont who as then was young, and he had a Mother who did ſo much, that ſhe ſaw my Mother and Florimont together in a ſolitary place on the Sea ſide: when my Mother perceiued that ſhe was eſpyed by Florimonts mother, ſhe departed and left Florimont her louer in great wéeping and lamentations, and neuer ſaw him after. And then ſhee returned into her owne Countrey of the ſecret Iſle, the which now is named Chafalone, whereas ſhe married after, and had a Sonne who in his time after was King of Eg
                        •
                     pt, named Nactanabus, it was he as it is ſaid that engendred Alexander the great, who after cauſed him to die. Then after a Seauen yeares, Caeſar paſſed by the Sea as he went vnto the place whereas he fought with Pompey, in his way hee paſſed by Chafalone, where my Mother fetched him, and hée fell in loue with her, bicauſe ſhe ſhewed him that he ſhould diſcomfite Pompey, as he did. Thus I haue ſhewed you who was my Father, at my birth there was many Princes and Barons of the Fayry, and many a noble Ladie that came to ſée my Mother whiles ſhe trauailed of mée, and amonge them there was one was not content, bicauſe ſhee was not ſent for as well as the other, and when I was borne, ſhee gaue mee a gift, the which was, that when I ſhould paſſe thrée yeares of age, I ſhould grow no more, but thus as you ſée mee nowe, and when ſhe had thus done, and ſawe that ſhe had thus ſerued me by her words, ſhe repented her ſelfe, and would recompence mee another way. Then ſhee gaue me another gift, and that was, that I ſhould be the faireſt creature that euer nature fourmed, as thou mayeſt ſ
                     ••
                   mée now: & another Ladie of the Fayry named Tranſtyna, gaue me another gift, and that was, all that euer any man can

know or thinke good or ill I ſhould knowe it. The third Ladie to doe more for me, and to pleaſe my Mother the better, ſhe gaue me, that there is not ſo farre a Countrey, but that if I wil wiſh my ſelfe there, I ſhal be there incontinent with what number of men as I liſt, and moreouer if I will haue a Caſtle or a Pallaice at mine owne deuice, incontinent it ſhall be made, and aſſoone gone againe when I liſt, & what meat or wine that I would wiſh for, I ſhould haue it incontinent, and alſo I am Kinge of Momur the which is about foure hundred Leagues from hence, and if I li
                     •
                  t incontinent I can be there. Know for troth that thou art arriued at a good Port, I know well thou haſt great néede of meat, for this thrée dayes thou haſt had but ſmall ſuſtenance, but I ſhall cauſe thée to haue ynough, I demaund of thée whether thou wilt haue meat and drinke héere in this meadow, or in a Pallaice, or in a Hall, commaund whereas thou wilt, and thou ſhalt haue it for thée and thy companie. Sir, (quoth Huon) I will follow your pleaſure, and neuer doe nor thinke the contrarie. Huon (quoth he) as yet I haue not ſhewed all the gifts that were giuen me at my birth. The fourth Ladie gaue me, that there is no bird, nor beaſt be they neuer ſo cruell, but if I will haue them, I may take them with my hande, and alſo I ſhall neuer beſéeme elder then thou ſéeeſt me now, and when I ſhal depart out of this world, my place is appointed in Paradiſe, for I knowe that all things created in this mortall world, muſt néeds haue an end. Sir, (quoth Huon) ſuch a gift ought to be well kept. Huon (quoth Oberon) well you were counſailed when you ſpake to me, you had neuer before ſo faire aduenture, ſhew me by thy faith, if thou wilt eate, and what meate thou wilt haue, and what wine thou wilt drinke? Sir, (quoth Huon) ſo that I had meate and drinke I care not what it were, ſo that I and my company were filled and rid from our famine. Then Oberon laughed at him and ſaid: Sirs, all you ſit down here in the meadowe, and haue no doubt but all that I will doe is done by the puiſſance of our Lord God: then Oberon began

to wiſh, and ſaide vnto Huon and his companie: Sirs ariſe vp quickly, the which they did, then they looked before them, and ſawe a faire and a rich Pallaice garniſhed with Chambers and Halles, hanged & bedded with rich cloathes of ſilke beaten with gold, and Tables ready ſet full of meat. When Huon and his company ſawe the rich Pallaice before them, they had great maruaile, and Oberon tooke Huon by the hand, & with him mounted vp into the Pallaice: when they came there, they found ſeruants there readie, bringing vnto them Baſons of gould garniſhed with precious ſtones, they gaue water to Huon, and he ſat down at the Table, the which was furniſhed with all manner of meate and drinke that man could wiſh.
               
                  Oberon ſat at the tables end vpon a bench of Iuorie, richly garniſhed with gould and precious ſtones, the which ſeat had ſuch vertue giuen vnto it by the Fayrie, that whoſoeuer by any ſubtil means would poyſon him that ſhould ſit thereon: aſſoone as he ſhould approach néere to the ſeat he ſhould fall downe ſtarke dead. King Oberon ſat thereon richly apparelled, and Huon who ſat néere vnto him began to eate a great pace, but Gerames had ſmall appetite to eate, for he beléeued that they ſhould neuer depart thence: when Oberon ſawe him he ſaid, Gerames eate thy meat and drinke, for aſſoone as thou haſt eaten, thou ſhalt haue leaue to goe when thou liſt. When Gerames heard that, he was ioyfull, then he began to eate and drinke, for he knew well that Oberon would not doe againſt his aſſurance. All the companie did well eate and drinke, they were ſerued with all thinges that they could wiſh for. When Huon ſawe how they were all ſatiſfied and repleat, and had well dyned, he ſaide to Kinge Oberon. Sir, when it ſhall be your pleaſure, I would you ſhould giue vs leaue to depart. Huon, (quoth Oberon) I am right well content ſo to doe, but firſt I will ſhewe you my iewels: then he called Clariand a Knight of the Fayrey, and ſaide, Fréend goe and fetch to me my Cup, he did his commaundement, and when Oberon had the Cup in his hand,

he ſaid vnto Huon, Sir, behold well, you ſée that this Cup is nowe voyd and emptie: that is true Sir, (quoth Huon.) Then Oberon ſet the Cup on the Table, and ſaide vnto Huon: Sir, behold the great power that God hath giuen mée, & that in the Fayrie I may doe what is my pleaſure: then hée made ouer the Cup the ſigne of a Croſſe thrée times, and incontinent the Cup was full of wine, and then he ſaid. Behold Sirs, you may well ſée that this is done by the gace of God, yet I ſhall ſhewe you the great vertue that is in this Cup, for if all the men in the world were héere aſſembled together, and that the Cup were in the handes of any man, being out of deadly ſinne, he might drinke thereof his fill: but whoſoeuer offers his hand to take it, being in deadly ſinne, the Cuppe doth looſe his vertue, and if thou mayeſt drinke thereof, I offer to giue thée the Cup. Sir, (quoth Huon) I thanke you, but I am in doubt that I am not worthy, nor of valour to drinke thereof, nor to touch the Cup, I neuer heard of ſuch dignitie as this Cup is of: but Sir, knowe for truth, I haue béen confeſſed of all my ſinnes, and I am repentant and ſorrowfull for that I haue done, and I doe pardon and forgiue all the men in the world, whatſoeuer iniurie hath béene done vnto me, and I knowe not that I haue done wronge to any creature, nor I hate no man: and ſo hée tooke the Cup in both his handes, and ſet it to his mouth, and droonke of the good wine that was therein at his pleaſure.
            
            
               
               Chap. XXV.
               
                  ¶ Of the great gifts that Oberon gaue vnto Huon, as his Horne of Iuorie, and his Cup, the which were of great vertues, and how Huon after thought to prooue the vertue of thē, whereby he was in great perill of death.
               
               
                  
                     WHen Oberon ſawe that, hee was right glad, and came and embraced Huon, ſaying that he was a noble man, and I giue thée (quoth he) this Cup as it is, in the manner as I ſhall ſhewe, that in any wiſe for any thing for the dignitie of the Cup, be thou euer true and faithfull, for if thou wilt worke by my counſaile, I ſhall aide thée, and giue thée ſuccour in all thine affaires: but aſſoone as thou makeſt any lye, the vertue of the Cup will be loſt and looſe his bountie, and beſide that, thou ſhalt looſe my loue and aide. Sir, (quoth Huon) I ſhall right well beware thereof, and nowe Sir I require you ſuffer vs to depart. Abide yet, (quoth he to Huon) yet I haue another iewell, the which I will giue thée, bicauſe I thinke there bee truth and noblenes in thée: I will giue thée a rich Horne of Iuorie, the which is full of great vertue, & which thou ſhalt beare with thée, it is of ſo great vertue, that if thou be neuer ſo farre from me, aſſoone as thou bloweſt ye Horne, I ſhall heare thée, and ſhalbe incontinent with thée, with a hundred thouſand men at armes for to ſuccour and ayd thée. But one thinge I commaund thée on the payne of looſing of my loue, and on ieopardie of thy life, that thou be not ſo hardy to ſound the Horne, without thou haſt great néede thereof, for if thou doe otherwiſe, I vowe to God that created mée, I ſhall leaue thée in as great pouertie and miſerie as euer man was, ſo that whoſoeuer ſhould ſée thée in that caſe,

ſhould haue pitie of thée. Sir, (quoth Huon) I ſhall right well beware thereof, now I deſire you let me depart. I am content, (quoth Oberon) and God be thy guide. Then Huon tooke leaue of the Kinge Oberon, and truſſed vp all his baggage, and did put his Cup into his boſome, & the Horne about his necke: thus they all tooke their leaue of King Oberon, & all weeping embraced Huon, who had maruaile why he wept and ſaid, Sir, why doe you wéepe? Fréend, (quoth Oberon) you may well know, you haue with you two things that I loue dearely, God ayd you, more I cannot ſpeake to you.
               Thus the fourtéene Knightes departed, and ſo they road foorth about fiftéene Leagues or more, then they ſawe before them a great déepe Riuer, and they could finde no guide nor paſſage to paſſe ouer, and ſo they wiſt not what to doe, then ſuddainly they ſawe paſſe by them a ſeruant of King Oberon, bearing a rod of gold in his hand, and ſo without ſpeaking of any word, he entred into the Riuer, and tooke his rod & ſtroke the water therewith thrée times, then incontinent ye water withdrew a both ſides in ſuch wiſe, that there was a path that thrée men might ride a froont, and that done he departed againe, without ſpeaking of any word. Then Huon and his companie entred into the water, and ſo paſſed thorowe without any danger, and when they were paſt they looked behind them, and ſawe the Riuer cloſe againe, and ran after his old courſe. By my faith, (quoth Huon) I thinke we be enchaunted, I beléeue ſurely King Oberon hath done this, but ſéeing we be thus ſcaped out of perill, I truſt from henceforth we ſhall haue no more doubt. Thus they roade foorth together ſinging, and oftentimes ſpake of the great maruailes that they had ſeene King Oberon doe, and as they road, Huon beheld on his right hand, and ſawe a faire meadowe well garniſhed with hearbes and flowers, and in the middeſt thereof a faire cleare Fountaine: then Huon roade thether, and alighted, and let their Horſes goe to paſture, then they ſpread a cloath on the gréene graſſe, and ſet thereon

ſuch meate as Kinge Oberon had giuen them at their departing, and there they did eat, & drinke ſuch drinke as they found in the Cup. By my faith (quoth Huon) it was a faire aduenture for vs when we met Oberon, and that I ſpake to him, he hath ſhewed me great tokens of loue, when he gaue me ſuch a Cup, if I may returne into Fraunce in ſauegard, I ſhall giue it to Charlemaine, who will make great ioy therwith, and if he cannot drinke thereof, the Barons of Fraunce will haue great ſport thereof. Then againe he repented him of his owne words, and ſaid, I am a foole to thinke or to ſay thus, for as yet I cannot tell what end I ſhall come to, the Cup that I haue is better worth then two Cities, but as yet I cannot beléeue the vertue to be in the Horne as Oberon ha
                     •
                  h ſhewed, nor that he may héere it ſo farre off, but whatſoeuer fortune fall, I will aſſay it if it hath ſuch vertue or not. Alas Sir (quoth Gerames) beware what you doe, you knowe well when wée departed what charge he gaue you, certainly you and we both are loſt if you treſpas againſt his commaundement. Surely, (quoth Huon) whatſoeuer fortune fall, I will aſſay it, and ſo tooke the Horne and ſet it to his mouth, and blewe it ſo loud that the wood rang: then Gerames and all the other began to ſing and to make great ioy. Then Garyn ſaid, Faire Nephewe blowe ſtill, and ſo Huon blew ſtill with ſuch force, that Oberon who was in his wood about fiftéene Leagues of, heard him clearely, and ſaid: Alas my fréends, I heare my fréend blowe, whome I loue beſt of all the world, alas what man is ſo hardy to doe him any ill, I wiſhe my ſelfe with him with a hundred thouſand men at armes, incontinent he was nere to Huon with a hundred thouſand men at armes. When Huon and his companie heard the Hoaſt comming, and ſaw Oberon come ryding on before them, they were affraid, and it was no maruaile, ſéeing the commaundement that Oberon had giuen them before. Then Huon ſaide, alas Sirs, I haue done ill, nowe I ſée well we cannot eſcape, but that we are likely all to die, certainly (quoth Gerames) you haue well deſerued it, houlde

your peace, (quoth Huon) diſmay you not, let me ſpeake to him; therewith Oberon came to them and ſaide: Huon, what mea
                     •
                  eth this? where are they that will doe thée any ill? why haſt thou broken my commaundement? Alas Sir, (quoth Huon) I ſhall ſhew you the truth, wée were ſitting right now in this meadowe, and did eat of that you gaue vs, I beléeue I tooke too much drinke out of the Cup that you gaue me, the vertue of the which we well aſſayed: then I thought to trye alſo the vertue of the rich Horne, to the entent that if I ſhoulde haue any néede, that I might be ſure thereof, now I know for troth, that all is true that you haue ſhewed me: wherefore Sir in the honour of God I require you to pardon my treſpas, elſe ſir, héere is my ſwoord, ſtrike off my head at your pleaſure, for 
                     •
                   know well without your ayd I ſhall neuer come to atchieue mine enterpriſe. Huon quoth Oberon, the bountie and great troth that is in thée, cō
                  ſtreyneth me to giue thee pardon, but beware from hencefoorth, be not ſo hardy as to breake my commaundement. Sir quod Huon I thanke you: well quoth Oberon, I knowe ſurely that thou haſt as yet much to ſuffer, for thou muſt paſſe by a citie named Tormont, wherein there is a Tyrant called Macayr, and yet he is thine owne Vncle, brother to thy father Duke Seuin: when he was in Fraunce he had thought to haue murdered king Charlemaine, but his treaſon was knowne, and he had béen ſlaine if thy Father Duke Seuin had not béen: ſo he was ſent to ye holy Sepulchre, to do his penaunce for the ill that he had d
                     •
                  ne, and ſo afterward there he renounced the faith of our Lord God, and tooke vppon him the Paynims Law, the which he hath kept euer ſince ſo ſtrongly, that if he heare any man ſpeake of our lord god, he will purſue him to death, and looke what promiſe that hée maketh, he keepeth none, therefore I aduiſe thee truſt not on him, for ſurely he will put thee to death if he may, & thou canſt not eſcape if thou goeſt by that City: therefore I counſaile thee take not that way if thou be wiſe. Sir, (quoth Huon) of your courteſie loue and good councell I thanke you,

but whatſoeuer fortune fall to me, I will go to mine Vncle, and if he be ſuch a one as you ſay, I ſhall make him to die an ill death, and if néede be I ſhall ſound my Horne, and I am ſure at my néede you will ayd me. Of that you may be ſure (quoth Oberon,) but of one thing I forbid thée, be not ſo hardy to ſound thy Horne without thou bée hurt, for if thou doe the contrarie, I ſhall ſo martir thée, that thy bodie ſhall not endure it. Sir, (quoth Huon) bée aſſured your commaundement I will not breake: then Huon tooke leaue of King Oberon, who was ſorrie when Huon departed. Sir, (quoth Huon) I haue maruaile why you wéepe, I pray you ſhew mee the cauſe why you doe it? Huon (quoth Oberon) the great loue that I haue to thée, is that cauſeth me to doe it, for as yet hereafter thou ſhalt ſuffer ſo much ill and trauaile, that no humane tongue can tell it. Sir quoth Huon ye ſhew me many things not greatly to my profite: Sure quoth Oberon, and yet thou ſhalt ſuffer more than I haue ſpoken of, and al by thine owne folly.
            
            
               Chap. XXVI.
               
                  ¶ How Huon arriued at Tormont, and found a man at a gate, who brought him to lodge at the Prouoſts howſe in the towne.
               
               
                  
                     AFter that Oberō
                      had ſhewed Huon part of that ſhould fall to him, and was departed, Huon and his company thē mounted on their horſes, and ſo rode foorth ſo long, till they came to the cittie of Tormont. Gerames
                   who had béen there before, when he ſaw the citie, he ſaid to Huon: Alas ſir, we be ill ariued, behould here we be in the way to ſuffer much trouble. Sir quoth Huon, be not diſmaide, for by the grace of god wée

ſhall right well eſcape, for who that God will aide, no man can hurt. Then they entred into the Citie, as they came to the gate, they met a man with a bowe in his hand, who had beene a ſporting without the Citie, Huon road formoſt and ſaluted him in the name of God, ſaying: Fréend what call you this Citie? The man ſtood ſtill, and had maruaile what men they were that ſpake of God, he beheld them and ſaid, Sirs, the God in whoſe name you haue ſaluted mée, kéepe and defende you from incombrance: howbeit, I deſire you in as much as you loue your liues, ſpeake ſoftly that you bée not heard, for if the Lord of this Citie knowe that you bée chriſtian men, he will ſlay you all, ſirs you may truſt me, for I am chriſtened, but I dare not be knowne thereof, I haue ſuch feare of the Duke. Fréend, (quoth Huon) I pray thée ſhew me who is Lord of this Citie, & what is his name? Sir, (quoth he) he is a falſe Tyrant, when he was chriſtened, he was named Macayr, but he hath renounced God, & he is ſo fierce and proud, that as nowe hee hateth nothing ſo much, as them that beléeue in Ieſus Chriſt: but Sir, I pray you ſhewe me whether you will goe? Fréend, (quoth Huon) I would gladly goe to the red Sea, and from thence to Babilon, I would tarie this day in this Citie, for I and my companie are ſore wearie. Sir, (quoth he) and if you will beléeue me, you ſhall not enter into this Citie to lodge, for if the Duke knewe it, none could ſaue your liues, therefore if it be your pleaſure, I ſhall lead you another way beſide the Towne. Sir, (quoth Gerames) for Gods ſake beléeue him that counſaileth you ſo truly. Know for troth, (quoth Huon) I will not doe thus, I ſée well it is almoſt night, the Sun goeth lowe, therefore I will lodge this night héere in this Towne whatſoeuer befall, for a good Towne ſhould neuer be forſaken. Sir, (quoth the ſtrange man) ſéeing it is ſo, for the loue of God I ſhall bring you to a lodging, whereas you ſhalbe well and honeſtly lodged, in a good mans houſe that beléeueth in God, named Gonder, he is Prouoſt of the City, and well beloued with the Duke. Fréend, (quoth Huon)

God reward thée, ſo this man went on thorow the Towne, vntill he came at the Prouoſts houſe, whome they founde ſitting at his gate. Huon that was a faire ſpeaker, ſaluted him in the name of God, and the Prouoſt aroſe vp, & beheld Huon and his companie, and he had great maruaile what they were, ſéeing they ſaluted him in the name of God: then he ſaid. Sirs you be welcome, but a Gods name I deſire you ſpeake ſoftly that you be not heard, for if the Duke of this Citie knewe this you ſhould vtterly bee loſte: but if it pleaſe you to tary this night héere in my houſe, for the loue of God, all that I haue in my houſe ſhall be yours to doe therewith at your pleaſure, I abandon all to you, & Sir, I thanke God I haue yt in my houſe, that if you abide héere this twoo yeare, you ſhall not néede to buy any thing without. Sir, (quoth Huon) of this faire proffer I thanke you, and ſo he and his companie alighted, and there were ſeruants ynough to take their Horſes and to ſet them vp: then the Hoſt tooke Huon and Gerames and the other, & brought them to Chambers to dreſſe them, then they came into the hall wheras they found the Tables ſet and couered, and ſo ſat downe, & were richly ſerued with diuers meats. When they had done and were ryſen, Huon called Gerames and ſaid: Sir, goe in haſt into the Towne and get a cryer, and cauſe to be cryed in euerie market place and ſtréete, that whoſoeuer will come and ſup at the Prouoſts houſe, aſwell noble, as vn
                     •••
                  le men, women and children, rich and poore, and all manner of people of what eſtate or degrée ſoeuer they be: ſhall come merrily and fréely▪ and nothing pay neither for meat nor drinke, whereof they ſhould haue as they wiſhed, and alſo hée commaunded Gerames, that all the meat that he could get in the Towne, he ſhould buy it, and pay readie money for ye ſame. Sir, (quoth Gerames) your pleaſure ſhall be done. Sir, (quoth the Hoſt) you know well, all that is in my houſe, I haue abandoned vnto you: therefore ſir you ſhall not néed to ſeeke for any thing further, take of my goods at your pleaſure. Sir, (quoth Huon) I thanke you, I haue monney

ynough to fourniſh all that néede, and alſo Sir I haue a Cup of great vertue, for if all the people that be within this Citie were héere preſent, they ſhould haue drinke ynough by reaſon of my Cup, the which was made in Fayry Land. When the Hoſt heard Huon, he began to ſmile, & beléeued that thoſe words had béene ſpoken but in ieſt. Then Huon, not well aduiſed, tooke the Horne of Iuorie from his necke, and tooke it to his Hoſt to kéepe, ſaying: mine Hoſte, I take you this to kéepe, for it is a precious thing, therefore kéepe it ſurely, that I may haue it againe when I demaund it. Sir, (quoth he) I ſhall ſurely kéepe it, and when it pleaſe you it ſhall bée readie: and ſo tooke the Horne and layd it vp in a Coffer. But after fell ſuch an houre, that Huon would haue had it rather then all the goods in ye world, as you ſhall heare more hereafter.
            
            
               Chap. XXVII.
               
                  ¶ How Huon gaue a ſupper vnto all the poore men of the Citie, and howe the Duke was Vncle to Huon: and howe the Duke had Huon into his Caſtle.
               
               
                  
                     THVS when Gerames had this commaundement of Huon, he went into the Citie, and made to be cryed in diuers places as he was commanded to do. When this crye was made, there was no Begger, Vacabound nor Ribauld, Iugler, Minſtrell, old nor yong, but by great flockes they came all to the Prouoſts houſe, in number more then foure hundred, and Gerames bought vp bread, meat, fleſh and other victuals, all that he could finde in the Citie, and payed for it: thus the ſupper was dreſſed, and euerie man ſet at the Tables. Huon ſerued them with his Cup in his hand, and made euerie man to drinke of that

he put out of his Cup into other pots, and yet euer the Cup was full. When the people had well eaten and dronken the good wines, and were well chaſed in their braines, ſome began to ſing, and ſome to ſleepe at the Table, and ſome did beat their fyſts vpon the boards, that it was maruaile to ſée the life that they led: whereof Huon had great ioy. The ſame time the Dukes Steward came into the Towne, to buy his Maiſters Supper: but he could neither find bread nor fleſh, nor no other victuals, whereof he was ſore diſpleaſed, and then he demaunded the cauſe, why he found no victuals as he was accuſtomed to doe? Sir, (quoth the Butchers and Bakers) in the houſe of Gonder the Prouoſt is lodged a yong man, who hath made to be cryed in all the City, that al beggers and ribaulds ſhould come to Supper at his lodging, and he hath bought vp all the victuals that he could get in the Towne. Then the Paynim in great deſpight went to ye Pallaice vnto the Duke, and ſaid. Sir, I can get nothing in the Towne for your Supper, there is a young man lodged in the Prouoſts houſe, that hath bought vp all the victuals, to giue a Supper to all the beggers, vacabounds and ribaulds that can be found in the Towne.
               When the Duke vnderſtood that, he was ſore diſpleaſed, and ſwoore by Mahound, that he would go ſee that Supper: then he commaunded all his men to be readie in harneſſe to goe with him, and as he was going out of his Pallaice, a Traytor who had ſtollen priuily out of the Prouoſts houſe, whereas he had been at ſupper with other, ſaid to the Duke: ſir know for troth, there is in your Prouoſts houſe a knight, who hath giuen a Supper to all people that would come thether, and ſo there is no begger, no ribauld nor other that would ſup, but are come thether, and Sir, this Knight hath a Cup Letter worth then all this Citie, for if all the people betweene Eaſt and Weſt ſhould dye for lacke of drinke, they ſhould haue all ynough, for as often as you will emptie the Cup, it will be full againe incontinent. When the Duke heard that, he had great maruaile, and ſaide, ſuch a Cuppe

were good for him, and ſwoore by Mahound that he would haue that Cup: let vs go thether, for my will is to haue that Cup, and all thoſe Knights ſhall looſe their horſes and baggage, I will leaue them nothing.
               Then he went foorth with thirtie Knights, and reſted not vntill he came to the Prouoſts houſe, and founde the gates open. When the Prouoſt perceiued him, he came to Huon and ſaide: Alas Sir you haue done ill, héere is come the Duke in great diſpleaſure, if God haue not pitie of you, I cannot ſée how you can eſcape without death. Sir, (quoth Huon) diſmay you not, for I ſhall ſpeake ſo faire, that he ſhall be content: then Huon with a merrie chéere came to the Duke, and ſaid: Sir, you be welcome. Beware, (quoth the Duke) come not néere me, for no chriſtian man may come into my Citie without my Licence, wherefore I will thou knoweſt, that you ſhall all looſe your heads, and all that you brought hether. Sir, (quoth Huon) when you haue ſlaine vs, you ſhall win thereby but little, and it were great wrong for you ſo to doe. I ſhall tell thée, (quoth the Duke) why I will ſo do, it is bycauſe you be chriſtian men, therefore thou ſhalt be the firſt, ſhewe me on thy faith, why haſt thou aſſembled all this companie héere to Supper? Sir, (quoth Huon) I haue done it bicauſe I am going to the red Sea, and bicauſe theſe poore men will pray to God for me, that I may ſafely returne: Sir this is the cauſe that I haue made them to ſup with me. Well, (quoth the Duke) great folly haſt thou ſpoken, for thou ſhalt neuer ſée faire day, you ſhall all looſe your heads. Sir, (quoth Huon) leaue all this, I pray you and your comapanie ſit downe, and eate and drinke at your pleaſure, and I ſhall ſerue you as well as I can, and then Sir if I haue done any wrong, I will make you amends in ſuch wiſe that you ſhall be content: for if you doe me any hurt, it ſhall be to you but a ſmall conqueſt. Sir, me thinks if you will do nobly, you ſhould ſomewhat forbeare vs, for as I haue heard ſay, you were once chriſtened. Then the Duke ſaid vnto Huon, thou haſt ſayd well, I am content to

ſup, for as yet I haue not ſupped. Then the Duke commaunded euerie man to be diſarmed, and to ſit downe at the Table, the which they did, and Huon and Gerames ſerued them, and they were well ſerued at that ſupper: then Huon tooke his Cup and came to the Duke and ſaid. Sir, ſée you not héere this Cup, the which is voyd and emptie? I ſée well (quoth the Duke) there is nothing therein. Then Huon made the ſigne of the croſſe ouer the Cup, and incontinent it was full of wine, he tooke the Cuppe to the Duke, who had great maruaile thereof, and aſſoone as the Cuppe was in his handes, it was voyd againe. What, (quoth the Duke) thou haſt enchaunted mee? Sir, (quoth Huon) I am none Enchaunter, but it is for the ſin that you be in, ſet it down, for you are not worthy to hold it, you were borne in an euill houre. How art thou ſo hardy (quoth the Duke) to ſpeake thus vnto me? I repute thee for a proud foole, thou knoweſt well it lyeth in my power to deſtroy thée, there is no man dare ſay the contrarie, yet I pray thée tell me thy name, and where thou wert borne? and whether thou goeſt? and of what kinne thou art? Sir, (quoth Huon) for any thinge that may fal vnto me, I wil not hide my name nor kindred: therefore Sir, know for troth, I was borne at Bourdeaux vpon Gerone, and am Sonne to Duke Seuin, who is dead ſeauen yeares paſſed. When the Duke heard how Huon was his Nephew, he ſaide: The Sonne of my Brother? Nephew, why haſt thou taken in this Citie any other lodging but mine? ſhewe mée whether thou wilt goe? Sir, (quoth Huon) I am going to Babilon to the Admirall Gaudiſe, to doe to him a Meſſuage from King Charlemaine of Fraunce, bycauſe I ſlewe his Sonne there: ſo he ſhewed his Vncle all his aduenture, and how the king had taken away his Land, nor ſhould he haue it againe, vntill he had done his Meſſuage to the Admirall. Faire Nephew, (quoth the Duke) in like wiſe I was baniſhed the Realme of Fraunce, and ſince I haue denyed the faith of Ieſus Chriſt, and ſince I married héere in this Countrey a great Ladie, by whome I haue

great Lands to gouerne, whereof I am Lord: Nephew, I will that you ſhall goe and lodge with me in my Caſtle, and to morrow you ſhall haue of my Barons to conduct you vntill you come vnto Babilon. Sir, (quoth Huon) I thanke you, ſince it is your pleaſure, I will goe with you to your Pallaice. Then Gerames priuily ſayd vnto him, Sir, if you goe thether, you may perhaps repent your ſelfe: ſo it may well be, (quoth Gonder the Prouoſt.) Then Huon commanded to truſſe vp all their geare, and to make readie their horſes, and tooke with him his Cup, but he left ſtill his Horne with the Prouoſt. Thus Huon went with his Vncle vnto his Caſtle, and lay there all night: the next morning Huon came vnto his Vncle to take his leaue. Faire Nephew, (quoth the Duke) I require you to tarie vntill my Barons come, that ſhall conduct you in your iourney. Sir, (quoth Huon) ſéeing it pleaſeth you, I am content to abide, and ſo they ſat them downe to dinner.
            
            
               Chap. XXVIII.
               
                  ¶ How the Duke thought to haue murdered Huon his owne Nephew, whiles he ſat at the Table.
               
               
                  
                     WHen this Traytour Duke ſawe his Nephewe ſit at the Table, hee called to him a Knight borne in Fraunce called Geffrey, who came out of Fraunce with the Duke, and had in like manner denyed the law of Chriſt, and he was ſecret with the Duke, then the Duke priuily ſayde vnto him. Fréend, go and arme an Hundred or Six ſcore Paynims, and cauſe them to come hether, let them ſlay my Nephew, and all that are come with him, for if one eſcape, you ſhall looſe my fauour. Sir, (quoth Geffrey) your will ſhalbe done,

then Geffrey went into a Chamber, whereas there was two Hundred Armours hanging, when he came thether, he ſaid within himſelfe. Alas good Lord, this villaine Traytour would ſlay the Sonne of his Brother, who when I was in Fraunce did me once a great courteſie, for I had béene dead & ſlaine if Duke Seuin his Father had not ſuccoured me: it is reaſon for that he did then to mée, to render againe ſome reward vnto his Sonne, God confound mee if he hath any ill for me, but I ſhall rather cauſe the falſe Duke to buy dearely the treaſon that he would doe vnto his Nephewe. The ſame ſeaſon there was in the Caſtle about Seauen-ſcore Priſoners all French-men, who were taken vpon the Sea,
and the Duke kept them in priſon, to the intent to put them to death, he was ſo cruell againſt all chriſtian men: but God who neuer forgetteth his ſeruants, ſucoured them. This Geffrey went to the Priſon, and ſaid to the priſoners: Sirs if you will ſaue your liues, come out and follow me. Then the priſoners incontinent yſſued out of the Priſon, and followed Geffrey, & he brought them into the Chamber whereas all the harneſſe hanged, and cauſed them all to be armed, and ſaid: Sirs, if you haue courage and will to iſſue hence, it is time now you ſhew your vertue. Sir, (quoth they) to dye in the quarrell we ſhall doe your commaundement, to come out of bondage into fréedome. When Geffrey hearde them, he was right ioyfull, and ſayd: Sirs, know ſurely, that there is héere in this Pallaice at dinner ye Son of Duke Seuin of Bourdeaux, and he is Nephewe to the Duke Lord of this houſe, who was once chriſtened, and hath denyed the faith of our Lord God, and he hath commaunded me to cauſe Seauen-ſcore Paynims to be armed, to come and to ſlay his Nephewe and all his company. Thus when they were all armed, and Swords by their ſides, they followed Geffrey to the Pallaice: and when they entred, Huon ſayd to the Duke his Vncle. Sir, theſe men in harneſſe that enter into this hall, be they ſuch as ye haue commaunded to come hether to conduct me in my iourney? No Huon quoth the Duke: it is

otherwiſe then thou thinkeſt, thinke ſurely to die there is no remedie: thou ſhalt neuer ſée faire day more. Then he ſaid: Sirs ſtep forth, looke that no chriſtian man eſcape you, but let them all be ſlaine.
            
            
               Chap. XXIX.
               
                  ¶How by the ayd of Geffrey and of the Priſoners, Huon was ſuccoured, and ſlew all the Paynims, and the Duke fled, and after beſieged the Caſtle.
               
               
                  
                     WHen Huon ſawe the malice of his Vncle and his falſe treaſon: he was ſore abaſhed, and aroſe vp ſuddainly, and put his helmet on his head, and tooke his Sword in his hand. Then Geffrey came in, and cryed Saint Denis you noble French-men, take héede that no Paynim eſcape aliue, but ſlay them all with ſorrow. The French-men drew out their Swords, and fought with the Paynims on all parts, ſo that within a ſhort time they were all ſlaine. And when the Duke ſawe howe they were no Paynims that ſlewe his men, hée was in great feare of his life, and ſo fled away into a ſecret Chamber. When Huon perceiued that they were French-men that had thus ſuccoured him: he purſued the Duke with his Sword in his hand, all bloudy with the bloud of the Paynims that he had ſlaine, and when the trayterous Duke ſaw that his Nephewe ſo followed him, hee fledde from Chamber to Chamber, vntill hee came to a windowe opening vppon the Garden ſide, and ſo leapt out thereat and ran away: whereof Huon and Geffrey and the other French-men were right ſorrowfull. Then they cloſed the gates, and lifted vp the bridges, to the entent that they ſhould not be taken within, then they came into the Hall, whereas one tooke acquaintance

of another, whereof they had great ioy. But if God had not ſuccoured them, their ioy had béen turned to ſorrow, for the Duke who was eſcaped, when he came into ye towne, he made a crye, that as many as were able to beare armour, ſhould come vnto him, ſo that he and all that he could make, came with him before the Pallaice, being more then Tenne Thouſand perſons, and they all ſware the death of the chriſtian men within the Pallaice. When the Duke ſaw that hée had ſuch a number, he was ioyfull, and then he commanded his Engins to be raiſed vp, and Ladders on euerie part, and there with Pikes and Mattockes they brake downe a corner Tower, and the chriſtian men within defended them ſelues valiantly. But their defence had little auailed them, if our Lord God had not mightily ſuccoured them. When Huon knewe the danger that they were in, hée was ſore diſpleaſed, and ſayd: Ah good Lord, I ought to be ſore agréeued, when I ſee that wée be thus kept in by mine Vncle, I feare me we ſhall neuer ſée more dayes. Then Gerames ſaid: Sir, for the loue of God blowe nowe your Horne. Alas (quoth Huon) it is not in my power to doe it, for the Prouoſt Gonder hath it in kéeping. Ah Huon, (quoth Gerames) in an ill houre we were acquainted with you, for nowe by your folly and pride, we are in the way of diſtruction. Thus as they were deuiſing, Gonder the Prouoſt came to the Duke, and ſaid: Sir, I haue great maruaile that you will thus deſtroy your owne Pallaice, great folly you doe therein, rather I would councell you to leaue this aſſault, and let there be a peace made betwéene you and your Nephew, vpon condition to let him and his company go ſafely away. Prouoſt (quoth the Duke) I pray 
                     〈◊〉
                   goe and doe the beſt that thou canſt, I will do as thou doeſt counſaile me. Then the Prouoſt came to the Pallaice, and ſayd to Huon: Sir, for Gods ſake ſpeake to mée. What art thou quoth Huon? I am your Hoſt the Prouoſt, and I require you in as much as you loue your liues, kéepe well this Pallaice. Sir, (quoth Huon) for your good counſaile I thanke you, and I deſire you for the

loue that you beare me, and in that you would help to ſaue my life, as to deliuer me againe the Horne of Iuorie that I tooke you to kéepe, for without that I cannot eſcape death. Sir, (quoth the Prouoſt) it is not farre from me, and ſo tooke it out of his boſome, and deliuered it vnto Huon in at a windowe vpon the Garden ſide.
            
            
               Chap. XXX.
               
                  ¶How King Oberon came and ſuccoured Huon, and ſlewe all the Paynims, except ſuch as would be chriſtened: And how Huon ſlewe the Duke his Vncle.
               
               
                  
                     WHen Huon ſaw that he was poſſeſſed of his Horne of Iuorie, hee was ioyfull, the which was no maruaile, for it was the only ſuertie of his life. Then hée ſet it to his mouth, and began to blowe it: then Gerames ſaid. Ah Sir, you ſhould neuer bee ſo lighte to diſcouer your ſecrets, for if this Prouoſt had béene vntrue, he might haue diſcouered all you ſecrets to the Duke, whereby you had béene loſt and dead, therefore neuer diſcouer your ſecrets more: and alſo Sir I require you as yet blowe not your Horne, for you bee not as yet hurt, King Oberon commaunded you ſo at his departing. Why (quoth Huon) will you then that I tarrye vntill I be ſlaine? ſurely I will blowe it without any longer tarying, and ſo he blewe it ſo ſore that the bloud came out of his mouth, ſo that all that were in the Pallaice began to ſinge and to daunce, and the Duke and al ſuch as were at the ſéege about the Pallaice, could not reſt but fell to ſinge and to daunce. Kinge Oberon, who as then was in his citie of Momur, ſaide on high: Ah I heare my fréend Huons Horne blowe, whereby I knowe well he hath ſome buſineſſe in hand, wherefore

I wiſhe my ſelfe there as the Horne was blowne, with an Hundred Thouſand men well armed. He had made no ſooner his wiſh, but he was in the Citie of Tormont, whereas he and his men ſlewe downe the Paynims, that it was maruaile to ſée the bloud run downe the Stréetes like a Riuer. King Oberon made it to be cryed, that as many as would receiue Baptiſme, their liues ſhould be ſaued, ſo that thereby there were many that were chriſtened. Then King Oberon came to the Pallaice, when Huon ſawe him, hee went and thanked him of his ſuccour at that time of néede. Fréend, (quoth Oberon) as longe as you beléeue and doe my commaundements, I ſhall neuer fayle to ſuccour you in all your affaires.
               Thus all that were in the Towne and would not beléeue in God, were ſlaine. Then the Duke was taken & brought to the Pallaice vnto Huon, when he ſawe his Vncle taken, he was ioyfull, and then the Duke ſayd: Faire Nephewe, I require you haue pitie of me. Ah vntrue Traytour, (quoth Huon) thou ſhalt neuer depart hence aliue, I ſhall neuer reſpite thy death; then with his ſword he ſtrooke off his Vncles head, then he made his bodie to be hanged ouer ye wals of the Towne, that his ilneſſe might alwayes be had in memorie, and to be an example to all other: thus that Countrey was deliuered from that Traytour.
            
            
               Chap. XXXI.
               
                  ¶How King Oberon forbad Huon, that he ſhould not goe by the towre of the Giant, to the which Huon would not accord, but went thether, whereby he was in great danger of death. And of the Damſell that he found there, who was his owne Coſen borne in Fraunce.
               
               
                  
                  
                     YEE haue all heard howe King Oberon came & ſuccoured Huon, and when all was done, then he ſaid vnto Huon. My deare Fréend, I will take my leaue of thée, for I ſhall neuer ſée thée again, vntill thou haſt ſuffered as much paine and ill, and pouerty and diſeaſe, that it will be hard to declare it, and all through thine owne folly. When Huon heard that, being affrayd, he ſaid: Sir, mee thinkes you ſaye great wronge, for in all things to my power I will obſerue your commaundement. Fréend, (quoth Oberon) ſéeing thou wilt doe ſo, remember then thy promiſe, and I charge thée vpon paine of thy life, & looſing for euer my loue: that thou be not ſo hardy, as to take the way to the Tower of Dunother, the which is a maruaylous great Tower ſtanding on the Sea-ſide. Iulius Caeſar cauſed it to be made, and therein I was longe time nouriſhed, thou neuer ſaweſt ſo faire a Tower, nor better garniſhed with Chambers and glaſſe windowes, and within hanged with rich Tapeſtrie. At the Entrie of the gate there are two men of braſſe, each of them holding in their handes a 
                     •
                  layle of yron, wherewith without ceaſe day and night they beat by ſuch a meaſure, that when the one ſtriketh with his 
                     •
                  layle, the other is lifted vp readie to ſtrike, and they ſmite ſo ſuddainly, that a ſwallow flying cannot paſſe by vnſlayn. And within this Tower there is a Gyant named Angolofer, he tooke from mée the Tower and a ſtronge Armour of ſuche vertue, that whoſoeuer hath it on his bodie, cannot be hurt nor wearie, nor he cannot be drowned in no water, nor burned with fire. Therefore Huon, (my fréend) I charge thee go not that way, as much as thou feareſt my diſpleaſure, for againſt that Gyant thou canſt make no reſiſtance. Sir, (quoth Huon) know for troth, the day that I departed out of Fraunce, I tooke vpon me, that any aduenture that might be heard of, though it were neuer ſo perilous, that I would neuer

eſchew it for any feare of death: and therefore Sir I ha
                     •
                   rather die then to forſake to fight with yt Gyant, there is n
                     •
                   man ſhall let me, & Sir I promiſe you ere I returne againe, to conquer your ſayde ſtronge Armour, it ſhall doe me good ſeruice héereafter, it is a thinge not to bée forſaken, and if I néede of your ayd, I ſhall blowe my Horne & you will come and ſuccour me. Huon (quoth Oberon) by the Lord that ſaued me, if thou breakeſt the Horne in the blowing, thou ſhalt haue no ſuccour nor ayd of me. Sir, (quoth Huon) you may doe your pleaſure, and I ſhall doe mine.
               Then Oberon departed without more ſpeaking, & Huon aboad in the Citie, the which he gaue to Geffrey and to the Prouoſt his Hoſt, & all the Land that his Vncle held. Then he made him readie, and tooke gould and ſiluer plentie, and tooke his leaue of Geffrey and of his Hoſt and of all other, & ſo he and his companie departed, and ſo road ouer Hils and Dals, night and day a certaine ſpace without finding of any aduenture worthy to be had in memorie. At laſt he came néere to the Sea-ſide, whereas the Tower of the Gyaunt was, when Huon ſaw it, he ſayd vnto his companie. Sirs, yonder I ſée a Tower, the which was forbidden me by Oberon, but as God help me, before it be night I will ſée what is within it, whatſoeuer come thereof. Then Gerames beheld the Tower, and began to ſorow, and ſaid: Ah Huon, he is a foole that agréeth to the counſaile of a Child, Sir, for Gods ſake beware that you breake not the commandement of King Oberon, for if you doe, great ill is like to come vnto you. Sir, (quoth Huon) if all the men nowe liuing ſhoulde forbid mee to goe thether, I would not obay them, for you knowe well, I departed out of Fraunce for none other thing, but to ſearch the ſtrangeſt aduentures, and I demaund nothing elſe but to find aduentures, therefore ſpeake no more to the contrarie, for ere I ſléepe I will fight with the Gyant, for though he be more harder then yron, yet I ſhall ſlay him, or he mée: and you Gerames & all the other, abyde you héere in this meadowe vntill I returne againe. Sir, (quoth Gerames)

in wéeping, it ſore diſpleaſeth me that it will bee no better: therefore I recommende you vnto the ſauegard of God.
               Thus Huon departed and left his companie heauily complayning. Huon armed himſelfe, and ſo tooke his way, and kiſſed all his men one after another, and tooke with him his Horne and Cup, ſo all alone on foot he went foorth, & reſted not vntill he came to the gate of the caſtle of Dunother, there he ſaw the twoo men of Braſſe, that without ceaſing beate with their 
                     •
                  layles, he beheld them well, and thought it was in a manner impoſſible to enter without death. Then he began to conſider hereon with himſelfe, how King Oberon had ſhewed him the troth, and thought without the aide of the grace of God, it were impoſſible to enter, whereuppon he beheld all about, if there were any other place to enter, at laſt he ſaw neere to a piller of marble, a Baſon of gould faſt tyed with a chaine, then he approached neere thereto, and drew out his ſword, wherwith he ſtrake thrée great ſtroaks on the Baſon, ſo that the ſound thereof might well be heard into the Caſtle. Within the Tower there was a Damſell called Sibilla, when ſhe heard the Baſon ſound, ſhe had great maruaile thereat, then ſhe went to a window, and looked out and ſaw that Huon would enter, whereuppon ſhe went backe againe and ſaid, ah good Lord, what knight is yonder without that would enter? if the Gyant awake, anone he will be ſlaine, for if there were a Thowſand Knights together, they ſhould all ſoone be deſtroyed: ſurely I haue great deſire to know what he is, and where he was borne, for as me ſéemeth he ſhould be of Fraunce, to know the troth I wil goe to the window againe, to ſée if I may haue of him any knowledge. Then ſhée went out of her chamber, and went to a window néere to the gate, and looked out and ſaw Huon all armed abiding at the gate, then ſhe beheld the blazure of his ſhield, wherein was portrayed thrée croſſes of gould, whereby ſhe knew well he was of Fraunce. Alas quod ſhée, I am but loſt if the Gyant know that I haue béene héere,

then ſhe returned againe in haſt, and went to the Chamber dore whereas the Gyant lay and ſlept, and ſhe perceiued hée was yet a ſléepe, for he rowted that it was maruaile to héere. Then ſhe returned againe quickly to the gate, and opened a wicket, out of the which there yſſued ſuch a wind, that if cauſed the two men with their flayles to ſtand ſtill in reſt, when ſhée had opened the wicket, haſtily ſhée returned into her Chamber, and when Huon ſawe the little wicket open, he aduaunced himſelfe & entred, for the two men with their flayles were in reſt, then hée went further thinking to finde them that had opened the wicket: but hée was ſore abaſhed when he could finde no creature, there were ſo many Chambers, that he wiſt not whether to goe to finde that he ſought for. Thus he ſearched all about, and at laſt hée ſawe about a Pillar fourtéene men lye dead, whereof hée had great maruaile, and ſaid, that he would returne backe againe, then he went out of the Hall and came to the gate, wéening to haue found it open: but it was cloſed by it ſelfe, and the men againe did beat with their flayles. Alas, (quoth Huon) nowe I ſée well I cannot eſcape from hence, then he returned into the Caſtle, and hearkened about, and as he went ſearching carefully, he heard the voice of a Damſell pitiouſly wéeping. He came there as ſhe was, and humbly ſaluted her, and ſaid: Faire Damſell, I cannot tell if you can vnderſtand my language or not, knowe of you I would, wherefore you make this great ſorrowe? Sir, (quoth ſhe) I wéepe becauſe I haue of you great pitie, for if the Gyant heare within (who is yet a ſléepe) hap to awake, you are but dead & loſt. Faire Ladie, (quoth Huon) I pray you ſhew me what you be, and where you were borne? Sir, (quoth ſhée) I am Daughter to Guinemer, who in his time was Earle of Saint Omers, & am Néece to Duke Seuin of Bourdeaux.
               
               When Huon heard that, right humbly he kiſſed her, and ſaide. Madame, knowe for troth, that you are my néere Kinſewoman, for I am Sonne to Duke Seuin: I pray you ſhew me what aduenture hath brought you into this Caſtle.

Sir, (quoth ſhe) my Father had deuotion to ſée the holy Sepulchre, and he loued me ſo well, that he would not leaue me behind him, and as we were on the Sea néere to the Citie of Eſcalone in Surry, there aroſe a great tempeſt vpon the Sea, that the winde brought vs néere vnto this Caſtle, and the Gyant being in his Tower, ſaw vs in great danger of drowning, & that we were driuen into this Port, he came downe out of his Pallaice, and ſlewe my Father, and all them that were with him except my ſelfe, and ſo brought me into this Tower, whereas I haue béen theſe Seauen yeares in great diſtreſſe and miſerie. And nowe Coozen, I pray you what aduenture hath brought you hether into this ſtrang Countrey? Coozen, (quoth he) ſéeing you will knowe of my aduentures, I ſhal ſhew you the troth, King Charlemaine hath ſent mee in meſſuage to the Admirall Gaudiſe in Babilon, I beare him a Meſſuage by mouth and by Letters, and as my way lay, I am come by this Tower, and I demaunded of a Paynim who was within this Tower, and he anſweared me and ſayd, howe héere ſhould bée a great and an horrible Gyant, who hath done much euill to them that haue paſſed this way. And I thought to paſſe this way, to fight with him and deſtroy him, and to deliuer the Countrey of him, and I haue left my companie héere by in a Valley to tarie for me. Deare Coozen, (quoth ſhe) I haue great maruaile that you would take on you ſuch a folly, for if ye were Fiue hundred men together well armed, yée durſt not all abide him if hée were armed with his armour, for none can endure againſt him, therefore Coſin I counſell you to returne backe againe ere he doe awake, and I ſhall open you the wicket, ſo that you ſhall paſſe out without any danger.
            
            
               
               Chap. XXXII.
               
                  ¶How the Damſell coſen to Huon, ſhewed him the chamber whereas the Gyant ſlept, and how he went and waked him, and of the good armour that the Gyant deliuered to Huon.
                  
               
               
                  
                     WHen Huon had well vnderſtood the Damſell, he ſaid, Coſen know for troth, ere I depart hence, I will ſée what man he is, it ſhall neuer be ſaid (to my reproch) in the court of any Prince, that for feare of any miſcreant I ſhould be of ſo faint a courage, that I durſt not abide him, certainly I had rather die than ſuch a fault ſhould come to me. Ah Coſen quoth ſhée, then I ſée well both you and I are deſtroyed, but ſéeing it is thus, I ſhall ſhew you the chamber whereas he ſléepeth, and when yée haue ſéene him, yet then yée may returne. Firſt goe into this chamber that you ſée héere before you, wherein yée ſhall find bread and wine and other victuals, and in the next you ſhall find clothes of ſilke, and many rich iewels, then in the third chamber yée ſhall find the foure Gods of the Paynims, they be all of fine maſſie gould, & in the fourth yée ſhall find ye Gyant lying a ſléepe on a rich bed: then ſir if ye were of my mind, I would counſell you to ſtrike of his head ſléeping, for if he awake, you cannot eſcape without death. Ladie quoth Huon, and god will, it ſhall neuer be ſaid to my diſgrace, that I ſhould ſtrike any man without his knowledge. Then Huon departed from the Ladie, his ſword being in his hand and his helmet on his head, and his ſhield about his necke, and ſo entred into the firſt chamber, and then into the ſecond and third, wheras he ſaw the foure Gods: when he had well regarded them, he gaue each of thē a ſtroake with his ſword, and then he entred into the chamber whereas the Gyant lay

ſléeping, Huon noted him aduiſedly, and the bed that he lay on, the which was ſo rich, that the valew thereof could not be prized, the curtaines, couerings, and pillowes were of ſuch riches, that it was great beautie to behould them. Alſo the chamber was hanged with rich clothes, & the floare couered with carpets, whē 
                  Huon had well regarded all this, and well conſidered of the Gyant, who was xvij. foote of length, and his body fourniſhed thereafter and all his other members, but a more fowler & hideous creature was neuer ſéene, with a great head, great eares, and a camelled noſe & eyes burning like a candle. Ah good Lord (quoth Huon) I would King Charlemaine were héere to ſée vs twoo fight, for I am ſure then ere he departed, my peace ſhould be made with him. Lord god, I humbly require thée to be my ſuccour againſt this enemy, for if it be not thy good pleaſure, againſt him I can no while endure. Then Huon fiercely aduanced foorth, and made the ſigne of the Croſſe, caſting in his mind what he might doe, for he thought if he ſlew him ſléeping, it ſhould be a great reproch to him, and it would be ſaid that he had ſlaine a man dead, whereupon he ſaid to himſelfe: ſhame haue I if I touch him ere I haue defied him, then Huon cryed out aloud and ſaid: Ariſe thou heathen hound, or elſe I ſhall ſtrike off thy head. When the Gyant heard Huon ſpeake, he awaked fiercely, and beheld Huon, and roſe vp ſo quickly, that in riſing he brake the bedſted that he lay vpon, then he ſaid to Huon. Frend, they that ſent thée hether, loued thée but little, nor doubted not me. And when Huon heard the Gyant ſpeake french, he had great maruaile and ſaid, I am come hether to ſee thee, and it may be ſo, that I haue done it vnaduiſedly. Then the Gyant ſaid, thou ſayeſt troth, for if I were armed as thou art, Fiue hundred men ſuch as thou art could not endure me, but yt they ſhould all die, but thou ſeeſt I am naked, without ſword or weapon, yet for all that I doubt thée not. Then Huon thought in himſelfe, that it would be a great ſhame to him, to aſſaile a man without armour or weapon, wherefore he ſaid: Goe and arme thée, or

incontinent I ſhall ſlay thée. Fréend quoth the Gyant, this that thou ſayeſt, procéedeth of a good courage & of courteſie. Then he armed him, and tooke in his hand a great fawchin, and Huon was withdrawne into the Pallaice abiding for the Gyant, who tarried not long but came to Huon, & ſaid: where art thou, behould me héere ready to deſtroy thée, without thou make good defence? yet I deſire thee tell me what thou art, to thintent that I may (when I haue ſlaine thée) tell how I haue ſlaine ſuch a one, that by his folly came to aſſaile me in myne owne Pallaice. Great pride it was in thée, that thou wouldeſt not ſtrike me ere I was armed, but whoſoeuer thou art, thou ſéemeſt ſonne to a noble man: I pray thée ſhew mee whether thou wouldeſt goe, and what mooued thée to come hether, to thintent that I might know the troth of thine enterprize, that when I haue ſlaine thee; I may make my vaunt to my men, that I haue ſlaine ſuch a man, that thought ſcorne and diſdaine to ſtrike me ere I was armed. Paynim quoth Huon, thou art in a great folly, when thou ſo raſhly reputeſt me for dead: But ſeing thou wouldſt know the troth, I am a poore knight, from whome king Charlemaine hath taken my Lands, and baniſhed me out of the Realme of Fraunce, and hath ſent me for to doe a meſſuage to the Admirall Gaudiſe at Babilon, and my name is Huon, Sonne to Duke Seuin of Bourdeaux. Now I haue ſhewed all the troth of mine enterprize, and now I pray thée tell me where thou wert borne, and who engendred thée, to thintent that when I haue ſlaine thée, I may make mine auaunt in king Charles Court, and before all my frends: that I haue ſlaine ſuch a maruaylous great Gyant as thou art. Then ye Giant ſaid, if thou ſlay me, thou maieſt well make thy vaunt, that thou haſt ſlaine Angolofer the Gyant, who hath xvij. brethren, of whome I am the yongeſt. Alſo thou maieſt ſay, that vnto the drie trée and to the red ſea, there is no man but is tributarie to me. I haue chaced the Admirall Gaudiſe, to whome thou ſaieſt thou goeſt, & haue taken from him by puiſſance diuers of his Cities, and he doth me yéerely

ſeruage, by the tender of a Ring of gould, to buy his heade withall. Alſo I tooke from Oberon the Fayrie King, this puiſſant Towre, who for all his enchaunting & Fayries could not reſiſt me, and alſo I tooke from him a rich Armour, thou neuer heardſt of ſuch another, for it hath ſuch vertue, that whoſoeuer can put it on, can neuer be wearie nor diſcōfited. But there is in it, another eſpeciall vertue, for he that muſt weare that armour, muſt be without ſpot of deadly ſinne, & alſo his mother muſt be without carnall copulation with any man, except with her owne huſband, I beléeue there cannot be found any man that may weare this Armour. Alſo it is of ſuch vertue, that whoſoeuer hath it on his bodye, cannot be grieued neither with fire nor water. By Mahoūd I haue prooued it, and becauſe I haue found ſuch courteſie in thee, that thou gaueſt me leaue to arme me: I will giue thee leaue to aſſay if thou canſt put on that Armour, in regard I know, that neither thou, nor any knight elſe can be able to doe it. Then the Gyant went to his coffer, and tooke out the Armour, and came to Huon and ſaid: See, heere is the good armour, I giue thee leaue to aſſay to put it on thy body. Then Huon tooke the Armour and went back a little, and put off his owne armour, and tooke that belonging to ye Gyant, and incontinent did it on his bodie, then haſtily he put on his helmet, and tooke his ſhéeld & ſword in his hand, and deuoutly thanked our Lord God of this great grace. Then the Gyant ſaid, by Mahound, I had little thought thou hadſt been ſuch a man, that Armour becommeth thee exceeding well, nowe I haue quit the courteſie that thou ſhewedſt mee, therefore I pray thee put off the Armour, and deliuer it me againe. Not ſo ſir by your leaue, anſweared Huon, this Armour is meeter for me, than ſuch a Helhound as thou art, therefore know for troth, I will not render it againe for xiiij. of the beſt Cities between this and Parys. Friend quoth the Gyant, ſeing thou wilt not render me againe the Armour, I am content to let thee depart hence without any hurt or damage, and alſo I will giue thée my

Ring of gould, the which the Admirall Gaudiſe gaue me, for I know well it will ſtand thee in good ſtead, if thou thinkeſt to fourniſh thy meſſuage, for when thou comeſt to the gate of his Pallaice, and ſayſt how thou art a meſſenger ſent frō kyng Charles, thou ſhalt find foure gates, and at euery gate foure Porters, ſo that at the firſt gate, if it be knowen thou be a frenchman: one of thy hands ſhalbe cut of, and at the ſecond gate thy other hand, and at the third gate one of thy féet, and at the fourth the other foote, and then ſhalt thou bee brought before the Admirall, and there thy head ſtriken off. And therfore to eſcape theſe perils, & furniſh thy meſſuage, and to thintent that thou maieſt ſurely retourne, giue me againe my Armour and I ſhall giue the my ring of gold, the which when thou but ſheweſt it, thou ſhalt be receiued with great honor at euery gate, and then thou maiſt go & retourne ſurelye into the Pallaice at thy pleaſure, and no man to let thee, for if thou hadſt ſlaine Fiue hundred men, there ſhalbe none ſo hardy as to touch thée, nor to doe thee any yll if thou haſt this Ring about thée, for when I haue nede of men or mony, I cannot lacke if I ſend this ring for a token, therfore I pray thee let me haue againe my Armour.
            
            
               Chap. XXXIII.
               
                  ¶ How Huon ſlew rhe great Gyant, and how he called Gerames and his company to him, and of the ioy that they made for the death of the Gyant.
                  
               
               
                  
                     WHen Huon vnderſtoode the Paynim, he ſaid. Ah thou fell and falſe deceiuer, know for troth, if all the Preachers betwéen the eaſt & weſt preached to me a whole yeare, and that thou wouldeſt giue me all that thou haſt, and thy Ring therewith: I would not render

againe the good Armour that is now on my bodie, firſt I ſlay thée, & then, as for thy Ring that thou praiſeſt ſo much: I will likewiſe haue it whether thou wilt or not. When the Gyant had well heard Huon, and ſaw that in no wiſe he could get againe his Armour: he was then ſorowfull, and becauſe he ſaw how Huon reprooued him, therewith he was ſo ſore diſpleaſed, that his eyes ſéemed like twoo burning candels, then he yet demaunded of Huon, if he would doe none otherwiſe. No truly quoth Huon, though thou be great and ſtrong, I haue no feare of thée, ſeing I haue on this good Armour: therefore in the name of god and of his diuine puiſſance I defie thée. And I thée quoth the Gyant, for all the Armour thou canſt not endure againſt me. Then the Gyant approched to Huon, and lift vp his fawchin thinking to haue ſtriken him, but he fayled, for the ſtroke glent, and the fawchin light vpon a piller, and entred into it more then twoo foot, then Huon (who was quicke and light) behoulding the maruaylous ſtroke, quickly ſtept foorth with his good ſword in his hand, and ſeing how the Gyant had his fawchin ſticking faſt in the piller, he ſtrake the Gyant on both ye armes néere to his hands in ſuch wiſe, that he ſtrake off both his hands, ſo that they with the fawchin fell downe to the earth. When the Gyant felt himſelfe ſo ſore hurt, with paine therof he gaue a maruaylous crie, ſo horrible, as though all the Towre had fallen to the earth: whereat the Damſell Sibylla being in her chamber, was ſore abaſhed, ſhe went out of her chamber and found a ſtaffe by the way, ſhe tooke it vp in her hands, and came to the Pallaice whereas ſhe heard the cry, and met the Gyant flying away to ſaue himſelfe, but the Damſell well aduiſed, when ſhe ſaw that he fled, ſhe caſt the ſtaffe betwéene his legges, ſo that thereby he fell to the earth, and Huon who came after him with his ſword in his hand, he haſted him, & gaue the Gyant many a great ſtroke, and the Gyant cryed out ſo high, that it was very terrible to heare him. Then Huon lift vp his ſword, and gaue him ſuch a ſtroake in the necke, that his head flew to the earth, then

                  Huon wiped his ſword, and put it vp into the ſheath, and he came to the head thinking to haue taken it vp, and to haue ſet it on the height of the Towre, but the head was ſo great and heauy, that he could not remooue it nor tourne the bodie, then he ſmiled and ſaid. Ah good Lord, I thanke thée of thy grace, that thou haſt giuen me the puiſſance to ſlay ſuch a creature, would to god that this body and head were nowe in the Pallaice of Parys, before Charlemaine Kinge of Fraunce, ſo that he knewe that I haue ſlaine him. Then Huon went to a window and looked out, and ſaw where his company were, than ſaid he to them on hie. Sirs come vp hether, ye may doe it ſurely, for this Pallaice is woonne, & the Gyant ſlaine. When Gerames, Garyn, & the other heard that, they were ioyfull and thanked our lord god, then they came to the gate, and Sybilla the Damſell went & opened the wicket, whereby the enchantment fayled, then they entred & followed the Damſell, who brought them into the Pallaice to Huon, and when they ſaw him, they all wept for ioy, and embraced and kiſſed him, and demanded if he had any hurt. Sirs quoth Huon, I thanke god I féele no hurt, and then he brought them where as the Gyant lay dead, when they ſaw him, they had maruaile how he could be ſlaine by Huon, they were affraid to ſée him lye dead. Then Gerames demanded of Huon, what was the Damſell that was there, and Huon ſhewed how ſhe was his coozen, and ſhewed thē all the maner how ſhe came thether: whereof they had great ioy and embraced her, then they all vnarmed themſelues, and went to ſupper, and eate and dranke at their pleaſure, but their ioy endured not long, as yée ſhall heare héereafter.
            
            
               
               Chap. XXXIIII.
               
                  ¶ How Huon departed from the caſtle of the Gyant, and tooke leaue of his company, and went alone a foot to the ſea-ſide, whereas he found Mallaborn of the Fayrie, on whome he mounted to paſſe the Sea.
               
               
                  
                     YE haue heard here before, how Huon conquered the Giant, the which was great ioy to all his companie, then the next day Huon called them all together, and ſaid. Sirs, yée knowe well the enterprize that I haue taken on me to doe, touching the Admyrall Gaudiſe
                  ▪ therefore it is conuenient, that as ſhortly as I can, to doe my meſſuage that I am charged by king Charles to doe to the Admirall Gaudiſe: wherefore I deſire you all, to kéepe good and true companie with this noble Damſell, & alſo I require you to tarrie héere xv. daies, and then if I retourne not, goe you all into Fraunce, and take this noble Damſell with you, and ſalute from me king Charlemaine and all the Péeres of Fraunce, and ſhew them the hard aduentures that I haue had, and how I am gone to perfourme his meſſuage. When his companie vnderſtood that he would depart, they were ſorowfull and ſaide. Sir, yée deſire vs to tarrie héere xv. daies, know for troth, wée ſhall tarrie héere for you an whole yéere. Sirs quoth he I thanke you, then he made him readie to depart, and armed him, and tooke his Cuppe and Horne, and alſo the Gyants Ring, the which he did put about his arme, and then he kiſt his Cooſen and all the others, and they all made great lamentation for his departing. Then they went vp into the Pallaice, & looked out at the windowes after Huon as long as they might ſée him: Huon went foorth till he came to the

ſea-ſide, the which was not farre from the Caſtle, and there was a little Hauen, whereas alwaies was wont to lye ſome manner of ſhip or veſſell to paſſe ouer the Sea. And when Huon came thether, though nowe at this inſtant there was none at all, finding no meanes for paſſage, he ſaid. Ah good Lord, what ſhall I doe, that I can finde heere no boate or veſſell to paſſe in? alas in an ill houre I ſlew Charlot, wherby I am thus ſtill in danger, howbeit I did it in mine owne defence: great wrong therefore king Charles hath done, to baniſh me out of mine owne Countrey. Theſe and the like complaints made Huon there being alone, and began ſore to lament, but ſodainly on his right hand he ſaw a great beaſt come ſwimming towards him, like a Beare, Huon beheld him, and made on himſelfe a ſigne of the Croſſe, and drew out his ſwoord to defend himſelfe, as thinking the Beaſt would haue aſſailed him: but he did not, but went a little off from Huon, & ſhooke himſelfe in ſuch wiſe, that his ſkinne fell off, and then he was as faire a man and as well fourmed as could be ſéene. Then Huon had great feare and maruaile, when he ſaw that this Beaſt was become a man, yet he approached neere to him, and demaunded what he was, and whether he were an humane creature, or els an ill ſpirite that was come thether to tempt him, and ſaid, right nowe thow didſt ſwimme in the ſea, & trauerſed the great waues in guiſe of a maruailous beaſt: I charge thee in the name of God thou do me no hurt, but ſhew me what thou art, for I beleeue thou art of king Oberons company: Huon quoth he, diſmay thou not, I know thée right well, thou art Sonne to Duke Seuin of Bourdeaux, Royall king Oberon hath ſent me to thee: once it happened me to breake his commaundment, wherfore he hath condemned me to be this xxx. yéeres like a beaſt in the Sea. Frend quoth Huon, by the Lord that fourmed me, I will truſt thée till I be paſt the red ſea. Huon quoth Mallaborn, know for troth, I am ſent hether for no other cauſe, but to beare thee whether thou wilt, therefore make thee readie, and recommend thy ſelfe to the ſauegard

of our Lord Ieſus Chriſt, and than let me alone. Than Mallaborn entred againe into the Beaſts ſkinne, and ſaid to Huon. Sir mount vpon my backe.
            
            
               Chap. XXXV.
               
                  ¶ How Huon paſſed the Sea vpon Mallaborn, who bare him to Babilon, and how Huon came to the firſt gate, and ſo to the ſecond.
               
               
                  
                     WHen Huon ſawe the Beaſte enter againe into his ſkinne, and that hee taried for him, he made the ſigne of ye croſſe, and prayed god to ſaue and conduct him, & ſo leapt vpon him, & the Beaſt entred into ye Sea, and ſwamme as faſt as though a bird had ſlowen, ſo that within a ſhort ſpace he trauerſed the great Ryuer of Nyle, the which cometh from Paradiſe, and which is a dangerous Riuer, for the multitude of Serpents and Crocodilles that be therein: howbeit, there were none that did him any trouble. Then when they came to land, Huon was ioyfull, and Mallaborn ſaid: Right déerely ſhall I aby the time that thou wert borne, or that euer I knew thée, for the intent to doe thée pleaſure, I ſhall endure yet x. yeares like a Beaſt in the Sea, and xxx. yeares I haue béen ſo already, ſo that my time is in all xl. yéeres. I haue great pitie of thée, for there is no man borne of a woman, that knoweth the ill and pouertie that ſhall fall héereafter to thée, and I ſhall ſuffer much for ye loue that I haue to thée: howbeit, I ſhall take it in patience. Yonder thou maieſt ſée the citie whether thou wouldeſt goe, moreouer, thou knoweſt what hath been commaunded thée, & what thou haſt to doe, and yet whatſoeuer fall, breake not the commaundement of king Oberon, and alwaies be true & ſay the troth, for aſſoone

as thou makeſt any lye, thou ſhalt looſe the loue of king Oberon: thus God be with thée, for I may no longer tarrie. So he went againe into the Sea, and Huon tarried there alone, recommending himſelfe to our lord god, and ſo tooke the way to the Citie, and there entred in without let of any man. So ſoone as he was entred, he met a M. Paynims going a hawking, another M. coming homeward, and a M. horſes led to be new ſhod, & a M. coming frō ſhooing, than he ſaw a M. men playing at the Cheſſe, & another M. that had played and béen mated, & another M. talking & deuiſing with Damſels, and another M. comming from drinking of the Admirals wine, and another M. going thether. When Huon all armed had gone a great ſpace in the Citie, he had great maruaile of that he had ſeene, and that he had met ſuch multitude of people. And he ſtudied thereon ſo much, that he forgat the Gyants Ryng on his arme, and the men that he met had great maruaile of him to ſée him goe all armed a foote, and yet he went ſtill forward. Alas poore vnhappie Huon, that could not remember the Gyants Ring about his arme, for lacke of remembrance thereof, he ſuffered after ſo much trouble, that there is no humane tongue can tell it, as yée ſhall heare hereafter. At laſt he came into a great place before the firſt gate of the Pallaice, whereas there ſtoode a great Vine trée ſet vpon bricke pillers of diuers colours, vnder the which the Admirall Gaudiſe one day in the wéeke would come thether, and vſed to giue audience to all Suters. When Huon had regarded all this, he came to the firſt gate of the Pallaice, & there he cryed to the Porter & ſaid. Friend, I pray you open the gate, and the Porter ſaid, with a good will, if thou be a Sarazin thou ſhalt enter. Then Huon (as vnaduiſed, and forgetting himſelfe, and not once thinking on king Oberons commaundement, or of the Gyants Ring about his arme, the which if hee had ſhewed foorth, hee ſhoulde not haue néeded to haue made any lye) when hee had heard the Paynim demaund whether he were a Sarazin or no: he ſaid yes, than the Porter ſaid, than may

you ſurely enter. So Huon paſſed the firſt bridge and gate, and when he came to the ſecond, he remembred himſelfe how he had broken king Oberons commaundement, wherewith he was ſo ſorowfull at his hart, that he wiſt not what to do, and ſware thē that he would neuer lye more. Then he tooke the Ring in his hand, and came to the ſecond gate, and ſaid to the Porter: Thou villaine, he that died on the croſſe, cō
                  found thee, open this gate, for I muſt enter. When the Porter heard him ſpeake ſo fiercely, he ſaid, who is it, that the firſt Porter was ſo hardy to ſuffer to enter in at ye firſt gate? I ſhall ſhew thee quoth Huon, ſéeſt not thou this Ring, the which is a token that I may paſſe and goe whereas me liſt. When the Porter heard him and ſaw the Ring, he knew it well, and ſaid: Sir, ye be welcome, how fareth the Lord ye ye come from? Huon, who would not lye, paſſed the bridge and gaue no anſwere, and ſo came to the third gate: where the Porter came to him, and Huon ſhewed him the Ring, then the Porter let downe the bridge, and opened the gate, and with great reuerence ſaluted Huon, and ſuffered him to paſſe. When Huon was thus paſſed the thrée bridges, then he remembred how he had made a lye at the firſt bridge, and ſaid to himſelfe. Alas, what ſhall become of me, ſeeing I haue ſo lightly broken my promiſe to him that hath done ſo much for me? alas, I forgot the Ring that was about mine arme, how be it, I truſt that Oberon will not be diſpleaſed for it, ſeeing I did it not wilfully, but that I forgat it: I truſt he will take no more regard to this déede, then he did when I blew ye Horne without any cauſe, thus Huon paſſed the thrée gates of the Pallaice.
            
            
               
               Chap. XXXVI.
               
                  ¶ How Huon paſſed the fourth Gate, and howe he came into the garden whereas the Fountaine was, and of that which he did there.
               
               
                  
                     WHen Huon ſaw that he had paſſed the thrée gates, he went on to the fourth gate, with the Ring in his hand, for he met with no man, but that ſtill did him honour when they ſaw the Ring: then he ſaid to ye fourth Porter, thou villaine Porter, I charge thée foorthwith open the gate. When the Porter heard him he had great maruaile, & ſaid, what art thou that art armed, and ſpeakeſt ſo fierceſly to me? lay away thine armour, and then ſhew me what thou art & whether thou wilt goe, for armed as thou art it is not poſſible for to enter, ſhew me by thy faith how thou haſt paſſed the thrée other bridges. Than Huon ſaid, hould thy peace Paynim, I am a Meſſenger ſent frō noble king Charlemaine, and whether thou wilt or not I will paſſe this way and goe to the Pallaice to the Admirall Gaudiſe: there is neyther thou nor any other ſhall lett me, behould this token that I ſhew thée. The Paynim knew it anon, and let downe the bridge, and opened the gate, and knéeled downe and kiſſed and embrabraced his leg, deſiring pardon of him in that he had cauſed him to tarrie ſo long: Paynim quoth Huon, good day mayeſt thou haue. Sir quoth the Porter, ye may goe to the Admirall, who will make you good chéere and great honour, for there is nothing that yée can deſire, but it ſhalbe graunted vnto you, yea and if it be his only Daughter, for loue of the Lord from whome yée bring this Ring for a token: and ſir, I require you how doth the Lord Angolofer
                  ▪ commeth hee

hether or not? Porter quoth Huon, if he come hether, all the Diuels of hell muſte bringe him hether, and therewith hee paſſed foorth without any more wordes, but he ſaid to himſelfe. Ah good Lord Ieſus Chriſt, helpe and aid me in all my buſines, I was tempted with an euill ſpirite, when I made the lye at the firſt gate, I did it by lightneſſe of courage and for lacke of remembrance, whereof I am right ſorie. Huon thus being in diſpleaſure with himſelfe for the lye that hee had made, went forth till he came to the Pallaice, and entred into a faire garden, wherein the Admirall tooke oftentimes his paſtime, for there could no trée, frute, nor flower be wiſhed for, but there they might be found both in ſōmer & winter. And in the middeſt of this garden there was a faire Fountaine comming out of the Ryuer of Nyle that cōmeth from Paradiſe, the which fountaine as then was of ſuch vertue, that if any ſicke man did drinke thereof, or waſhed his handes and face therin, incontinent he ſhould be whole, and alſo if a man had béen of great age, he ſhould retourne againe to the age of xxx. yéeres, and old women to become as freſh and luſtie as a maide of xv. yeares. This Fountaine had that vertue by the ſpace of lx. yeares, but x. yeares after that Huon had béen there, it was deſtroyed and broken by the Egiptians, who made warre on the Admyrall that was as then in Babylon. And when Huon had waſhed his handes and face in the Fountaine, and dronke of the water, he beheld ye Pallaice, and thought it maruaylous faire, and whē he had well regard it, he ſaw a little beſide the fountaine a great Serpent, who kept the Fountaine, to thintent that none ſhould be ſo hardy as to drinke or touch ye Fountaine: for if a traytour, or any man that had falſefied his faith did touch it, he could not eſcape without death. But when the Serpent ſaw Huon, he enclined himſelfe, without making of ſemblance to do him any ill. Huon ſat down by the Fountaine, and began gréeuouſlye to lament, and ſaid. Ah good Lord, without thy ſuccour it is impoſſible for me to depart hence aliue. Ah noble king Oberon, forſake me not nowe in

this néede, for the treſpas that I haue done ought to be forgiuen me, ſéeing I did it negligently for lacke of remembrance, certenly I will know, if for ſo ſmall a cauſe yee will leaue me, wherefore whatſoeuer fall, I ſhall prooue & aſſay to know the troth, then he tooke his Horne and blew it ſo fiercely, that king Oberon heard it being in his Forreſt, & when he heard it, he ſaid. Ah good Lord I heare the falſe Knight blow his Horne, who ſetteth ſo little by me, for at ye firſt gate that he paſſed by, he made a falſe lye: by the Lord that fourmed me, if he blow till the vaines of his necke bur
                     ••
                   in ſunder, he ſhall not be ſuccoured for me, nor for any manner of miſchiefe that may fall to him. Then Huon being in the garden blew ſo lowde, that the Admirall, who was ſet at his dinner, aroſe from the boord with all his Lords, and all other ladies and Damſels, knights and ſquiers, boyes, and ſcullions of the kitchen, and all other came into the Pallaice to the Admirall, and began to daunce and ſinge, and made great ioy, the more that Huon blew his Horne, ye more they daunced and ſang. And when Huon left blowing, than the Admirall called his Barons, and commaunded them to be armed, and ſaid. Sirs goe into this garden, for ſurely there is ſome Enchaunter, therefore take héed that he eſcape not, but bring him aliue to me, for I will know of him the cauſe why he hath done this déed, for if he eſcape, he will doe vs more ill. When Huon had blowen a longe ſpace, and ſawe no body come to him, he was ſore abaſhed, and thā he began to lament and ſaid. Ah good Lord god, now I ſée well mine end approcheth, when king Oberon fayleth me, in whom I haue all my truſt in life and death. Ah déere Lady Mother and brother Gerardine, I ſhall neuer ſée you more. Ah noble king Charlemaine, great wrong haue yée done to me, thus to baniſh me without deſert, for that that I did was in my defence, god forgiue it you. Ah king Oberon, well mayēſt thou be reputed for an vnkind creature, thus to leaue me for one ſmall fault, certenly if thou be a noble man, I hope thou wilt pardon me, at leaſt, I put all to god, and to him I ſubmit

me. And whatſoeuer fall, I will enter into the Pallaice, & doe my Meſſuage that king Charlemaine hath commaunded me to doe. So he made him readie, and departed from the Fountaine, thinking he ſhould finde the Admirall at dinner at that time.
            
            
               Chap. XXXVII.
               
                  ¶ How Huon came into the Pallaice, and did his meſſuage to the Admirall, and how he ſlew many Paynims, and was afterward taken, and put in Pryſon.
               
               
                  
                     WHen Huon had been a certen ſpace at the fountaine, he departed all armed, and mounted vp the degrees of the Pallaice, the ſame time the Admirall had cauſed twoo of his principall goddes to be ſet in the middeſt of the Pallaice, richly adorned, and before thē twoo great torches burning, ſo that no Sarazin paſſed by them, but made to them great reuerence, but Huon paſſed by them, and would not once looke on them, nor ſpeake to no man that hée met, whereof they had all great maruaile and ſayd one to another, ſo that Huon eaſily heard them. I beléeue this man, who thus entred into ye Pallaice all armed, is ſome meſſenger ſent from ſome great Prince to the Admyrall, and then Huon ſaw a Paynim King ſpeaking to the Admyrall, who was newly come to the Admirall, bicauſe the ſame day the Admirall Gaudiſe ſhould haue deliuered to him his Daughter the faire Eſcleremond in mariage, and Huon ſawe well, howe hee was the greateſt Prince that as then was there with the Admirall, then Huon ſayd to himſelfe. Ah good Lord, if I acquite my ſelfe truly to King Charlemaine, I muſt ſlay this Paynim king, I thinke it be he that I looke for, ſéeing he ſitteth ſo néere to the Admirall,

god confound me▪ but incontinent I will ſtrike of his head, and then let our Lord Ieſus Chriſt do with me at his pleaſure. Then Huon came nere to the table, and drew out hys ſword, and therewith gaue the ſaid King ſuche a ſtroke, that his head fell on the table, ſo that ye Admyrall was therwith all bloody. Then Huon with a hye voyce ſaid. Ah good Lord, what a good beginning is this, the reſt I remit to our Lord Ieſus Chriſt whome I require to aid me to perfourme the reſt of mine enterpriſe, in this point I haue nere quit my ſelfe agaynſt king Charlemaine. Then the Admirall ſaid to his Barons, take this man that hath doone me this offence, as to murder this king 
                     •
                  itting at my table, if he eſcape, looke me neuer in the face. Thē the Paynims aſſailed Huon on all ſides, and caſt at him darts and ſwords to haue ſlaine him. But his good Armor ſaued him from the death, and with his ſword he ſlew many a bolde Paynim, ſo that none durſt approch néere him. When he ſaw that he was ſore oppreſſed, he tooke his Ring from off his arme, and caſt it on the table before the Admirall and ſaid. Sir Admirall, beware on paine of thy lyfe, of doing to me any hurt or damage, by this token that I ſhew thee. Whan the Admirall ſaw the Ring, hee knew it well, then hee began to crye, that no man ſhould be ſo hardye as to touch him that hath ſlayne the Paynim King, and euery man let Huon in reſt, wherof he was right ioyfull, than he ſaid to the Admirall, Sir, I will from hence forth that thou do as I commaund thee. Friend quoth the Admirall, thou mayeſt do in my Pallaice what thou wilt, whatſoeuer thou commaund ſhalbe done, no man ſhall ſay the cō
                  trary. Than Huon ſaw where his daughter the fayre Eſcleremond ſat by her Father, and Huon went to her, and kiſſed her iij. times before her Father, whereat the Damſell was much abaſhed, but ſhe ſaw him ſo fayre, and felt his mouth ſo ſweet, that ſhe thought without ſhe might haue him to her Louer, ſhe ſhould dye for ſorow, ſo that ſhe changed colour, and bluſhed as ruddie as a roſe. Whan Huon had kiſſed the ladie, than he went to the Admirall and ſaid. Sir Admirall,

know for troth that I am chriſtened, and am a Meſſenger ſent from noble king Charlemaine to thée, bicauſe there is no Prince chriſtian nor heathē, but that obeyeth his cōmaundement, except thy ſelfe: therefore by me hee ſendeth thee worde, that ſince the dolorous day of battaile at Ronceuaux, whereas he loſt his twoo Nephews, Rowland and Oliuer, he neuer ſince aſſembled ſo much people, as he will do this next ſommer to come vpon thée both by water and by land, without thou wilte beleue in the lawe of Ieſus Chriſt, therefore if thou wilt beléeue me, be chriſtened, or elſe this miſchiefe will fall vpon thée. Speake no more of that quoth the Admirall, for I had rather be hewen and ſlaine, then to leaue my law and beléeue vpon thy god. Sir Admirall quoth Huon, moreouer king Charles commaundeth thée to ſend him a M. Sparhawkes, a M. Goſhawkes, a M. Beares, and a M. wayters chayned together, a M. yong Varlets, a M. faire Damſels, and alſo a handfull of thy beard, and Foure of thy great téeth. Ha quoth the Admirall, I ſée thou art hardy and outragious, to demaund of me this that thou haſt ſaid. And alſo I haue great maruaile of thy Maiſter, that he is ſo fooliſh as to commaund me by thee, to ſend him my beard and great téeth, before this time he hath ſent me more than xv. Meſſengers, & hath demaunded part of this that thou ſpeakeſt of, but all xv. haue been hanged, & nowe thou art come by thy folly to make vp the xvj. But by reaſon of the Ring that thou beareſt, we dare not touch thée: I pray thée therefore by the faith and law that thou art of, ſhewe mee what Diuell hath giuen thée that Ring. Than Huon ſore abaſhed, as he that durſt not make a lye, for feare of king Oberon, ſaid. Sir, not for doubt of thée, or of any Paynim héere, I will not ſpare to ſhew thee the troth, know then that with this good ſword I haue ſlaine the Lord Angolofer the Gyant. When ye Admirall heard that, he ſaid to his Lords. Sirs looke that this Villaine eſcape not, for by all the Gods that I beléeue on, I ſhall neuer haue ioy in my heart vntill I ſée him takē. Then Paynims and Sarazins on all parts aſſayled Huon,
                  
when he ſaw that, he commended himſelfe to our Lord god, and thought he ſhould neuer ſée faire day more, and ſo with his ſword in both his hands he defended himſelfe nobly, in ſlaying and cutting off handes, and féete of the Sarazins, & of many he made the braynes to flye abroad on ye pauement, great terrour it was to behould, for by reaſon of his good Armour, there was no Paynim could do him any damage, but they gaue him way, and durſt not approch néere him. Huon being full of yre as he fought, he ſaw on the one ſide of the Pallaice an Arch in the wall, and ſo euer ſtill fighting he drew thether, and ſet his backe to the arch, to thintent that none ſhould come behind him. There he fared like a wilde Boare in the wood▪ and defended himlelfe in ſuch wiſe, that whome ſoeuer he touched with a full ſtroke, had no néede after of any ſurgeon, thus a long ſpace Huon endured, and had no great harme. But the force of the Paynims was ſo great, that it was not poſſible for him to ſuſtaine long, for he waxed ſo wearie, that his ſtroakes féebled, oftentimes he called vpon god, and on the other part the Admirall cryed to his men and ſaid. Ah yee fainte harted ſlaues, great ſhame is to you all, that one man ſhall ſo long endure againſt you, that ye can neither take him nor ſlay him. Then the Paynims whē they heard the Admirall ſo diſpraiſe them, they came in a great rage all at once vppon Huon, whereas he was alone vnder the arch, and a Paynim who was Nephew to the Admirall, came vpon Huon, but when Huon ſaw him approch, he lifted vp his ſword, and gaue the Paynim ſuch a ſtroake on the helmet, that he claue his head to the breaſt, and therewith his ſword fell out of his hands, and another Sarazin tooke it vp, then all the Sarazins at once ran vppon Huon & tooke him, and then tooke from him his Horne and his Cup, and put off his armour: whan he was vnarmed, the Sarazins beheld him well, and many ſaid, how they neuer ſaw ſo faire a man before, affirming, that if all Frenchmē were ſuch as he, there were no King able to reſiſt them.
            
            
               
               Chap. XXXVIII.
               
                  ¶ Of the great complaints that Huon made being in priſon, and how the Admirals Daughter came to comfort him, and how ſhe departed not well content with Huon.
                  
               
               
                  
                     WHen Huon was diſarmed, the Paynims tooke and brought him before the Admirall, who was right ioyfull when he ſawe Huon, and called his Barons & demaunded of them, what death the Caytiffe ſhould die that had done them ſuch damage, as to ſlay one of his moſt puiſſant Kings, and alſo his Nephew, beſide many others. Then they all anſweared with one voice, that hee ſhould be ſlaine aliue incontinent. Then ſtept foorth an old ancient Admirall of Six ſcore yéeres of age, who was of ye Admirals priuie counſell, and he ſaid. Sir Admirall, yée may not doe thus, for the loue of this good day, the which is the feaſt of Saint Iohn, according to our law, there is none ought to die on that day, but Sir, reſpite his life for a whole yéere, and then ſhalbe the feaſt of your Gods, on that day ye ought to deliuer xj. Champions, to doe with them you Sacrifice: let this man be one, and another may come by that time, and which of the twoo Champions be ouercome, yée ſhall make your ſacrifice to your Gods of him. Thus ye promiſed your Gods to doe, the firſt day that yée tooke on you the Signiorie of Babylon, and Sir, if it were not for that this man hath ſlaine one of your Kings, and your Nephew, ye ought not to ſlay him, but rather to thanke him, for by him, the man that you ought moſt to hate in the world, is ſlaine, that is Angolofer, and now by his death yee are out of all ſeruitude & bondage, and by this man ſet at libertie. When the Admirall Gaudiſe had well heard the Paynim, he ſaide,

ſéeing it is ſo that ye giue me this counſell, and that of right mine Aunceſtors haue euer accuſtomed the ſame: I will not doe the contrarie, but it ſhall be as ye haue ſaid. Then was Huon led with iiij. Paynims to a darke priſon, and the Iaylor was commaunded to giue him meate and drinke ſuffitient. When Huon ſaw how he was in priſon, he was right ſorowfull and began to remember ye noble Duches his Mother, and Gerard his brother, and ſaid. Ah Oberon, how is it that art ſo vnkind & outragious to me, for ſo little an offence to ſuffer me to endure this great miſery? for I know well it is not vnknowen to thee, that the offence that I haue done, was but only by forgetfulnes.
               Now let vs leaue ſpeaking of Huon, and ſay ſomewhat of faire Eſcleremond Daughter to the Admirall: when ſhee ſaw that it was night, and ſhee all alone in her bed, ſhée remembred the French knight, who had kiſſed her iij. times in the preſence of her Father, and ſhee was in great ſorow bicauſe he was put in priſon, & ſaid to her ſelfe: Without he were a Knight of great enterprize, he would neuer haue béen ſo hardy to haue done as he hath done this day in diuers manners. Wherefore ſhe ſaid, he was well worthy to be beloued and ſuccoured. Then incontinent ſhee aroſe and made her readie, and priuily ſhe tooke a torch of waxe in her hand, and lighted it, and iſſued out of her chamber as priuilye as ſhe could. It was about midnight, and euery man was a ſléepe in the Pallaice, ſhe went ſtrait to the priſon, & came at ſo good a time that ſhe found the Iaylor faſt a ſléepe, then ſhe ſtole away the keyes, and went and opened the priſon dore. But when Huon ſaw the torch light, and the dore of ye priſon open, he was in great feare, leaſt they would take him out to put him to death, or to doe him ſome other diſpleaſure, whereupon he began to make pitifull complaints, The Ladie who could well ſpeake french, vnderſtood all Huons complaints, and remembred his name, bicauſe the day before ſhe had heard himſelfe ſhew her Father his name, then ſhée ſaid. Huon, diſmay not, I am Eſcleremond Daughter to the

Admirall, whome this day paſſed thou didſt kiſſe iij. times in the preſence of my Father, if it be ſo that thou wilt fulfill my will, I ſhall put to my endeauour to deliuer thée out of priſon, for I am ſo affectionate towards thée, that euer ſince thou didſt kiſſe me, I haue none other thought nor immagination but only on thée, & how to bring thée out of the danger that thou art in. Madame quoth Huon, god reward you for your great courteſie that ye would do vnto me, but faire Lady Eſcleremond, you are a Sarazin, and I am chriſtened: True it is, that I did kiſſe you, but that was by the commaundement of king Charlemaine, who ſent me hether ſo to doe, but elſe I had rather to haue been heere in perpetuall priſon, than to haue touched any part of your bodie or mouth ſo long as ye be a Sarazyn. Huon quoth ye Ladie, ſeing thou art of that mind, thou ſhalt end thy daies heere in priſon miſerably, and neuer truſt me, but if I can, I ſhall cauſe thee deerely to aby the refuſall that thou haſt made me. Then the Lady Eſcleremond parted from the priſon, and came to the Iaylor and awaked him, and ſaid: Friend, I charge thee on paine of thy life, that to this french Priſoner within thy keeping, for theſe iij. daies and iij. nightes thou giue him neither meate nor drinke. Madame quoth the Iaylor, your commaundement ſhalbe fulfilled. Then the Lady in this diſpleaſure went againe to her bed, right penſiue and full of fantaſies, and Huon was iij. daies and iij. nights without meate or drinke, and on the iiij. day he ſaid all ſorowing. Ah good Lord, I ſee well I muſt heere die for hunger, I hū
                  bly require thee to ayd and ſuccour me, and graunt me thy grace, that I neither conſent nor doe any thing that ſhall be againſt thy pleaſure or againſt thy holy law, for any tribulation that can come to me. Thus noble Huon complayned all ſorowing, & there was no creature that had heard him, but he would haue been partaker of his great ſorowes.
            
            
               
               Chap. XXXIX.
               
                  ¶ How Huon made great complaints for the famine that he endured, and how the faire Eſcleremond came againe to cō
                     fort him, conditionally that Huon would fulfill her deſire.
               
               
                  
                     Thus (as haue ye haue heard before) Huon complayned pitiouſly, for he had been iij. daies and iij. nights without ſuſtenance, and the Lady Eſcleremond who cauſed it, came euery morning and euening to the priſon to heare what Huon would ſay, and euer ſhee would demaund of Huon, if he were any otherwiſe aduiſed to anſwere her or not, and euer ſhe found him at one point. But at the laſt, when ſhe ſaw that he ſtill continued in that minde, then ſhe demaunded of him, that if ſhe deliuered him out of priſon, whether he would then promiſe her to lead her with him into Fraunce, and take her to his wife when hee came there, if thou wilt promiſe me this (quoth ſhee) thou ſhalt haue meate and drinke ſufficient at thy pleaſure.
               Madame quoth Huon, I promiſe you faithfully, that vppon your forſaking Paganiſme, and conuerſion to our chriſtian faith: I ſhall doe your pleaſure, whatſoeuer happen to me thereby. Then know for troth quoth the Lady, that for the loue of thée I will become chriſtened, and beleeue in ye law of the Lord Ieſus Chriſte ſo ſoone as we come into any place whereas it may be done. Huon thanked her, and then ſhe cauſed him to haue meate and drinke, whereof he was ioyfull, and ſhe called the Iaylor and ſaid. Goe thy way in haſt to the Admirall my Father, and tell him that the french knight is dead iij. daies paſt, through féeblenes & hunger. Ladie quoth the Iaylor, I am ready to doe your commaundement, and ſo he went to the Admirall and ſaid. Sir, the

french Knight that was in my keeping, is dead by famine iij. daies paſt. Alas quoth the Admirall, I am ſory therfore, but ſeing it will none otherwiſe be, I muſt paſſe it ouer as I may, but I had rather that he were aliue. And thus as ye haue heard, Huon was deliuered from death, for it is a commō, but a very true ſaying, that one day of deliuerance, is worth a hundred yeeres of endurance. Then the Iaylor returned to the priſon vnto the Ladie, and ſhewed her what he had ſaid to the Admirall. Well fri
                     •
                  nd quoth the Ladie, if thou wilt be ſecret, I ſhall make thée rich for euer, helping to aide me in ſuch things as I would haue thee. Madame quoth he, to die in the quarrell, I ſhall doe you ſeruice ſuch as you commaund me, the feare of death ſhall not let me to doe it.
               Now let vs leaue ſpeaking of Huon, who was oftentimes viſited with the Iaylor, and had all things as he deſired, and was well lodged at his pleaſure. And let vs now ſpeake of Gerames, and of them that were with him in the Caſtle of the Gyant.
            
            
               Chap. XL.
               
                  ¶ How Gerames and his company departed from the Tower and the Damſell with them, and came to Babilon, and of the manner that Gerames vſed to know ſome newes of Huon.
                  
               
               
                  
                     WE haue heard heere before, how Huon departed from the Tower of the Gyant, and left there Gerames and all his company with ye Damſell his Coozen: they taried there iij. moneths, and neuer heard any thing of Huon, wherof they were ſorowfull. They went foorth one morning, and came to the Sea-ſide, to ſée if they might heare any newes of their Lord Huon, and as they looked

vpon the Sea, they eſpied a ſhippe charged with xxx. Paynims and great riches, and Gerames ſaw how the ſhip was coming to that Port, wherfore he ſaid to his company: Sirs, let vs go and ſee if we can learne any tiding
                     •
                   of Huon by them. Then they went to the Port, and by that time that the Maryners had caſt their anchor, then Gerames demaunded of them whence they were, and whither they would go. Sir quoth they, we would goe to Meſque, to pay to Angolofer the great Gyant, a Tribute that we are bound euery yeere to pay, therefore Sir we deſire you to ſhew vs where we might find him. And when Gerames ſaw that they were all a land out of the ſhip, he ſaid, Ah ye vnhappie Paynims, ye ſhall neuer depart hence, for he that ye demaund for is dead, and all ye ſhall beare him companie▪
               
               Then Gerames ſaide to his company, ſirs let all theſe Paynims be ſlaine, and then incontinent they ſet vpon thē, ſo that all the Paynims were ſlaine, not one eſcaped aliue, for the chriſtian men were armed, and the Paynims without armour or any weapon, for otherwiſe they durſt not come on land for feare of the Gyant. Then Gerames entred into the ſhip, and tooke all that they found there and bare it into the Tower, and then they went to dinner and made great ioy for that aduenture, and after dinner Gerames ſaid. Sirs if wee were now in Fraunce, and that king Charlemaine ſhould demaund of vs what is become of Huon: yée know wel there is none of vs can tel whether he be aliue or dead, for if we ſhould ſay that he is dead, and he afterward retourne home, then we ſhould be reputed for falſe men euer after both we and our children, for a man may be a Priſoner xiiij. or xv. yeeres, and yet come home againe at the laſt ſafe and ſound. But ſirs if yee will be ruled by me, we ſhall doe like true men: we haue as now in this port a good ſhip well fourniſhed with euery thing, and we haue heere gould and ſiluer plentie, and we ſhall ſoone vittaile our ſhip, and then let vs take the Sea, and neuer reſt ſayling vntill wee heare ſome newes of our Lord Huon, & if we doe thus, then

wée doe as true men ought to doe, and I deſire you all euery man ſhew his aduice herein. Then without taking of any longer reſpite, they anſwered all with one voice, that they were readie to accompliſh all that he had deuiſed. So they tooke gould and ſiluer and all their riches, and bare it into the ſhippe, and fourniſhed it with wine, biſket, ſalt fleſh, & artillerie, and when their ſhippe was garniſhed, they put in their horſes and their armour, and they all xiij. Companions entred into the ſhip, & the Damſell with thē, then they wayed vp their anchors, & hoyſed vp their ſayles, and ſo left the Tower of the Gyant all voyd and no man therein. And thus they ſayled along the coaſt, vntill they came into the high ſea, and ſo long they ſayled till they came to Damieta, & there they entred into the Riuer of Nyle, and ſo long they ſayled therein, that they arriued at Babylon, and came to the Port, and tooke out their horſes.
               
                  Gerames that knew well the language, and the manner of the entring into all the iiij. gates, ſaid to his companie. Sirs lets vs mount on our horſes, and let vs enter into the Citie, to ſee if we may heare any newes of our Maiſter Huon. Thus they roade foorth and entred into the Citie, & then Gerames ſaid. Sirs, wée will goe to the Pallaice, but when we come there, 
                     •
                  ould you all your peace, and ſuffer mee to ſpeake, wherein it is conuenient that yee all agree to my wordes, and ſay not the contrary. They anſwered and ſaid, they were content ſo to doe, and thus they roade together through the towne, Ah good Lord quoth Gerames, I beſéech thee of thy grace to grant vs, that we may heare ſome good tidings of our maiſter Huon of Bourdeaux, for whome we be heere in ieoperdie of death, ſo they paſſed all the iiij. bridges and gates, by reaſon that Gerames ſhewed foorth ſuche reaſons that the Porters were content. Then they came before the great hall, & there they alighted & mounted vp all xiij. and the Damſell with them, and when they were in ye hall, they ſaw the Admirall Gaudiſe ſitting on a rich chaire garniſhed with gould & pretious ſtones, and Gerames that

could well ſpeake the Sarazine language, came before the Admirall and ſaid.
               The ſame god that cauſeth the wine and corne to grow, ſaue and keepe the Admirall Gaudiſe, whome I ſee there 
                     •
                  itting among his Barons. Friend quoth the Admirall, thou art welcome, I pray thee ſhew me what thou art, and whither thou wouldeſt goe? Sir (quoth Gerames) to tell you plainely, I am come from the good citie of Mombrance, and am Sonne to king Iuoryn. When the Admyrall heard that, he roſe vp on his féete and ſaid: Thou art welcome the ſon of my brother, faire Nephew, I pray you ſhew me how doth my brother Iuoryn? Sir (quoth Gerames) when I departed from him, I left him in good health, and he ſaluteth you by me, and hath ſent heere to you xij. french men by me, the which were taken vpon the ſea, as they were going on Pilgrimage to the holy Sepulchre of Chriſt in Ieruſalem, and he deſireth you to put them in priſon, vntill the day of Saint Iohn the Baptiſt, at which day you muſt make the feaſt of your Gods, and then to bring them into the meadow heere without, and there tye and binde thē to ſtakes, and let your Archers ſhoot at them, to thintent to know who ſhooteth beſt. As for this Damſell that is héere with me, ſhe is to be put to your Daughter, to teach her to ſpeake perfectly the french language. Faire Nephew (quoth the Admirall) as he hath appointed it ſhalbe done, and I giue you power to cōmaund euery thinge in this houſe at your pleaſure, and I pray you ſhew me what is your name? Sir quoth he, I am called Ieracle. Well (quoth the Admirall) from hence foorth I retaine you to be as my chiefe Chamberlaine, and I will that yee haue the key of the priſon in your kéeping, and therein to put theſe Captiues, and doe with them at your pleaſure, extend vnto thē what kindneſſe you pleaſe, but let them haue meat & drinke ſuffitient, that they die not with famine, as but lately died a French man that was ſent to me by king Charles of Fraunce, who was called Huon of Bourdeaux, the which was a right faire yong man.
               
                  When Gerames heard that, he had neuer before greater ſorow at his heart, for then (hearing of the death of Huon) his diſpleaſure & anger was ſo great, that he had néere hand runne vpon the Admirall, and he was ſo vexed in his mind, that he tooke vp a ſtaffe that lay by him, and gaue each of the French men ſuch ſtroakes on their heades, that the blood ran downe: but they ſuffered it and durſt not ſtirre, they were in ſuch feare of the Admirall, but they curſed Gerames for his ſtroakes, who did it for the nonſt. And when the Admirall ſawe how hee had well beaten the frenchmen, he ſaid: Faire Nephew, it ſeemeth well by you that you loue theſe chriſtian men but little. Sir quoth he, I hate theſe chriſtian men more then any men in the world, for Sir all the waye that I haue come, I haue thus beaten them thrée times in euery day, in the honour of my God Mahound, and in deſpight of their law and God on whome they beléeue. Thus then Gerames departed from the Admirall, and led with him the xij. french priſoners, beating them till he came to ye priſon, and none of them durſt ſpeake one word, but to themſelues they curſed Gerames. And as they went towards the priſon they met with the Lady Eſcleremond, and ſhe ſaid, Coſin, I am right ioyfull of your comming, but if I durſt truſt you, I would ſhew you a ſecret matter, ſo that you promiſe not to diſcouer me. Couſin quoth Gerames, by the faith that I owe to my god Mahound, ye may well ſhew me your will and pleaſure, for if mine eyes were to be drawne out, I ſhal neuer diſcouer you. And when the Damſell heard that promiſe, ſhe ſaid. Deare Couſin, it is a v. months paſſed ſince there came to my Father the Admirall a french knight, with a meſſuage from king Charlemaine, who called himſelfe Huon of Bourdeaux, who when he had done his meſſuage, hee ſlew a Paynim king as he ſat at the table by my Father, & after came & kiſſed me thrée times before my Fathers face, and after that ſlew many Sarazins, wherefore at laſt hee was taken Priſoner, and put in priſon whereas he is yet, howbeit I made my Father beléeue that he is dead with famine,

yet deere couſin he is as yet aliue, and as well ſerued of meat and drinke as my father is. When Gerames vnderſtood the Damſell Eſcleremond, he was both ſorowfull & angrie, for he thought that the Damſell did it to deceaue him, and to cauſe him to ſhew forth the ſecretnes of his minde, & bicauſe he was in doubt thereof, he paſſed foorth and made no manner of anſweare to the Damſell, but came to the priſon, and put in the Priſoners rudely, and the Damſell returned right ſorowfull in that ſhe had ſhewed ſo much of her minde to Gerames whome ſhe tooke for her Couſin. When Gerames had put the xij. Frenchmen in priſon, he returned right ſorowfull, and Huon being in the priſon, had greate maruaile what priſoners they were that were let downe into the priſon, for he could not ſée thē the priſon was ſo darke, then he drew néere to them to heare them ſpeake, and at laſt one of them began to make his complaint, and ſaid. Ah good Lord Ieſu Chriſt ſuccour vs, for thou knoweſt well, this that wee ſuffer we haue not deſerued, but it is for the loue of our yong Lord Huon of Bourdeaux, we haue loued him ſo well, that now wée be loſt for 
                     •
                  uer, except deere Lord thou haue mercie vppon vs. When Huon had heard what they ſaid, then he knew well that they were chriſtened & frenchmen, and then he coueted much to know what they were, & ſo approched néere to them and ſaid. Sirs, yée that be heere, I pray you ſhew me what yée be, and how yee be come hither?
               Sir quoth one of them, true it is that v. moneths paſſed, there departed from vs a young knight, with whome wee came out of the Realme of Fraunce, and he was borne in Fraunce, and ſonne to a noble Duke, called Duke Seuin of Bourdeaux, this Knight ſlew Charlot ſonne to King Charlemaine by miſaduenture, wherefore hee was baniſhed out of the Realme of Fraunce, and ſent by king Charlemaine to do a meſſuage to the Admirall Gaudiſe, and he is dead in priſō as it is ſhewed vs, and ſir wée came to ſéeke for him, & are betrayed by one of our owne companie.
               
                  When Huon heard him ſpeake, he knew him well, & ſaid. Sirs, be of good comfort and make good chéere, for I am Huon, ſafe and in good health, thanked be god and the Admirals daughter, who is ſo enamoured of me, that ſhe hath ſaued my life, yée ſhall ſée ſoone how ſhée will come and viſite me. But I pray you ſirs what is become of ould Gerames, whether he be left behind to kéepe ye Tower, with the Dammy couſin whome I left in your kéeping? Sir quoth they, a worſe creature or more falſe Traytor was neuer borne, for he hath betrayed vs, and hath beaten and put vs in priſon: and as for the Damſell, ſhee is with the Admiralls Daughter. When Huon perceiued that all they were of his companie, he went & embraced them and ſaid. Sirs knowe of a ſuretie, that all that Gerames hath done, is done to the intent to deliuer vs all out of priſon, I doe ſo well know the troth of Gerames. Sirs make good chéere, for aſſoone as night commeth, wée ſhalbe viſited with great ioy. Sir quoth they, ſurely wee beléeued that Gerames had forſaken the faith of Chriſt, and was become a Sarazin, for he hath made the Admirall beleeue, that he is ſonne to his brother king Iuoryn of Mombrance. When Huon heard that, he had great ioy at his heart and ſaid. Ah good Lord, the troth of Gerames and loue that he hath alwaies ſhewed to me, ſhalbe to vs right profitable, in the deſpight of king Oberon, who hath forſaken me for a ſmall offence, by Gerames we ſhalbe deliuered out of this pouertie and danger. Now leaueth the Hiſtorie to ſpeake of Huon and his companie being in pryſon, and returneth to the ould Gerames, who ſtudied and practiſed for the deliuerance of Huon and his company.
            
            
               
               Chap. XLI.
               
                  ¶ How Gerames and the faire Eſcleremond went to the Pryſon to comfort Huon and the other Priſoners.
               
               
                  
                     NOw ſheweth the Hiſtorie, that when Gerames was retourned to the Admirall, he ſaid. Sir the French men that I brought, are faſt in priſon and well beaten. Faire Nephew quoth the Admirall, they haue had but an euill neighbor of you. Then Gerames went into his chamber, and ſtudied how he might fourniſh the Priſoners with vittailes, & did ſo much that he had ſufficient, and when night came, he went with his vittailes to ye priſō, for he might do there what he liſted, for euery man was ready to doe him any ſeruice. When he came to the priſon dore, he ſent euery man away and taried there alone, and he had not béen there longe, but that the Admirals daughter came thether. When Gerames ſaw her, he wiſt not what to thinke, but ſaid. Faire couſin, I pray you ſhew me what you doe heare at this houre? Déere couſin quoth ſhee, the great truſt that I haue in you, hath made me to come hether, bicauſe to day I diſcouered to you all my ſecrets, and what I am intended to doe. Therefore let me intreat you, that you would leaue the law of Mahdund, and receiue the chriſtian faith, and then to goe with mee into Fraunce together with theſe Priſoners, and we ſhall well find the manner how to depart, and we will take with vs al the priſoners that ye haue put in priſon.
               When Gerames had heard the Lady, he was right ioyfull, for then he knew well that ſhee went not about to deſcrie him, but that ſhe did it of good heart and good will that ſhe bare to Huon, howbeit, hee thought that hee would not

diſcouer himſelfe to her, vntill the time he knew the troth of Huon, wherfore he anſwered the Damſell angerly and ſaid. O thou falſe and vntrue maide, how art thou ſo hardy as to ſpeake or thinke thus? ſurely the Admirall thy Father ſhall know it aſſoone as he commeth out of his chamber, and then ſhalt thou be burned and the Frenchmen hanged. Alas Sir quoth ſhee, yet I pray you let mee goe into the priſon with you, to thintent yt I may ſée Huon once yet before I die, for the loue of whome I am content to die, for if he die I will not liue one day after, therefore let me once take my leaue of him. Well quoth Gerames, for this time I am content that ye goe with me, then Gerames tooke a torch in his hand, and opened the dore & entred, he was no ſooner entred, but Huon knew him, and went and embraced him, and ſaid. Ah my true louer, bleſſed be the houre that I found you, then they all clipped and embraced him, when the Lady ſaw their maner of ſaluting ſhe was ioyfull, for then ſhe ſaw well, that her intent ſhould be more ſurely compaſſed, & then ſhe came to Huon, & demaunded if they were his ſeruants that made ſo great loue together? Madame quoth Huon, ſurely all theſe that be heere be my men, boldly ye may truſt them, for there is none of them but that they ſhall do your commaundment. Huon quoth the Damſell, their comming pleaſeth me right well, then Huon ſaid to his companie. Gentlemen and my deare friends, forbeare this extremitie of kindneſſe to me, and beſtow it vpon this noble Ladie, for by her wee ſhalbe deliuered, and it is ſhee that hath ſaued my life, thē they all together humbly thanked her.
               Sirs quoth ſhe, if yée will worke by my councell, I ſhall ſhew you how I may aid you to deliuer you frō hence. Firſt let me vnfainedly perſwade ye that I doe firmely beléeue in Ieſus Chriſt, and at this day there is no man that I more hate than the Admirall Gaudiſe my Father, bicauſe he beléeueth not in our Lord Ieſus Chriſt, for hee hateth ſo the chriſtian men, that he cannot abide to heare any ſpeaking of them, for he beléeueth but vpon Mahound and his Idols,

therefore my hart cannot loue him, if he did otherwiſe, I would purchaſe to him none ill for all the good in the world, but I ſhall ſhewe you what yee muſt doe. When it is the houre of midnight, I ſhall bring you all into my chamber, whereas I will prouide Armour for you all, and there yée ſhall all be armed, then I ſhall bring you into the Admirall my Fathers chamber, whome yee ſhall find ſléeping, and there yee may ſlay him, and as for mee, I will bee the firſt that ſhall ſtrike him, and when he is ſlaine, then ſhall wée depart ſurely.
               When Huon had vnderſtood her, he ſaid, Madame, and god will your Father ſhall not be ſo ſlaine, ye day ſhall come that ye ſhall otherwiſe deliuer vs, wée thanke you that yee ſo much deſire our deliuerance, but I thinke it good that you and Gerames depart hence for this time, for it is néere hand day, to thintent that our buſines be not perceiued. Then the Lady and Gerames departed, and cloſed againe the priſon dore, and went vp into the Pallaice, as if they had not béene there at all. And thus euery day Gerames & the Lady went to viſite the Priſoners, and bare them euery thing that was néedefull for them. Gerames was alwaies with the Admirall, and did what he would, for there was not any Paynim that durſt do contrarie to his commaundment. Now leaue wée to ſpeake of the Admirall, of Gerames and of Huon and of all them that were in priſon, vntill ſuch time as wée may returne to them againe.
            
            
               
               Chap. XLII.
               
                  ¶ How the great Giant Agrapart, eldeſt brother to Angolofer whome Huon ſlew, aſſembled his people and came to Babylon, to haue the tribute of the Admirall as his brother had, and of the battaile hand to hand that he deſired of the Admirall Gaudis, the which was agreed vnto.
               
               
                  
                     IT hath beene ſufficiently declared heere before, how Huon ſlew the Gyant Angolofer, the which Gyant had Seauentéene Brethren, all elder than himſelfe, who liued diſtant from him in diuers ſeuerall places. It was no longe while after, but that his elder Brother named Agrapart, was aduertiſed of the death of his Brother, which he tooke to his hart excéeding heauilie. Now you muſt vnderſtand, that he was in all reſpects of as huge ſtature as his brother, for he was xvij. foote of length, and in bignes he was made therafter, he was a foot betwéen ye browes, & his eyes more redder and burning than a brand of fire, and the griſtle of his noſe as great as the noſtrill of an oxe, and he had twoo téeth iſſuing out of his mouth more than a foot long each of them: but if I ſhould deſcribe his foule figure at the full, it would annoy all the hearers thereof, therefore yee may well beléeue when he was in his diſpleaſure, that he had a fearefull countenance to looke vpon, for then his twoo eyes ſéemed like twoo burning torches. When he was certenly aduertiſed of the death of his brother, he ſent ouer all his countrey, that euery man ſhould come to him in armour, and ſo they did, and when they were come, he declared to them ye death of his brother Angolofer, & ſaid how it was his mind to goe to Babylon to ye Admirall Gaudiſe, there to take poſſeſſion of

the landes and ſigniories that were his brothers, and alſo to haue the tribute that was due by the Admirall, then all his L
                     ••
                  ds ſaid, Sir, commaund at your pleaſure, and wee ſhall obay it. Well ſirs (quoth he) then I will that euerye man mount on their horſes to goe towards Babylon, and ſo they all obayed, and got on their horſes and departed, & rode ſo long, that they came into a plaine néere to the citie of Babylon, there were about Ten Thowſand men together, and Agrapart ſaid, Sirs tarie yée all héere till I come againe, for I will goe all alone and ſpeake with the Admirall Gaudiſe. Then he armed himſelfe, and tooke a great fawchin in his hand, and departed all alone, and ſo went and entred into the citie of Babylon, and ſo paſt the Foure gates, there was no Paynim that durſt ſay him nay, and he reſted not vntill he came to the Pallaice, the ſame time as the Admirall was ſitting at dinner & Gerames with him, then the Gyant came to the table, & ſaid. The ſame god Mahound vnder whome we liue, confound the Admirall Gaudiſe, as an ill caytiffe and a falſe Traytour. When the Admirall heard himſelfe ſo highly abuſed, he ſaid to Agrapart, in this that thou haſt ſaid, thou lyeſt falſely, thus ſhamefully to rebuke me in mine owne Court before all my Lords: therefore ſhewe mee the 
                     •
                  auſe why thou doeſt me this iniurie? Admirall quoth hee, it is bicauſe there is come into thy Court he that hath ſlaine my Brother, whom incontinent thou oughteſt to haue ſlain likewiſe, wherefore if it were not for mine owne honour, with my fiſt I would ſtrike thée on the face, thou haſt put him in priſon, without any more hurt dooing vnto him, therefore thou traytour théefe, by Mahound be thou curſed, thou art not worthy to ſit in a ſeate royall, therefore ariſe vp, it is not mée
                     •
                  e for thée to ſit there. And therewith hée drew the Admirall ſo rudely out of his chaire, that his hat and Crowne fell downe to the earth, whereat the Admirall was ſore abaſhed.
               Then Agrapart ſat downe in his chaire & ſaid, thou falſe Traytour, my Brother is dead, therefore from hencefoorth

thou ſhalt be my Subiect, for it appertaineth to me to haue the Lands that my Brother had, and the Tribute that thou wert woont to pay vnto my Brother, or elſe I ſhall ſtrike off thy head: howbeit I will not doe againſt right, for if thou wilt prooue the cōtrarie, or find two Champions to be ſo hardy, that for thy loue they dare or will fight with me in plaine battaile, I ſhall fight with them, or more if thou wilt ſend thē to me. And if it be ſo, that I be ouercome & diſcomfited by any of thē, I am content that frō hence foorth thou ſhalt hould thy landes franke & frée, without any tribute paying. But if it fall out ſo that I conquer thē both, then thou to be my ſubiect, and to pay me tribute for euer, & alſo to pay me for a due taxe euery yéere Foure Ducates of gould as thy head money. Agrapart quoth the Admirall, I am content thus to do, and to appoint twoo of my men to fight with thée.
            
            
               Chap. XLIII.
               
                  ¶ How the Admirall Gaudis tooke Huon out of priſon, and armed him to fight with the Gyant Agrapart.
                  
               
               
                  
                     WHen the Admirall had heard the great Gyant, he ſaid alowd: where bee the twoo gentle knights, that will for euer be my friends? now is the time come, that all the goodnes and great gifts that I haue giuen among you, is now to be rewarded. If there be any of you that will fight againſt this Gyant, I ſhall giue him my Daughter Eſcleremond in mariage, and after my death to haue my Heritage, no man ſhall be ſo bold as to ſay nay thereto. But for any faire wordes or promiſes that the Admirall could make, there was no Paynim ſo hardye to vndertake it: whereuppon the Admirall made great ſorow, and began to lament, and when the Gyant Agrapart
                  
ſawe him, he ſaid. Thy lamenting cannot auaile thée, for whether thou wilt or not, it muſt beheeue thée to pay theſe iiij. péeces of gold yerely, for I am ſure there is no Paynim that dare fight againſt me.
               When the faire Ladie Eſcleremond ſaw her Father wéepe, it ſore gréeued her hart, and ſhe ſaid, O my Father, if I knewe that it ſhould not diſpleaſe you, I would ſhew you one thing which ſhould bring you out of this doubt. Daughter quoth he, I ſweare by Mahound, I will not be diſpleaſed whatſoeuer thou ſayeſt. Sir (quoth ſhée) I did once delude you, in telling you that the French-man that brought you the Meſſuage from king Charlemaine, was dead in priſon: but ſir credite me he is as yet aliue, if it pleaſe you I ſhall fetch him to you, and without doubt I dare warrant you, that he will take on him this Battaile againſt the Gyant, for he ſhewed you how he ſlew the other Gyant Angolofer, therefore I haue hope by the ayd of Mahound, in likewiſe he ſhall ſlay his brother this Gyant Agrapart. Daughter (quoth the Admirall) it is my pleaſure that ye ſhall fetch the Priſoner to me, for if he can diſcomfite this Gyant, I am content that he & all his company, ſhall depart franke & frée at their pleaſure. Then the Lady & Gerames went to the priſon, & tooke out Huon & all his company, & brought them before the Admirall. Then the Admirall earneſtly beheld Huon, and had great maruaile that he was in ſo good caſe, yet his colour was ſomewhat pale, by reaſon of lying ſo long in priſon, then the Admirall ſaid. Friend it ſéemeth by thy lookes, that thou haſt had no ill impriſonment. Sir quoth Huon, I thanke your Daughter therefore, but I pray you ſhew me for what cauſe yée haue as now ſent for me?
               Frend (quoth the Admirall) I ſhall ſhewe thée, behould yonder Sarazin that is armed, who hath challenged to fight with me hand to hand, or againſt twoo of the beſt men that I haue, and I can find none ſo hardy that dare fight againſt this Paynim: but if it be ſo that thou wilt take vpon thee this enterpriſe for me, I ſhall then deliuer thée and all thy

company, quite to goe into thy country at thy pleaſure, and ſafely to conduct thée to the Citie of Acre. And alſo I will giue thée a Sommer with gould, the which thou ſhalt preſent frō me to king Charlemaine, and euery yere from hencefoorth to ſend him like preſent as for my head money, and to make ſuch aſſurance as his councell can deuiſe. Alſo if hee haue any warre, I ſhall ſend him twoo M. men of armes payed for a whole yere before hand, and if it be ſo that he deſire mine owne perſon, I will then paſſe the ſea with a C.M. Paynims to ſerue him: for I had rather to be in ſeruitude there, than to pay iiij.d. to this Gyant. And moreouer, if thou wilt abide héere with me, I ſhal giue thée my daughter Eſcleremond in mariage, and the halfe of my Realme to maintaine thine eſtate. Sir quoth Huon, I am content this to doe, ſo that I may haue mine owne Armour, and my rich Horne of Iuory and my cuppe, the which were taken from me when I was yéelded Priſoner. Frend quoth the Admirall, all ſhalbe deliuered to thée, thou ſhalt not looſe the value of one peny. Then the Admirall ſent for the Horne, Armour and Cup, and deliuered them to Huon, whereof he had great ioy, but when Agrapart ſaw & knew, that the Admirall had found a Champion to fight with him, hee ſaide to the Admirall. Sir, I will goe out and ſpeake with my Knights, and in the meane time let thy Champiō be ready apparelled, for I ſhall not tary long, beſide, I ſhall neuer haue ioy at my hart, till I haue torne his hart out of his bodie: therewith he departed and went to his men, and Huon put on his coate of mayle, and then he tooke Gerames his horne of Iuory, and ſaid: Friend, I pray you kéepe my Horne till I returne againe. Then he went & prayed to our Lord, to forgiue him his ſinnes, and to ſuccour & ayd him to diſcomfite that foule 
                     ••
                  end the Gyant, and when he had made his praiers to god, he put on his armour as quickly as though he had neuer béen in priſon, wherby he knew well that god was pleaſed with him, and then he ſaid.
               Ah noble king Oberon, I pray thée ſéeing God is pleaſed

with me, put away thy diſpleaſure and pardon me, for the breaking of thy commaundement I haue béen ſore puniſhed, and I pray thee be not diſpleaſed if I ſpake any haſty worde being in priſon, for famine cauſed me to doe it. In the breaking of thy commaundement, I confeſſe I did ill therein: yet it was but by negligence and forgetting. Alas Sir, remember but what courteſie ye ſhewed me, when yée found me in the wood, and gaue me your rich Horne and Cup, by the which often times I haue been ſuccoured: therefore ſir now I require thée to pardon me all my treſpaſſes, and helpe me at my néed, for I ſée well, without it be by ye grace of god & your helpe, there is nothing can ſaue my life, thus he beſought god of pardon, and to giue him grace to deſtroy his enemy, who was ſo horrible to behould. And when he had made his prayer, there came a Sarazin to Huon & ſaid, Sir héere is your owne ſwoord that yée loſt when yée were taken. Friend quoth Huon, yee do me great courteſie, God giue me grace to reward thée. Then he did on his helmet and girt on his ſword, and the Admirall ſent him a good horſe the beſt in all his Court, for he was not ſo faire, but he was in goodnes aboue all other. When Huon ſaw him, he was right ioyfull & thanked the Admirall. As for his rich fourniture I make no mention thereof, the ſaddle, harneſie, and bridle were ſo rich, that the value thereof could not be eſtéemed. Then Huon made the ſigne of the croſſe, and mounted on his horſe armed at all points, and ſo rode out of the Pallaice into a faire meadow, and there made a courſe to aſſay his horſe, & then he reſted him before ye Admirall, who leaned in a window in his Pallaice, and when he beheld Huon, he ſaid to his Lords. Truſt me theſe Frenchmen are to be doubted & feared, for Huon is a goodly yong man, and great wrong it had been if he had béen ſlaine. The Admirall commaunded the field to be kept with a Thowſand Sarazins, to thintent that no treaſon ſhould be done, or any iniurie offered to his faire ſéeming Champion.
            
            
               
               Chap. XLIIII.
               
                  ¶ How Huon fought with Agrapart the Gyant, and diſcomfited him, and deliuered him to the Admirall, who had great ioy thereof.
               
               
                  
                     WHen Huon hadde made his courſe, he came into the field whereas his enemie was ready, and when Agrapart ſaw Huon, hee ſaid. Thou that art of ſo great courage as to fight againſt me, howe néere of kinne art thou to the Admirall, ſéeing that for the loue of him thou wilt put thy ſelfe in aduenture of death? Paynim quoth Huon, know for troth, that I am nothing of kinne to the Admirall, but I was borne in the Realme of Fraunce, and if thou deſire to know what I am, I ſay vnto thée, that I am he that ſlew thy Brother. For that (quoth the Paynim) I am the more ſorowfull, and yet againe ioyfull, in that Mahound hath done mée the grace, to haue power to reuenge his death: but if thou wilt beléeue and worſhip my God Mahound, and forſake thy beléefe and goe with me into my countrey I ſhall make thée ſo great a Lord, that of all thy kinne there was neuer any ſuch. And I ſhall giue thée my ſiſter in mariage, who is a foote greater than I am, and is as blacke as a cole. Paynim quoth Huon, I care neyther for thy land nor for thy ſiſter, but all the diuels in hell kéepe them both: beware thou of me, for I ſhall neuer ioy in my hart, vntill the time that I haue ſlaine thee as I haue done thy brother: I defie thée in the name of god, and I thée quoth the Gyant, in the name of Mahound.
               Then they went a ſunder to take their courſes, and they ran each at other and met ſo fierſly, that their ſpeares brake in péeces, and the encounter was ſo rude, that by force of the

ſhocke both the horſes fell to the earth, but the Champions quickly recouered, and came each vpon other. Agrapart tooke vp his fawchin to haue ſtriken Huon, but he ſtept a litle on the one ſide, whereby the Paynim miſſed his ſtroke, & Huon lifted vp his ſword and ſtrake the Gyant on the helmet ſo maruailous a ſtroke, that he ſtrake of a quarter therof, and wounded him ſore, and the ſtroke deſcended downe and cut of his eare, ſo that the black blood ran downe to the ground. Then Huon ſaid, Paynim thou wert vnhappie when thou cameſt hether, thou mighteſt haue béen content with ye death of thy Brother, and not to come hether to haue as much thy ſelfe, for thou ſhalt neuer ſée faire day more.
               When the Gyant ſaw him ſelfe hurt, he had great feare and ſaid: Curſed be he of Mahound that forged thy ſwoord, I had rather I had béene bound to haue paid a great ſumme of money to haue ſaued my life, than to be ſlaine héere: therfore I yéeld my ſelfe to thée, take héere my ſwoord, I pray thée doe me no hurt. Paynim quoth Huon, haue no doubt, ſéeing thou doeſt yéeld thée to me, there is none ſo hardy that ſhall doe thée any diſpleaſure. Then Huon tooke the Paynim by the arme & brought him into the Citie, whereof the Admirall and all his Lords had great ioy: but the inward content that Eſcleremond had, paſſed all other. When Gerames ſaw how the Gyant was ouercome, he came to the Admiral and ſaid. Sir Admirall, know for troth that I am chriſtened, and I am not your Nephew: I came hether but only to ſearch for my Lord Huon, & the better to know the troth, I ſaid I was ſonne to Iuoryn of Mombrance your brother, thereby to know the certentie what was become of Huon, for I knew well he was ſent to you from king Charlemaine on a Meſſuage.
            
            
               
               Chap. XLV.
               
                  ¶ How Agrapart the Gyant cryed mercie to the Admirall, and howe Huon deſired the Admirall Gaudiſe to leaue his law, and to be chriſtened.
               
               
                  
                     WHEN the Admirall heard Gerames, he had great maruaile and ſaid, it is hard for any man to beware of the craft and ſubtiltie that is in a Frenchman. Then the Admirall ſawe where Huon was comming vp the ſteps, and bringing with him the Gyant, whereon the Admirall and all his Lords came & met him, and Gerames & his company with him, who were right ioyfull when they ſaw him come. When Huon ſawe the Admirall, he tooke Agrapart by the hand and ſaid to the Admirall. Sir, I deliuer him into your handes, that this day did you ſo great iniurie, euen he that drew you out of your chaire, I deliuer to you, to doe with him at your pleaſure. When Agrapart ſaw that, he knéeled and ſaid, Sir Admirall, he hath much to doe that fooliſhly thinketh, I ſay this by my ſelfe, for to day when I came to you, I thought my ſelfe the moſt puiſſant man that raigned on the earth, & thought that yée were not ſufficient nor worthy to ſerue me: but often times raſh beléeuing deceaueth his maiſter, for I thought that for x. men I would not once turne my chaire to haue regarded them, but otherwiſe is fallen to me, for I am diſcomfited alonely by one man, and am taken and brough
                     •
                   into your hands, therefore ye may do with me at your pleaſure, yet ſir I require you haue pitie on me, and pardon the outrage that I haue done vnto you.
               Then the Admirall anſwered & ſaid, how he would par
                  
                     •
                  on him on the condition, that he ſhould neuer after treſpas

him nor any man in his country, and beſide that, to become his man, and to doe him homage before all them that were there preſent. Sir quoth Agrapart, I am readie to fulfi
                     •
                  l your pleaſure, and then he did homage to the Admirall in the preſence of all thē that were there, and in ioy they ſat all downe to dinner. The Admirall made great honour to Huon, and cauſed him to ſit by him, then Agrapart and Gerames, and al the other Frenchmen ſat downe. As for their ſeruice, and many diſhes of ſondrie ſorts of meates, I leaue ſpeaking of them. Huon, who had great deſire to accompliſh his enterprize drew out his Cup, the which Gerames had before deliuered to him with his Horne of Iuory, and then ſaid to the Admirall. Sir yée may ſée héere this rich Cup in my hand, the which yee ſee is all emptie. Sir quoth the Admirall, I ſée well there is nothing therein. Now Sir quoth Huon, I ſhall ſhew you how our Law is holy and diuine, then Huon made the ſigne of the croſſe thrée times ouer the Cup, the which incontinent was full of wine, whereat the Admirall hadde great maruaile. Sir quoth Huon, I preſent you this Cuppe, that yée may drinke thereof, and then ſhall yée taſt the goodnes of the wine. The Admirall tooke it in his hand, and incontinent the Cuppe was voyde and the wine vaniſhed away, whereat the Admirall had great maruaile and ſaide, Huon yée haue enchaunted me. Not ſo Sir quoth Huon, I am no Enchaunter, but it is becauſe yée be full of ſinne, for the law that yée hould is of no worth, the great vertue that god hath put in this cuppe, is by reaſon of the ſigne of the croſſe that I made, whereby yée may perceyue that my ſaying is true. Huon quoth ye Admirall, yée néed not to trouble your ſelfe to ſpeake to me to forſake my beléefe and to take yours, but I would know of you, whether you will abide heere with me, or elſe goe into Fraunce, for that I haue promiſed you I ſhall fulfill it. Ah Sir Admirall quoth Huon, I know well you will kéepe couenaunt with me in that yee haue promiſed me: but Sir aboue all other matters, I pray you haue pitie on your owne ſoule, the which ſhalbe damned

in hell without yée leaue your beleefe, in that it is neyther good nor iuſt, without yée doe thus, I ſweare by my faith, that I ſhall call hether many men of armes, that all ye houſes in your Pallaice and Citie ſhalbe full. When the Admirall heard Huon ſay ſo, he beheld his owne men & ſaid. Sirs, heere yée may well heare the pride that is in this Frenchman, who hath been more than halfe a yéere in my priſon, and now he threateneth to ſlay mee, becauſe I will not take on me his law and leaue mine owne. I haue great maruaile where he ſhould find ſuch ſtore of men as he hath ſaid, or what lets me to ſlay him at my pleaſure? Sir quoth Huon, yet I demaund once more of you if ye will doe as I haue ſaid. Huon quoth the Admirall, beware on paine of your eyen, and as much as you loue your life, that ye ſpeake no more to me of this matter, for by the faith that I owe to Mahound, if all King Charlemaines Hoaſt were heere aſſē
                  bled, it ſhould not lye in their power to ſaue your life. Admirall quoth Huon, I am in doubt that too late yée will repent you.
            
            
               Chap. XLVI.
               
                  ¶ How Huon ſeeing that the Admirall would not forſake his beleefe, blew his Horne, whereby Oberon came to him, and how the Admirall was ſlaine and all his men. And how Huon and the faire Eſcleremond were in perill of drowning, by reaſon that he brake the commaundement of king Oberon.
                  
               
               
                  
                     WHen Huon ſaw that the Admirall would not leaue his Law to receiue chriſtendom, he ſet his Horne to his mouth, & blew it with ſuch violence, that the blood iſſued out at his mouth, ſo that the Admirall and all other that were there put the tables from them,

and roſe and all that were in the Pallaice began to ſing and daunce. The ſame time king Oberon was in his wood, & hearing the Horne blow, ſaid. Ah good Lord, I know ſurely that my friend Huon hath great neede of mee, I pardon him of all his treſpaſſes, for he hath been ſufficiently puniſhed, & nowe I wiſh my ſelfe with him with an C.M. men well armed, for there is not in all the world ſo noble a man as Huon, it is great pitie that his hart is ſo light and mutable. Then incontinent he with all his companie were in the Citie of Babylon, whereas they began to ſlay all ſuch as would not beleeue on Ieſus Chriſt, and then Oberon went to the Pallaice with all his Chiualrie, and euery man with his ſword naked in his hand. When Huon ſaw Oberon, hee embraced him and ſaid, I ought greatly to thanke God and you, that yée be come ſo farre off to aide me in all my buſineſſe.
               
                  Huon quoth Oberon, as yee beleeue me, and worke by my councell, I ſhall not faile you: then on all ſides they ſlewe the Paynims, men, women, and children, except ſuch as would bee chriſtened. Oberon came to the Admirall & tooke him, and deliuered him into the handes of Huon who had thereof great ioy, and then Huon demaunded of the Admirall what he was minded to doe, if he would leaue the lawe of Mahound, and take chriſtendome. Huon quoth the Admirall, I had rather be hewen all to péeces, then to take your law and forſake mine owne. Oberon then ſaid to Huon, why doe yée tarrie to put him to death, whereupon Huon lifted vp his ſword and therewith ſtrake the Admirall, that his head flew from his ſhoulders, and Oberon ſaid to Huon. Now it lieth well in thy power to be quit with king Charlemaine: then Huon tooke the Admirals head, and opened his mouth, and tooke out his foure great téeth, & then cut off his beard, and tooke therof as much as pleaſed him, then Oberon ſaid. Now thou haſt in thy hands the Admirals téeth and beard, looke as well as thou loueſt thy life, that thou keepe them well. O Sir quoth Huon, I require you to put them in ſuch

a place, where they may bee well kept, and ſo that I may haue them againe in time of need, for I feele my ſelfe that my heart is ſo light, as either I ſhal forget thē, or elſe loo
                     •
                  e them. Of this that thou ſaieſt quoth Oberon, I thinke thou ſpeakeſt wiſely, therefore I doe wiſh them in Gerames ſide, in ſuch manner that they ſhall doe him no hurt. He had no ſooner ſpoken the word, but by the will of God, and ye power that he had by the Fayrie, they were cloſed in Gerames ſide in ſuch wiſe, that no man could ſée them, then he ſaid to Huon. Friend I muſt goe to my Caſtle of Momur, I deſire you to doe well, yée ſhall take with you Eſcleremond daughter to the Admirall. But I charge you on paine of your life, and in as much as yee feare to diſpleaſe me: that ye be not ſo hardy as to company with her bodily, vntill yée 
                     •
                  e married together in the citie of Roome, for if thou doeſt the contrarie, thou ſhalt find ſuch pouertie and miſerie, that though thou hadſt double the miſchéefe that thou haſt hadde 
                     ••
                  nce thou cameſt out of Fraunce, yet can it be nothing in regard of that, that ſhall fall to thée hereafter if thou breake my commaundement. Sir quoth Huon, by the pleaſure of our Lord Ieſus Chriſt, I ſhall well beware of doing of any thing againſt your pleaſure.
               Then Oberon apparelled a rich ſhippe, well garniſhed with chambers, and hanged ſo richly, that it was incredible to be heard or ſeene, there was no cord, but it was of gould and ſilke, if I ſhould ſhew you the beautie and riches of this ſhippe, it would be ouer long to recite it. When the ſhippe was fourniſhed with vittailes, then he put therein his horſes, and Oberon tooke leaue of Huon, and kiſſed and embraced him greatly lamenting. When Huon ſaw him wéepe, he had great maruaile and ſaid Deare Sir, for what cauſe doe you weepe? Huon (quoth he) the thing that mooueth me thus to do, is bicauſe I haue great pitie of thée. For if thou kneweſt the pouertie and miſerie that thou ſhalt endure, there is no member that thou haſt but it would tremble for feare: for I know for certen, that thou haſt ſo much to ſuffer, that

no humane tongue can rehearſe it, and then Oberon departed without more ſpeaking. When Huon ſawe Oberon depart, he was right penſiue, but his ſwéetnes of youth put him out of his ſorow. Then hee made his ordinance in the citie, and chriſtened the faire Ladie Eſcleremond, and afterward did marrie his Couſin Sibilla to an Admirall of the countrey who was newly chriſtened, and Huon gaue to thē the Citie of Babylon, and all that longed thereto. Then he made and ordayned a little ſhip, to goe with his owne ſhip, to thintent to ſend a land for vittailes when need ſhould require. Then he and his companie went into his great ſhip, and ſo tooke his leaue of his couſin that was newly married, who was right ſorowfull for his departing.
               Then they ſet vp their ſayles, and had a good faire wind, and ſo ſayled till they were out of the riuer of Nyle, and ſo paſſed by Damieta, and came into the high ſea and had wind at will. And on a day as they ſat at dinner and made good chéere, for by reaſon of his Cup they had wine at their pleaſure: Ah good Lord quoth Huon, I am greatly bound to thanke king Oberon, that I haue ſuch a Cup and Horne & Armour, for whenſoeuer I ſhall blowe my Horne, I can haue men ynough to come to aide me, and alſo I haue the Admirals 
                     •
                  eard and great téeth, but ſpecially the faire Ladie Eſcleremond, whome I loue ſo perfectly, and am ſo enamoured with her faire body, that I can no longer endure it. How be it, the Dwarffe Oberon to mocke me, hath forbidden me ſtrictly, that I ſhould not touch her in any wiſe. But I will that he well know, that in this caſe I will not obey him, for ſhe is mine own, therfore I will do with her at my pleaſure. When Gerames heard him, he ſaid. Alas ſir, what will yée doe? Yée know well Oberon neuer as yet made any lye, but alwaies ye haue found him true, for if hee had not been ſo, both you and wée all had béene loſt before this time. And now againe you would breake his commaundement, if yee touch this Ladie ere the time come that he hath ſet you, great miſfortune ſhall f
                     •
                  ll thereby. Gerames quoth Huon, for

you nor for any other will I forbeare, but ere I depart I will haue of her my pleaſure, and if any of you be affraid, I am content he ſhall depart in this little ſhip, and goe where he liſt, and take vittaile into it for his prouiſion. Sir quoth Gerames ſéeing yée will doe none otherwiſe, I am right ſorowfull, and I will depart, and ſo will all our other companie.
               Then Gerames departed out of the great ſhippe, and entred into the little ſhippe, with the xiij. in his companie, and Huon tarried ſtill with the Ladie, and when he ſaw that all his company was departed, he went and made readie a bed, and ſaid to the Ladie. Madame ſurely I muſt now haue my pleaſure of you, when ſhee heard Huon, ſhée fell downe ſore weeping, and humbly deſired Huon that he would forbeare her companie vntill 
                     •
                  he time that they ſhould be married together, according to the promiſe that he had made to king Oberon. Faire Ladie quoth Huon
                  ▪ no excuſes can auaile, for it muſt be thus, then he tooke the Ladie, and made her goe to bed, and there they tooke together their pleaſures. He had no ſooner accompliſhed his will, but there aroſe ſuch a maruailous tempeſt, that the waues of the ſea ſéemed ſo great and high as mountaines, and therewith it blew and thundred and lightned, that it was very fearefull to behould the ſea, and the ſhippe was ſo ſore tormented, that it burſt all to péeces, ſo that there remained but one péece of timber, whereuppon Huon and the Ladie were. And it happened ſo well for them, that they were néere to an Iſle, and thither the winde draue them, and when they ſaw that they were there arriued, and that they were on the land: they both kneeled downe, and thanked our Lord Ieſus Chriſt, that they were ſo well eſcaped the perill of drowning. The other companie that were in the little ſhippe, draue at aduenture in the ſea, and they cried to our Lord Ieſus Chriſt to ſaue them from drowning, for they had ſéene well how the ſhippe with Huon and the Ladie was broken in the ſea: wherefore they thought ſurely that Huon and the Ladie were periſhed.

Now let vs leaue ſpeaking of them, returning againe to Huon of Bourdeaux and the faire Eſcleremond.
               
            
            
               Chap. XLVII.
               
                  ¶ How Huon and Eſcleremond arriued in an Iſle all naked, and how the Pyrates of the ſea tooke Eſcleremond and left Huon alone, and bound his hands, feete, and eyes.
               
               
                  
                     WHEN Huon and Eſcleremond
                   ſaw how they were driuen a land al naked, pitiouſly weeping they entred into 
                     •
                  he Iſle, wheras there dwelt neither man nor woman, but the earth was ſo faire and gréen, that great ioy it was to ſée it, it was likewiſe ſo faire & hot, that they hid them ſelues in the greene graſſe, to thintent they ſhould not be perceaued, ſtill the Lady wept pitiouſly, and Huon ſaid vnto her. Lady bée not abaſhed, for if we dye for loue, wée ſhall not be the firſt, for Triſtram died for the loue of the faire Iſoluda, and ſhée for him, and ſo all wéeping they clipped and kiſſed eche other. And as they lay wrapped in the gréene graſſe, there ariued Tenne Sarazins in a litle veſſell, who entred into the Iſle to take freſh water and other things that they needed, then they ſaid eche to other, let vs goe foorth into this Iſle, and ſee if wée can find any aduenture: theſe men were Pyrates of the ſea, and had ſerued before the Admirall Gaudiſe Father to Eſcleremond. Huon
                   (who was with his Louer in the gréen graſſe) heard how neere to them people was comming, hée thought to go to them to ſée if he might get any meate. Deere Louer quoth Huon, I pray you goe not hence till I returne. Sir quoth ſhée, God be your guide, but I requyre you to returne againe ſhortely. Then hee departed all as naked as he was borne, and ſo came to thē before they had dyned, where

he ſaluted them & deſired them humbly for the loue of God to gyue hym ſome bread. One of them aunſwered and ſaide, Fréend, thou ſhalt haue ynough, but we pray thee ſhew vs what aduenture hath brought thee hether? Sir quoth Huon, the tempeſt of the ſea hath brought me hether, for the ſhippe that I was in is periſhed and all my companye.
               When they heard him, they had great pity, and gaue him two loaues of bread. Huon tooke them & departed, and thanking them went backe to his Loue, and gaue her parte of the bread, whereof ſhée was not a little glad. Then the Pyrates that had giuen Huon the bread, ſaid one to another, this man that is thus gone from vs, ſurely it can not be but yt he hath ſome other company, therfore let vs goe preſently after him, and peraduenture wée ſhall finde out his company, for mee thinkes if he were alone, hée would not ſo haue come to vs. Let vs go and ſée quoth all the other, and not returne till we know the troth. Than they went all together, & followed Huon as priuilie as they could, and when they came néere whereas hée was, they ſaw him and the Ladie hard by him eating of the bread that they had giuen him, there they ſtood ſtill & aduiſed them, to ſée if they could haue any knowledge of him or of the Lady.
               Now among them there was one that ſaid: Sirs, neuer beleue mée, but this Ladie is the faire Eſcleremond daughter to the Admirall Gaudiſe, and hée that is with her, is the ſame Frenchmā that fought with Agrapart & ſlew him, and alſo the Admirall, it is happy that we haue found them and ſpecially that he is naked without armour, for if that he were armed, our lyues were but ſhort. When they knew certainely that it was Eſcleremond daughter to the Admirall Gaudiſe, then they approched néere to them, and cryed aloude and ſaide. Madame Eſcleremond, your flying away auayleth you nothing, for by you and your meanes, your father hath been ſlaine by the theefe that ſitteth there by you, therefore wee ſhall bring you to your Vncle Iuoryn of Mombrance, who ſhall take of you ſuch correction, that ye ſhalbe an example

to all other, & the leachour that is by you, ſhalbe there ſlayne before your face. When the Lady ſaw theſe Paynims, ſhe
                     •
                   was right ſorowfull and ſore diſcomforted, then ſhe kneled down and held vp hir handes, & prayed them humbly, that they would haue pitie on the frenchman, & as for her owne life, ſhée did put it to their owne pleaſures, either to ſlay hir or to drowne her, or elſe to bring her to her Vncle. And ſirs (quoth ſhee) I ſweare by Mahound, that if ye will grant my requeſt, if I can be agreed with mine Vncle Iuorin, I ſhall doe you all ſuch pleaſures, that ye and all yours ſhall be rich for euer after, for little ſhall yee winne by the death of one poore man.
               Ladie quoth they, we are well content to leaue him héere, but wée ſhall doe him all the ſhame and rebuke that we can, that hee may remember it for euer after. Then they tooke Huon, and laide him on the grene graſſe, and did blind his eies, and binde his hands and féet, ſo that the blood burſt out at his nayles, wherby hée was in ſuch diſtres, that hée ſwonded three times, and pitiouſly called on our lord god▪ to haue pitie of him and to forgiue him his ſinnes. When the ſwéet Eſcleremond ſaw her Louer Huon ſo handled, and that ſhee ſhould depart from him: to ſhewe the pitifull complaints that ſhée made, it were impoſſible. Alſo Huon made pitious complain
                     •
                  s when his Loue Eſcleremond departed, the which gréeued him more then his own paine that hée ſuffred. Now wee ſhall leaue ſpeaking of him, and ſay what happened afterward to the faire Eſcleremond.
                  ▪
               
            
            
               
               Chap. XLVIII.
               
                  ¶ How the faire Eſcleremond was led away with the Pyrates of the ſea, and how the Admirall Galaffer of Anfalerne deliuered her out of their hands.
               
               
                  
                     NOw ſheweth the Hiſtorie, how that when theſe théeues had takē and bound Huons hands, féet and eyen, they left him alone in the Iſle, and tooke the faire Eſcleremond and brought hir into their ſhippe. Then they gaue hir a gowne and a mantell furred with ermyns, for they were Robbers of the ſea, and had much goods in their ſhippe, then they ſayled foorth night and day, at laſt a wind tooke them, that whether they would or not, they arriued at the Port of Anfalerne, and at the ſame time the Admirall there was newly riſen from his dinner, and ſtood leaning out at a window in his Pallaice, and when hée perceiued the ſhippe that lay at anchor in the hauen, and ſaw the banners and ſtreamers wauing with the winde, thereby hée well perceiued, that the ſhip pertayned to Kinge Iuoryn of Mombrance, whereuppon hée with his Lords went downe to the hauen. Then he cryed out aloude, & ſaid. Sirs what marchandize haue ye brought? Sir quoth they, we haue brought ſendals & clothes of ſilke, wherefore ſir if we ſhall pay any Tribute or cuſtome, wee are redie to pay it at your pleaſure. Then Galaffer the Admirall ſaid, I know well ynough if yee ſhould pay any tribute, yee ſhould not chooſe but doe it: But ſirs I pray you tell mee, what Damſell is that which I ſée in your ſhippe ſore wéeping. Sir quoth they, it is a ſlaue a Chriſtian woman whome we bought at Damieta.
               
               The Ladie heard well how the Admirall demaunded for

her, and likewiſe what anſwere the Mariners had made, then ſhee cried out aloud and ſaid. Alas Sir Admirall, for the loue and honour of Mahound, I pray you haue pitie on me: for I am no ſlaue, but I am Daughter to the Admirall Gaudiſe of Babylon, who is dead and ſlaine by a Frenchman, the Mariners heere haue taken me, and would carrie me to mine Vncle king Iuoryn of Mombrance: and I know ſurely that if he had me, he would burne me. Faire Lady (quoth the Admirall, diſmay you not, for yee ſhall abide with mee whether they will or not, then he commaunded the Mariners to bring the Ladie to him, but they anſwered that they would not ſo doe, then the Admirall commaunded to take her from them perforce, and then they of the ſhippe began to make defence: But anon they were all ſlaine, and the Lady taken and brought to the Admirall, who had great ioy therof, howbeit he was ſorie, becauſe one of them that were in the ſhip ſcaped away and fled to Mombrance, notwithſtanding the Admirall cared not greatly for it ſéeing he had the Ladie, whome he brought into his Pallaice.
               When the Admirall ſaw her ſo excéeding faire, hee was taken in her loue, ſo that incontinent he would haue married her after the Sarazins law, whereof ſhee was right ſorowfull and ſaid. Sir, reaſon it is that I doe your pleaſure, ſéeing yée haue rid me out of the handes of theſe Pyrates of the ſea. But ſir I require you for the loue that ye beare me, that yee will forbeare your pleaſure at this preſent time, for Sir I haue made a faithfull vow and promiſe, that for a yeere and a day from henceforth, I will not lye with nor touch any man boldly, for the which vow ſir I am now ſorie, euē for the loue that I beare to you, but Sir I am right ioyfull that yee will doe me ſo much honor, as to haue me to your wife, our great god Mahound reward you. Now ſir, for the loue of him I pray you be content, vntill my vow be accompliſhed. Faire Ladie quoth he, know for troth, that for the honour of my God Mahound, but more for the loue of you, I am content to tarrie this yeere, yea and if it were

Twentie yeeres, to be ſure of your loue then. Sir quoth ſhe, Mahound reward you, but ſhe ſaid to her ſelfe. Ah deare Lord god Ieſu Chriſt, I humbly require thée to giue me that grace, to kéepe my troth to my Louer Huon: for ere I ſhall doe the contrarie, I ſhall ſuffer as much paine and gréefe as euer womā did, and I will neuer breake my troth for feare of death. Now leaue we to ſpeak of her, and ſay ſomewhat of the theefe that ſcaped out of the ſhippe.
            
            
               Chap. XLIX.
               
                  ¶ How the Pyrate fled to Mombrance to Iuoryn, and how he ſent to defie the Admirall Galaffer of Anfalerne, and of the anſweare that he had there.
               
               
                  
                     YE haue heard heere before, how the faire Eſcleremond was receiued by the Admirall Galaffer, and of the manner yt ſhee found to keepe her ſelfe true to Huon, and how one of the Mariners ſcaped away and fledde by land till at laſt he came to the Citie of Mombrance, where he found Iuoryn, to whome he ſhewed all the whole matter as ye haue heard, and how his brother the Admirall Gaudiſe was ſlaine by a young french knight, and how he and his companie found the ſaid knight and his Néece the faire Eſcleremond, whom they had thought to haue brought to him. But (quoth he) the Admirall Galaffer hath taken them from vs by force, and hath taken our ſhippe, and ſlaine all your men that were within it, ſo that none eſcaped but I alone. When king Iuoryn vnderſtood the Mariner, he ſaid. Ah mightie Mahound, how haſt thou ſuffered that my brother Gaudiſe hath thus pitiouſly been ſlaine, and alſo my Néece his Daughter to conſent thereto? certainely the gréefe that I féele at my heart, conſtraineth

mée rather to deſire death than life. And alſo moreouer, to ſee him that is mine owne Subiect and houldeth his landes of me, to keepe my Néece, and thus to ſlay my men. Alas, I cannot well ſay what I ſhould doe therein, a little thing would cauſe me to ſlay my ſelfe. Then in great diſpleaſure he called his Lords and cauſed the Mariner to come before them, & there he made him to ſhew again all the matter b
                     •
                  
                  fore them, both how his brother the Admirall Gaudiſe was ſlaine, and alſo how the Admirall Galaffer held his Néece by force, and how he had ſlaine his men, which when the Lords had heard, they ſaid thus to Iuoryn.
               
               Sir, our aduice is, that yée ſhould ſend one of your ſecret meſſengers to the Admirall Galaffer, and commaund him incontinent to ſend you your Néece, and to make amends for that he hath ſlaine your men, and that he ſend you word by writing, what cauſe hath mooued him thus to doe, and if it be ſo, that pride doth ſo ſurmount in him, that hee will not obey your commaundements, then by a iuſt quarrell ye may goe and make warre vpon him, and take from him all his lands that he houldeth of you. When Iuoryn vnderſtood his Lords, he ſaid, Sirs I perceaue well your opinion is good, and then a Meſſenger was appointed, and his charge giuen him, and ſo he departed and rode ſo long till he came to Anfalerne where he found the Admirall Galaffer, whome he ſaluted in the name of Mahound, and then hee declared his Meſſuage at length, but aſſoone as Galaffer had heard his meſſuage, he ſaid. Friend, goe and ſay to king Iuoryn, that as for the deliuerance of his Néece, I will not doe it, and as for his men that are ſlaine, it was through their owne folly, and as touching that I ſhould come to him, I will not come to him, let him do what he can, but if he come to aſſaile me, I ſhall defend as well as I can. When the Meſſenger heard that, he ſaid. Sir Admirall, ſéeing yee will doe none otherwiſe, in the name of our god Mahound, and in the name of great king Iuoryn, héere I defie you, & he ſendeth you woord by me, that he will leaue you neither Citie, Towne, nor

Caſtle, but he will put them all to flame and fire, nor leaue you one foot of land, but alſo if he may take you, ye ſhall die a ſhamefull death.
               When the Admirall ſaw how hee was defyed, hee was more inflamed then a burning fire-brand, and ſaid to the meſſenger. Go and ſay to thy Lord, that I ſet nothing by his threatning, and if I may know when hée commeth, I ſhall do him that honour, that I will not abide till hée enter into my country, but I will méete with him before, and ſay vnto him from me, that if I can take him, I ſhall ſoone ryd his ſoule out of his body. So the meſſenger departed, and came to Mombrance, where whē 
                  Iuoryn ſaw him, he ſaid▪ Frend, what ſaith Galaffer? will hée ſend me my Néece? Sir quoth the meſſenger, hée will not doe it, hée ſaith hée doubteth you nothing, and if yee be ſo hardy as to come and aſſayle him, then hée will meet with you before, and fight with you: and I heard him ſweare, that if hée may take you, hée will ſlay you without mercy. When Iuoryn heard that, hée ſwet for anger, & was in that caſe that hée could not ſpeake one word of a long ſpace, but when hée had ſomewhat aſſwaged his yre, hée ſware by his God Mahound, that hée ſhould neuer haue ioy nor mirth at his heart, till hee had deſtroyed the towne of Anfalerne, and ſlaine the Admirall Galaffer.
               
               Then in haſt hée ſent for all his Lords, and with them concluded to ſend for all his men of warre, and gaue them day to be with him within xv. daies before Mombrance, the which thing was done, for at that day they were all aſſembled as ye ſhall heare heereafter. Now leaueth the Hiſtorie to ſpeake of them, and returneth againe to ſpeake of King Oberon.
               
            
            
               
               Chap. L.
               
                  ¶ How king Oberon at the requeſt of twoo Knights of the Fayrie, called Gloriant and Mallaborn the monſter of the Sea, went and ſuccoured Huon, and carried him out of the Iſle of Noyſant.
                  
               
               
                  
                     NOw the Hiſtorie ſheweth, that King Oberon (the ſame time that Huon was in the Iſle of Noyſant) was in his wood, where for the moſt part hee was accuſtomed to be conuerſant, bicauſe ye place was very much delectable and farre from people, there hee ſat him downe vnder a faire oake, and hee began to weepe and complaine. When Gloriant a knight of the Fairie, ſaw him, he had great maruaile, and demaunded of him why he lamented ſo much? Gloriant quoth king Oberon, the periured Huon of Bourdeaux cauſeth mee thus to doe, whome I haue alwayes perfectly loued, and yet he ſtill treſpaſſeth my commandements, for when I departed from him, I cauſed him to haue the Admirall Gaudiſe at his pleaſure, and alſo I made him to haue the faire Eſcleremond the Admirals Daughter, and alſo I haue giuen him my rich Horne of Iuorie and my good Cup, the which he hath loſt by his pride and folly and therefore he hath been puniſhed, and now hee lyeth all naked bound handes and féete, and his eyes blindfolded in an Iſle, in the which place I will ſuffer him to die moſt miſerably. Not ſo Sir, (quoth Gloriant) for the honour of our Lord Ieſus Chriſt, call to your remembrance, howe that by Gods owne mouth, Adam and Eue were forbidden from the eating of the fruit that was in Paradiſe, yet they by their fragilitie brake Gods commaundement, howbeit our Lord God had great pitie of them. And therefore

Sir, I pray you haue pitie of Huon, then Mallaborn ſtept foorth and ſayd. Alas Sir, for the honour and reuerence of our Lord God, I deſire you to graunt me this one time, that I may goe and ayd him.
               When Oberon ſawe he was ſo earneſtly deſired of Glorian
                        •
                     
                   and Mallaborn, he was ſore diſpleaſed, and anſwearing, ſayd. Mallaborn, it pleaſeth me ſo well, that this Caytiffe Huon who endureth ſo much paine be viſited by thée: therefore I condemne thée to bee xxviij. yeares a Monſter in the Sea, beſide xxx. yeares that thou art enioyned too alreadie. Now I will that thou giueſt him none other counſaile nor aid, but alonely to beare him out of the Iſle that he is in, and to ſet him on the maine Land, then let him goe whether hée will, for I deſire neuer more to ſee him. Alſo I will that thou bringeſt againe vnto me, my rich Horne of Iuorie, and my rich Cup, and my Armour, fetch them there as hee hath loſt them. Alas Sir, (quoth Mallaborn) great paine you put him vnto, when for ſo ſmal an offence you are ſo ſore diſpleaſed with Huon. And as for ye Armour that you would haue againe, you know well how Huon of Bourdeaux did conquer it, and hée had been loſt if it had not béene, great ill you ſhall doe if you cauſe him not to haue it againe. But Sir, ſince I haue Licence to bring him out of the Iſle, I pray you ſhewe mée in what place is the Iſle whereas he is. Then Gloriant ſayd, Brother Mallaborn, this Iſle is néere vnto Hell, and it is called the Iſle Noyſant. Well, (quoth Mallaborn) then I commend you all to our Lord Ieſus Chriſt, and ſo he departed and came to the ſea-ſide, and when he came there, he leapt into the Sea, and began to ſwim as faſt as the bird flyeth in the ayre, and ſo arriued in the Iſle Noyſaunt, and ſo came vnto Huon whome hée found ſore wéeping, and ſayd. Sir Huon, I pray our Lord Ieſus Chriſt to ſuccour and aide thée. Ah deare God, (quoth Huon) who is that that ſpeaketh vnto me? Huon, (quoth hée) I am a man who loueth thée, and am called Mallaborn, and am a beaſt of the Sea, who hath before this time borne thée ouer the ſalt water to Babilon.
               
               
                  Ah Mallaborn déere Brother, (quoth Huon) I require thée vnbind mée, and bring me out of this dolorous paine. With a right good will, (quoth Mallaborn) then he did vnbind him and opened his eyes. When Huon ſawe that, hée was right ioyfull, and demanded who ſent him thether. Huon, (quoth he) knowe for troth, that it was King Oberon, and whereas I was condemned before to be a beaſt of the Sea Thirtie yeares, now for thy ſake I muſt endure ſo eight and Twentie yeares more, yet I care not for the paine, for the loue that I beare vnto thée, there is no paine impoſſible vnto mée to beare: but I muſt carie againe vnto Oberon the rich Horne and Cup and Armour, for ſo I haue promiſed King Oberon to doe. Ah, (quoth Huon) I pray to our Lord Ieſus Chriſt to confound the Dwarfe, who hath cauſed me to endure all theſe paines for ſo ſmall an occaſion. Huon, (quoth Mallaborn) you doe ill to ſay ſo, for you haue no ſooner ſpoken it, but that King Oberon doth know it. Certainly, (quoth Huon) I care not what he can doe, he hath done me ſo much ill, that I can neuer loue him: but Sir, I pray thée tell me, if thou wilt beare me hence, or elſe whether that I muſt abide héere for euer. Fréend, (quoth Mallaborn) I will beare thée out of this Iſle, and ſet thée on the maine Lande, other ayd may I not doe thée, and then Mallaborn tooke vppon him againe his beaſts ſkin, and ſayd: Sir, leape vppon mée, then Huon leapt vppon his backe as naked as euer he was borne, and Mallaborn leapt into the Sea, and began to ſwim, and came to the mayne Land, and ſayd. Fréend Huon, more ſeruice can I not doe vnto thée at this time, but I recommend thée to the kéeping of our Lord God, who ſend thee comfort, I now muſt goe and ſéeke for the Horne, Cup, and Armor, the which thou wert woont to haue and enioy, and I am to beare them vnto King Oberon, for thus haue I promiſed to doe.
               Now Huon was there all alone and naked, pitiouſly complayning and ſayde. Ah good Lord, I require thée to ayde

mée, I know not where I am, nor whether I may goe, yet if I had cloathes to couer my naked ſkinne, I ſhould haue ſome comfort, for then I might goe and ſéeke ſome aduenture: greatly I ought to hate the crooked Dwarfe Oberon, who hath brought me into all this paine, but by the faith yt I owe vnto God, ſéeing he hath left me thus, from hencefoorth to doe him the more ſpite, I ſhall make lyes ynough, I ſhall not leaue for him, whom I recommend now to a hundred Thouſand Diuels. When he had béen there a certen ſpace all alone, hee aroſe and looked all about him, to ſée if he might perceiue anye man paſſe by, from whome hee might haue any ſuccour, for he was néere famiſhed for lacke of ſuſtenance: howbeit, he thought to depart thence to ſéeke ſome aduenture, ſo he went on his way, and hée went ſo far, that he found an aduenture ſuch as you ſhall heare, for our Lord Ieſus Chriſt neuer forgetteth his Seruants.
            
            
               Chap. LI.
               
                  ¶ How Huon found a Minſtrell, who gaue him cloathing and meat, and tooke Huon with him as his Varlet, and went to Mombrance.
                  
               
               
                  
                     WHen Huon hadde gone a great way, hee beheld on his right hand, and ſaw néere him a little wood by a faire meadow-ſide, and therein was ſtanding a great Dake full of leaues, and there beſide was a cleare Fountaine, and there he ſaw an ancient man with white haires ſitting vnder the Dake, and before him he had a little cloth ſpread abroad on the graſſe, and thereon fleſh and bread and wine in a Bottell. When Huon ſaw the old man, he came vnto him, and the ancient man ſayd. Ah thou wild man, I pray thée for the

loue of Mahound doe me no hurt, but take meat and drinke at thy pleaſure. When Huon ſawe him, he eſpied lying beſide him a Harpe and a Vyoll, whereon he could well play, for in all Pagany there was no Minſtrell like him. Fréend, (quoth Huon) thou haſt named me right, for a more vnhappy man then I am, there is none lyuing. Fréend, (quoth the Minſtrell) goe to yonder Male and open it, and take what thou likeſt beſt to couer thy naked ſkinne, then come to mée and eat at thy pleaſure. Sir, (quoth Huon) good aduenture is come vnto mée thus to find you, Mahound reward you. Sir, (quoth the Minſtrell) I pray you come and eate with me, and kéepe me companie, for you ſhall not find a more ſorowfull man then I am. By my faith, (quoth Huon) a companion of your owne ſort haue you found, for there was neuer man that ſuffered ſo much pouertie as I haue, praiſe be vnto him that fourmed me, but ſéeing I haue found meat to eat, bleſſed be the houre that I haue found you, for you ſéeme to bee a good man. Then Huon went to the Male and tooke cloathes, and then came vnto the Minſtrell, and ſat down, and did eat and drinke as much as pleaſed him. The Minſtrell beheld Huon, and ſawe that he was a faire young man and a courteous, and then hee demaunded of him, where hée was borne, and by what aduenture hee was arriued there in that caſe that he was in.
               When Huon heard how the Minſtrell demaunded of his eſtate, he began to ſtudy in himſelfe, whether he ſhould ſhew the troth or elſe to lye, then he called to our Lord God, and ſayd. Ah good Lord, if I ſhew to this man the troth of mine aduenture, I am but dead: and King Oberon, for a ſmall offence thou haſt left me in this caſe, now if I ſhewe the troth of my life to this man, I am but dead, I ſhall neuer truſt thée more, but I will now put all my truſt in God, for the loue that I haue to my Loue, thou haſt mee in hate, but ſéeing it is ſo, as often as I haue néede I ſhall ly, nor I ſhall not leaue it for feare of thée, but rather do it in deſpite of thée: then Huon ſaide to the Minſtrell. Sir, you haue demanded

of mine eſtate, and as yet I haue made you none anſweare, the troth is, I find my ſelfe ſo well at mine eaſe, that I forgat to anſweare you, but I ſhall nowe ſhewe you ſéeing you would know it. Sir, of certaine I was borne in the countrey of Affricke, and fell in company with diuers Marchants by the Sea in a Shippe, thinking to haue ſayled to Damieta, but a great miſfortune fell vppon vs, there aroſe ſuch an horrible tempeſt, that our Shippe periſhed and all that were within it, none eſcaped but I, and I thanke Mahound that I am eſcaped aliue: therefore I deſire you now to ſhew mée your aduenture, as I haue ſhewed you mine. Fréend (quoth the Minſtrell) ſéeing you will knowe it, knowe for troth, I am named Mouflet, I am a Minſtrell as thou ſéeſt héere by mine Inſtruments, and I ſay vnto thée, that from hence to the red Sea, there is none ſo cunning in all Inſtruments as I am, and I can doe many other things, and the dolour that thou ſéeſt mee make, is bycauſe of late I haue loſte my good Lorde and Maiſter the Admirall Gaudiſe, who was ſlayne miſerably by a Vacabond of Fraunce called Huon, that Mahound ſhame him, and bring him to an ill death, for by him I am fallen into pouerty and miſerie, I pray thée tell me thy name? Sir, (quoth Huon) my name is Solater. Well, (quoth
the Minſtrell) Solater, diſmay thée not, for the great pouerties that thou haſt ſuffered, thou ſéeſt what aduenture Mahound hath ſent thée, thou art nowe better arayed then thou wert, if thou wilt follow my counſel thou ſhalt haue no néed, thou art faire and young, thou oughteſt not to be diſmayed, but I that am old and ancient haue cauſe to be diſcomforted, ſéeing in mine olde dayes I haue loſt my Lord and Maiſter the Admirall Gaudiſe, who did me ſo much good and profit, I would it pleaſed Mahound, that he that ſlewe him were in my power.
               When Huon heard that, he ſpake no word but caſt down his head. Solater, (quoth the Minſtrell) ſéeing my Lord is dead, I will goe to Mombrance to King Iuoryn, to ſhew him the death of his Brother the Admirall Gaudiſe, and if thou

wilt abide with me, ſo that thou wilt beare my Fardell and harpe a foote, ere it be halfe a yéere paſt, I warrant thée thou ſhalt haue a Horſe, for whenſoſeuer thou ſhalt heare me play vpon my inſtruments, all the hearers ſhall take therein ſuch pleaſure, that they ſhall giue mee both Gownes and Mantles, ſo that thou ſhalt haue much adoe to truſſe them in my Male. Well Sir, (quoth Huon) I am content to ſerue you, and to doe all your Commaundements. Then Huon tooke the Male on his necke and the Harpe in his hand, and Mouflet his Maiſter bare the Vyoll, and thus the maiſter and the ſeruant went on their way to goe to Mombrance. Ah good Lord, (quoth Huon) my heart ought to bée ſorrowfull when I ſée my ſelfe in this caſe, that nowe I muſt become a Minſtrels Varlet: Gods curſe haue Oberon the Dwarfe, who hath done mee all this trouble. Alas if I had nowe my good Armour, my Horne, and my Cup, I would reckon al the ſorrow that I haue endured as nothing. But when I had xiij. Knights to ſerue me, how is this chaunce now turned, that I my ſelfe muſt ſerue a poore Minſtrell?
               When Mouflet heard Huon make ſuch ſorow within him ſelfe, hée ſaid. Déere brother Solater take good comfort, for before to morow at night, thou ſhalt ſee the good cheere that ſhall bee made to mée, wherof thou ſhalt haue part, and of all the goodes that I can get. Maiſter quoth Huon, Mahound reward you for the goodnes that ye haue ſhewed mée, and ſhall do, thus the maiſter and the ſeruant went foorth together deuiſing, at laſt Huon eſpied behind them coming certē men of armes, houlding the waye to Mombrance. Maiſter quoth Huon, héere behind vs are coming men in armour, I know not whether they will doe vs any hurt or not. Solater quoth Mouflet, bee not abaſhed, wee will abide héere, and know whether they will goe, and within a while the man of war came to them, who were in number Fiue .C. perſons, the minſtrell ſaluted them and ſaid. Sirs, I pray you ſhewe mee whether ye will goe. Frend quoth one of them, bicauſe we ſée that ye be a gentle minſtrell, I ſhall ſhew you, we are

going to king Iuoryn of Mombrance, who will néeds goe and make warre vppon the Admirall Galaffer, bicauſe that now of late, the Damſell Eſcleremond daughter to the Admirall Gaudiſe, paſſed by Anfalerne, who ſhould haue béen brought to her Vncle king Iuoryn of Mombrance, but the Admirall Galaffer tooke her by force, and ſlew all them that ledde her, and hath maryed the faire Eſcleremond, whereof King Iuoryn is as ſorowfull as may be, and for that cauſe we be ſent for by king Iuoryn, who is minded to aſſemble all his power, to go & deſtroy the Admirall Galaffer. Now I haue ſhewed you the cauſe of our going to the Citie of Mombrance.
               
            
            
               Chap. LII.
               
                  ¶ How Huon and his Maiſter Mouflet arriued at Mombrance, and how Huon ſpake with king Iuoryn.
                  
               
               
                  
                     WHen Huon of Bourdeaux vnderſtood the Paynims, how they were going where the Ladie Eſcleremond was, he was ſurprized with ioy, & ſaid to his Maiſter. Sir, I require you lette vs goe to the warres with them. Solater quoth Mouflet, beware what thou ſayeſt, for where as warre is, I would not come there for any thing. Thus they went foorth vntill they came to Mombrance, and went ſtraight to the Pallaice, whereas they found King Iuoryn and all his Barons, when the Minſtrell ſaw him, hee ſaluted him in the name of Mahound, and ſayde. Sir, I am right dolorous for the newes that I bring you, for Sir, your Brother my Lord and Maiſter the Admirall Gaudiſe is pitiouſly ſlayn. Mouflet, (quoth Iuoryn) theſe newes hath béen brought vnto mée before this time, whereof I am much agréeued, and alſo I am ſorrie for my Néece the faire Eſcleremond, who is kept from mée by the

Admirall Galaffer, and for any Meſſuage that I can ſend to him, he will not ſend her backe to mée. But by ye faith that I owe to my God Mahound, I ſhall make him ſuch warre, that the memorie thereof ſhall bee had an Hundred yeares héereafter. For I ſhall leaue him neuer a foote of Land, but I ſhall bring all into fire and flame, and cleane deſtroy him, and in the deſpite of his téeth, I will ſée my Neece Eſcleremond, and if I may get her, I ſhall cauſe her to be ſtriken al to péeces, and burne her into aſhes, for my Brother is dead by a Villaine of Fraunce, vppon whome ſhée was amourous.
               When Huon heard him ſpeake of his Lady, his heart roſe, & made promiſe in himſelfe, that ere the moneth was paſt, he would goe and ſée her, and find the meanes how to ſpeake with her. Then King Iuoryn called Mouflet the Minſtrell, and ſayd: Fréend, I pray thée doe ſome thinge to make mée merrie, for by reaſon of the diſpleaſure that I haue had, my ioy is loſt therefore it were better for me to take ſome mirth, then to bee long in ſorrow. Sir, (quoth Mouflet) I am readie to doe your pleaſure, then hée tooke his Vyoll, and playd thereof in ſuch wiſe, that it was great melodie to heare it, for al the Paynims that were there had great ioy and mirth, and made great feaſting, when Huon heard it, he ſaid. Good Lord I require thée, that this great ioy may turne to mée, as to heare ſome good newes of her who I deſire ſo ſore to ſée. When the Minſtrell had finiſhed his ſong, the Paynims did of their cloathes, and ſome gaue him their Gownes, & ſome their Mantles, hee thought himſelfe right well happie that could giue the Minſtrell any thing. Huon had ynough to doo to gather together the cloathes that were giuen him, and hée put them into his Male, whereof Huon was ioyfull, bicauſe he ſhould haue the one halfe.
               King Iuoryn beheld Huon, and ſayd vnto them that were about him, great dammage it is that ſo faire a younge man ſhould ſerue a Minſtrell. Sir, (quoth Mouflet) be not abaſhed though this young man doe ſerue me, hee hath cauſe

ſo to doe, for when your Brother was dead, I departed from thence to come hether, & by the way I found a great Dake, vnder the which I ſat downe to reſt me, and there by was a great Fountaine faire and cleare, there I ſpread abroad a Towell on the graſſe, and ſet thereon bread and ſuch meate and drinke as I had, and the ſame time this young man arriued and came vnto mee all naked, and prayed me for the loue of Mahound to giue him ſome of my bread, and ſo I did and cloathed him as you ſée, and I did ſo much for him, that he promiſed to ſerue mée, and to beare my Fardell and my Harpe, and moreouer, when I came to any paſſage of water, hee would caſt me in his necke as light as though I had béen nothing, (he is ſo ſtrong) and beare me ouer. Ah poore Catiffe, (quoth King Iuoryn) haſt thou liued ſo longe, & cannot perceiue why he doth it? he abideth vntill thou haſt gotten ſome riches, and then he will cut thy threat and caſt thée into the Riuer, and then goe away with all thy riches, cauſe him to come and ſpeake with mée. Sir, (quoth Mouflet) hée ſhall come to you, and ſo he called Huon, and brought him to King Iuoryn.
               
               My fréend, (quoth the King) I pray thée ſhewe me where thou wert borne? for I haue pitie of thée, to ſée thée in ſo low eſtate, as to bee Varlet to a Minſtrell, it were better for thée to ſerue ſome Prince, or helpe to kéepe a Towne or a Caſtle, rather then thus to looſe thy time. I wote not what I ſhould thinke therein, but that it ſéemeth to mee that thou art of a faint courage, what hath mooued thée thus to doe? thou ſéeeſt thy Maiſter hath nothing, but that hee getteth with his Vyoll, canſt thou find none other meanes to liue by more honeſtly? Sir, (quoth Huon) I can Crafts ynow, the which I ſhall name vnto you if you will heare me. Say on, (quoth Iuoryn) for I haue great deſire to know what thou canſt do: but of one thing I aduiſe thée, make no vaunt of any thing, without thou canſt doe it indéede, for in euerie thinge I will prooue thée. Sir, (quoth Huon) I can mew a Sparrow-Hauke, and I can chaſe the Hart and the wilde Boare, and

blow the prize, and ſerue the hounds of their rights, and I can ſerue at the table before a great Prince, and I can play at Cheſſe and Tables aſwell as any other can doe, and I neuer found man could winne of me if I liſt.
            
            
               Chap. LIII.
               
                  ¶ How king Iuoryn cauſed his Daughter to play at the Cheſſe with Huon, vpon condition, that if he were mated, he ſhould looſe his head: and if ſhee were mated, Huon ſhould haue her loue, and how Huon wonne the game.
               
               
                  
                     WHEN king IVORIN heard Huon, he ſaid, hould thée to this, for I ſhall prooue whether it be true that thou ſaieſt or not. Yet Sir (quoth Huon) I pray you let mee ſhew farther what I can doe, and then aſſay mee at your pleaſure. By Mahound quoth the king, I am content that thou ſhalt ſhew all that thou canſt doe. Sir quoth Huon, I can right well arme me, and ſet the helmet on my head, and beare a ſhield & ſpeare, and runne and gallop a horſe, and when it commeth to the point where ſtrokes ſhould be giuen, yée may well ſend foorth a worſe than I. Alſo Sir, I can right well enter into Ladies chambers, to embrace and kiſſe them, and to doe them any ſeruice. Friend quoth Iuoryn, by that which I heare by thée, thou canſt doe more things than ſhould turne to good, but to prooue thée, I ſhall cauſe thee to be aſſayed at the play of the Cheſſe: I haue a faire Daughter, with whome I will that thou ſhalt play, vpon condition, that if ſhe winne, then thou ſhalt looſe thy head, but if thou canſt mate her, then I promiſe thée that thou ſhalt haue her to thy wife, to repoſe with her at thy pleaſure, and a C. markes of money therewith. Sir quoth Huon, if it were your pleaſure▪
                  
I would be glad to forbeare that enterpriſe. By Mahound quoth the king, it ſhalbe none otherwiſe, come thereof what will.
               In the meane ſeaſon that this Bargaine was making, a Paynim went into the Ladies chamber, and ſhewed her how there was with the king her father a young man, who had made promiſe, how he ſhould play at the Cheſſe with her vpon condition, that if he loſt the game, hee ſhould then looſe his head, and if he chaunced to win, then he to haue you to his wedded wife, and a C. Markes of money. But Madame quoth he, I aſſure you he that ſhall play againſt you, is the faireſt man that euer I ſaw, pitie it is that he ſhould be a varlet to a Minſtrell as he is. By Mahound quoth the Ladie, I hould my Father a foole, when he thinketh that I ſhould ſuffer a man to die for winning of a game at Cheſſe. Then Iuoryn ſent for his Daughter by twoo Kings, who brought her to ye King her Father, then Iuoryn ſaid. Daughter, thou muſt play at Cheſſe with this young Varlet that thou ſeeſt héere, ſo that if thou winne, then he ſhall looſe his head, and if he winne, then I will that hee ſhall be thy huſband, to doe with thee at his pleaſure. Father quoth the Ladie, ſéeing this is your pleaſure, it is reaſon that I doe it whether I will or not. Then ſhee beheld Huon, whome ſhee ſaw to be right faire, and ſaid to her ſelfe. By Mahound, for the great beautie that I ſee in this young man, I would this game were at an end, ſo that I were his wedded wife.
               When then Ladie was come, their places were made redie, then ſhee and Huon ſat downe, and king Iuoryn and all his Barons ſat downe about them to ſée them play, then Huon ſaid to the King. Sir I require you, that you nor none other doe ſpeake in our game, neither for the one partie nor for the other. Friend quoth the King, haue no doubt thereof, and for more ſuretie, the King cauſed to be proclaymed thorow out all his Pallaice, that none ſhould be ſo hardie as to ſpeake one word vpon paine of death. Then the Cheſſe were made readie, and Huon ſaide: Ladie, what game will yée

play at? Friend quoth ſhe, at the game accuſtomed, that is to be mated in the corner, then they both began to ſtudie for the firſt draught, there were Paynims that beheld Huon, but he cared not for any of them, but ſtudied on his game, the which they had begun ſo, that Huon had loſt moſt parte of his Pawnes, wherewith he changed colour and bluſhed as redde as a roſe. The Damſell perceiued him, and ſaid, Friend, whereon doe yée thinke? yee are almoſt mated, anon my Father will ſtrike of your head. Madame quoth he, as yet the game is not done, great ſhame ſhall your Father haue, when yée ſhall lye all night in mine armes, and I being but a ſeruant to a poore Minſtrell.
               When the Barons heard Huon ſay ſo, they began all to laugh, and the Ladie, who was ſo ſurpriſed with the loue of Huon, (in regard of the great beautie that ſhe ſaw in him) that ſhe forgat all her play to thinke of him, whereby ſhe loſt the game, whereof Huon was right ioyfull, and called the King and ſaid. Sir, now may yée ſée how I can play, but if I would ſtudie but a little more, I could mate your Daughter whereas I liſt. When the King ſaw that, he ſaid to his Daughter. Ariſe, curſed be the houre that I begate thee, for great diſhonour haſt thou now done to me, that heretofore haſt mated ſo many great men, and now I ſee heere before my face, that a Minſtrels varlet hath mated thée. Sir quoth Huon, trouble not your ſelfe for that cauſe, as for the wager that I ſhould winne therby, I am content to releaſe it quite, let your Daughter goe into her chamber, and ſport her with her Damſels at her pleaſure, and I ſhall goe and ſerue my Maiſter the Minſtrell. Friend quoth the King, if thou wilt ſhew me this courteſie, I ſhall giue thée an hundred Markes in money.
               Sir quoth Huon, I am content with your pleaſure, and the Ladie went her way ſorowfull, and ſaid to her ſelfe. Ah falſe ſainted heart, Mahound confound thee, for if I had knowen that thou wouldeſt thus haue refuſed my companie, I would haue mated thée, and then thou hadſt loſt thy

head. Thus the matter paſſed till the next day, then king Iuorin made proclamation through out all the citie, that euerie man ſhould be armed and mounted on their horſes, and that it was his minde to ſet forward towards his enemies. Then euerie man armed them and mounted on their horſes, many helmets glittered againſt the ſunne, and many trompets & drums began to ſound, ſuch brute was made within the citie that it was maruaile to heare it.
            
            
               Chap. LIIII.
               
                  ¶ How Huon was armed, and mounted on a poore horſe, and went after the armie to Anfalerne.
                  
               
               
                  
                     WHen Huon ſaw how he had not wherwith to arme him, his heart mourned right ſore, for gladly hee woulde haue gone foorth with other, if he might haue had any horſe to haue ridden on, wherefore hee came to king Iuoryn and ſaid. Sir I require you to let mee haue a horſe and armour, that I may goe with you to the Battaile, and then ſhall yee ſée how I can aid you. Friend quoth Iuoryn, I am content that ye goe with me. Then the King commaunded one of his Chamberlaines to deliuer him a horſe and armour, and the Chamberlaine ſaid. Sir, beware what yee doe, for oftentimes ſuch flying vagabounds are of a light courage, if he haue a horſe and armour, he may aſſoone goe to your enemies part, as to kéepe with you, and neuer truſt me, but he is ſome counterfeit varlet. When the King heard him ſay ſo, he ſaide, it may well bee, yet let him haue a good armour, and helmet and ſhéeld, and let his horſe be but of a ſmall valew, to the intent that he ſhall not goe farre of though he would.
               The ſame time there was a Paynim, that heard the king

grant, how Huon ſhould haue armour, he went to his houſe, and tooke out of his coffer an old ruſty ſword, and brought it to Huon, and ſaid Frend, I ſée wéell yée haue no ſword to aid your ſelfe withall, and therefore I giue you this ſword, the which I haue long kept in my coffer: the Paynim did giue it to Huon in a mockery, for he thought the ſword to be but of a ſmall value. Huon tooke the ſword, and drew it out of the ſheath, & ſaw letters written thereon in french, ſaying, how this ſword was forged by Galams, who in his dayes forged thrée ſwords, & that ſame ſword was one of the three, and the ſecond was called Durandell, and the third Courtayn. When Huon had read the letters, he was right ioyfull, and ſaid to the Paynim. Friend, for this good ſwoord that yee haue geuen mee, I thanke you, and I promis you if I may liue long, I ſhall reward you with the double valew therof. After that Huon had this ſword there was brought vnto him a good Armour, helmet, ſhéeld, and ſpeare with a ruſty head, Huon cared little for it, by reaſon of the great deſire that hee had to come to ye place whereas hee might ſhew his ſtrength & vertue, thē there was brought to him a leane horſe pilled, with a long necke and a great head. When Huon ſaw that horſe, he tooke him by the brydle, & leapt vpon him without any foote in the ſtirrop, in the ſight of a M. Paynims that were there preſent, & ſome ſaid it was not well done to giue him a horſe, the which could not ſerue nor aid him in time of need. When Huon was mounted on his leane féeble horſe, hée was ſorowfull, for well hee perceaued how they mocked him, and ſaid ſoftly to him ſelfe, Ah yee falſe Paynims, if I may lyue a yeere, I ſhall quitte your mockes.
               Then Huon rode foorth with others, but for all that hee could doe with his ſpurres, the horſe would goe but his own ſoft pace, wherat diuers Paynims mocked him. Thus king Iuoryn departed from Mombrance with his great armie, and tarried in the fields for his men, & when they were all aſſembled together, then hee departed and tooke the way to Anfalerne, the which was diſtant of but foure leagues, and when

they came there, they ran before the citie, and draue away all the beaſtes, béeues and muttons, and ſent them to Mombrance. Then when the Admirall Galaffer ſaw king Iuoryn before his citie, and had driuen away all the pray aboute the towne, he was ſo ſorowfull that hee was neere hand out of his wit, and then hée ſaw the faire Eſcleremond before him & ſaid. Madame, the great loue that I haue ſet on you, is this day derely bought, for by your occaſion I ſée my country deſtroyed, and my men ſlayne and led in ſeruitude. Sir quoth ſhée, I am ſory thereof, it lyeth in you to amend it, ſeeing this ill is come to you by me, then it is in you to render me to king Iuoryn, and thereby ye and your country ſhalbe in reſt and peace. Faire Ladie quoth Galaffer, by the grace of Mahound, for any feare that I haue of Iuoryn your Vncle, I will not render you into his handes, vntill I haue had of you my pleaſure. Sir, (quoth ſhée) you may do with mee as it ſhall pleaſe you, after that the twoo yeares bee paſt for the accompliſhing of my vow. Madame quoth Galaffer, before I will render you to your Vncle Iuoryn, I ſhall haue neuer a foot of land, for firſt it ſhall be cleane diſtroyed.
            
            
               Chap. LV.
               
                  ¶ How Huon fought with Sorbryn and ſlew him, and wanne the good Horſe Blanchardyn, whereon he mounted and wan the Battaile, and was brought with great tryumph to Mombrance.
                  
               
               
                  
                     WHen Sorbryn (Nephew to the Admiral Galaffer) heard his Vncle make ſuch ſorow, hée ſaid to him. Faire Vncle, be not diſmayed, though Iuoryn hath taken and ſlaine ſome of your men, and driuen away your beaſtes: for eche one of yours, if I lyue, I ſhall

render againe to you foure, I ſhall tell you how, I will goe and arme me and iſſue out, and ſhew to Iuoryn, that if hee will ſet one or twoo of the hardieſt men of all his hoaſt to fight with me, and that if it be ſo that I be ouercome, then you to render his faire Néece Eſcleremond to him, to do with her at his pleaſure: and that if I diſcomfite his men, then let him depart, ſo that for all the damage that he hath done to you in this warre, hee will render againe to you the double thereof, for better it were that this warre ſhould end by two men, rather then ſo much people ſhould be deſtroyed. Faire Nephew quoth Galaffer, I neuer heard a better word, I am well content if ye will haue it thus.
               Then Sorbryn went and armed him ſelfe, he was a goodly knight, for in all ye Paynims lands there was not his Péere, nor none that approched neere to his valiantnes. When hée was armed, then Blanchardyn his good horſe was brought to him, the goodnes of this horſe excéeded all other, and of beautie there was none like him, he was as white as ſnowe, the freſhnes of his apparell, it was ſo riche and goodly, that I cannot make due mention thereof, for no man could eſtéeme the valew of the riches of the brydle, ſaddle, and harneſſe. Then Sorbryn leapt vppon his horſe without any ſtirroppe, and tooke a great ſpeare, and ſo rode out of the Cittie, and when hée ſaw king Iuoryn a farre of, hée cryed aloud & ſaid. Ah thou Iuoryn of Mombrance, the Admirall Galaffer hath ſent mee to thée, and willeth that thou doe arme one of thy valianteſt men of thy Court, and let him come againſt me, and if hee can vanquiſh me, then hee ſhall deliuer to thée thy Néece Eſcleremond: but if I ouercome thy man, then thou to retourne to thy Citie, and ſuffer thy Neece to remaine ſtill with him, and alſo thou to reſtore all the damages that thou haſt done to him and his in this warre. When Iuoryn heard the Paynim, he looked about him, to ſée if any of his men would take on him this enterpriſe to fight with Sorbryn, but there was no Paynim that durſt ſpeake one word, for they feared Sorbryn for the fiercenes that was in him, and they

ſaid amonge themſelues, that whoſoeuer did fight againſt him, was like miſerably to finiſh his dayes.
               The ſame time that Iuorin ſpake with Sorbrin, Huon was among the other Paynims, & heard what Sorbryn had ſaid, and alſo he ſaw yt no man durſt goe againſt Sorbryn, then as well as hée might, he got himſelfe out of the preſſe vpon his leane horſe, & ſtrake him with his ſpurres, but for all that hée could doe the horſe would neither trot nor gallop, but go ſtill his own pace. The old Minſtrell beheld Huon his Varlet, who made him readie to fight againſt the Paynim, and ſaw that he was ſo ill horſed, he cryed on hye and ſayd. Sir King Iuoryn, it ſhalbe vnto you great diſhonour, when ſuch a Horſe that is nothing woorth you haue deliuered vnto my Varlet, who gooth for your ſake to fight with Sorbryn, with whome none of your other men dare fight, great ſinne it is that he hath not a better Horſe. Then Huon ſayd vnto Sorbryn: Sarazin, I pray thée ſpeake with me. Fréend, (quoth Sorbryn) what wilt thou with mée? Paynim, (quoth Huon) I require thée to prooue thy vertue againſt mée. Then (quoth Sorbryn) tell mée, art thou a Paynim or a Sarazin? Fréend, (quoth Huon) I am neither Paynim nor Sarazin, but I am chriſtened, beléeuing in ye law of Ieſus Chriſt, and though thou ſéeſt mée but poorely apparelled, deſpiſe me not, for I am come of a noble extraction, wherefore I require thée on thy lawe that thou beléeueſt on, let mée not goe without battaile. Fréend, (quoth Sorbryn) in this requeſt thou doeſt great folly, for thou deſireſt thy death, I haue pitie of thée, & therefore I councell thée to returne backe. Paynim, (quoth Huon) I had rather dy then to returne ere I haue iuſted with thée. Then they went each from other to take their courſe, but for all that euer Huon could doe, his horſe would not aduance foorth, whereof Huon was ſore diſpleaſed, and ſayd: Ah verie God and man, I deſire thée to giue mée the grace, that I may winne this Horſe that this Paynim doth ryde vppon.
               When Huon ſaw that his horſe would neither go forward

nor backwarde, hée ſet his Shéeld againſt his enemie, & Sorbryn came running like the Tempeſt, and with his Speare ſtrooke in Huons Shéeld ſuch a ſtroake, that the buckles nor any thing elſe coulde reſiſt the ſtroake, but the Sheeld was peirced through-out, but the good armour ſaued Huon from all hurts, and hée remooued no more for the ſtroake then if it had béen a ſtrong wall, whereof Iuoryn & all other had great maruaile, and ſaid one to another, how they had neuer ſéene before ſo great a ſtroake, nor a goodlyer receit thereof without falling to the earth, euerie man praiſed greatly Huon that he held himſelfe ſo firmly. By Mahound, (quoth Iuoryn) our man is fierce and of great hardyneſſe, I woulde hée were mounted now vpon my horſe. And Huon who had receiued the great ſtroake, in great yre caſt downe his Speare, and tooke his Sword with both his handes, and gaue therewith the Paynim a great ſtroake as he paſſed by him a hye vppon his healme, the ſtroake was ſo puiſſant, that neither the healme nor coiffe of ſtéele could reſiſt the ſtroake, but that his head was clouen to the ſhoulders, and ſo hee fell downe dead in the féeld.
               Then Huon who was quicke and light, tooke yt good horſe Blanchardine by the reyne, and alighted from his own horſe without féet in the ſtirrop, leapt vppon the Paynims horſe, and left his owne in the féeld, and when hée ſaw himſelfe on Blanchardine, he ſmoat him with his ſpurres to prooue him, when the horſe felt the ſpurres, hée began to leape and gambould, and gallop as it had béen the thunder, and the Paynims had maruell that he had not fallen to the earth, ſo whē he had well prooued him and turned him in & out, he thought hee would not giue him for the value of a Realme, then hee came vnto King Iuoryn with twentie gan
                     •••
                  ulds. By Mahound, (quoth Iuoryn) this Varlet ſéemeth rather Sonne to a King or Prince, then to be a Varlet to a Minſtrell, then he came vnto Huon and embraced him, and made him great reſpecte, and the Paynims that were within Anfalerne, with the Admirall Galaffer yſſued out of the Citie, and when Galaffer
                  
ſaw his Nephew ſlain, he road about him thrée times, and made a pitious complaint, and ſaid. Ah right deare Nephewe, I may well complaine, by reaſon of your youth, when I ſée you thus pitiouſly ſlaine, certainly, if I liue long, your death ſhall dearely be bought, ſo he cauſed the dead bodie to be carried into the Citie with great lamentations, and then hee and his men entred into the Battaile, where was great ſlaughter made on both parts, but among all other Huon did maruailes, he ſlew and beat downe, & tare of helmets, and ſtrake out braines with the pummell of his Sword, hée ſlew and beat downe all that came within his ſtroake, his proweſſe was ſuch that no Paynim durſt abide him, but fled as the Shéepe doth from the Woolues, he did ſo much by vertue of his armes, that within ſhort ſpace hee brought all his enemies to playne diſcomfiture, ſo that the Admirall Galaffer with much paine fled and entred into the Citie, right ſorrowfull for the loſſe that he had receiued that day, for the third part of his men were ſlaine in the Battaile, and all by the valiantneſſe of Huon, the which was ſo great, that King Iuoryn and his Barons ſtood ſtill to beholde his valyant déedes.
               And as Huon fought, hee ſpyed out the Paynim that had giuen him his Sword, then hée remembred the promiſe that he had made him, and he lifted vp his Sword, and ſtrake another Paynim therewith, ſo that hee claue his head to the breaſt, and ſo hee fell downe dead, and Huon tooke the Paynims horſe, and gaue the horſe to him that had giuen him the good Sword, and ſayd. Fréend, take well in woorth ye gift of this horſe, f
                     •
                  r a reward for the good Sword that you gaue me. Sir, (quoth the Paynim) I thanke you. In bréefe, Huon did ſo much, that there was no Paynim that durſt abide him, but fled and entred into the Citie of Anfalerne, then they cloſed their gates and lifted vp their bridges, and King Iuoryns men departed with the bootie that they had wonne: then with great triumph Huon was conuayed, riding chéeke by chéeke by Kinge Iuoryn, and ſo brought to Mombrance,
                  
whereas they were receiued with great ioy, and the Admirall Galaffer was entred into Anfalerne, in great ſorrow for Sorbryn his Nephew who was dead, & alſo for his men that he had loſt in battaile, and when he was vnarmed, hee cauſed his Nephew to be buried with ſore wéepings and lamentations. Nowe let vs leaue ſpeaking of them, vntill wee haue occaſion to returne vnto them againe.
            
            
               Chap. LVI.
               
                  ¶Howe Huon was hadde in great honour, and ſat at the Table with King Iuoryn of Mombrance.
                  
               
               
                  
                     WHen Iuoryn was entred into Mombrance, hee went & vnarmed him, & his Daughter came vnto him to make him reuerence, and when hee ſawe his Daughter, hée kiſſed her and ſaid. Déere Daughter, thou wert mated in a good houre by the Minſtrels Varlet, for in the day of battaile that we haue had againſt the Admirall Galaffer, he was diſcomfited by the only proweſſe of this Varlet by whom thou wert mated, thanked be my God Mahound, for by him I haue ouercome mine enemies, and beſide that, he fought hand to hand againſt Sorbryn Nephew to the Admirall Galaffer, and hee ſlew him, but if I may liue one yeare, the great ſeruice that he hath done vnto me, ſhalbe euen right well rewarded: Father, (quoth the Ladie) you are bound ſo to doe.
               Then Kinge Iuoryn went vp into his Pallaice, and his Daughter with him, and Huon went to the lodging where as the Minſtrell was lodged, where hee vnarmed him, and went with his Maiſter to the Pallaice, but when King Iuoryn ſaw them, the King aduanced foorth, and tooke Huon by the hand, and ſayd. Fréend, you ſhall goe with mée and ſit

at my Table, for I cannot doe you too much honour, for the good ſeruice that you haue done vnto mée, I abandon vnto you all my houſe, to doe therein at your pleaſure, take all my gould and ſiluer, and iewels, and giue thereof at your pleaſure: I ordaine and will, that all that you commaund ſhall be done, all that is heere I abandon vnto you, yea in the Ladies chambers take there your pleaſure as you liſt, and whē I goe out, you ſhall goe with mée. Sir, (quoth Huon) of the great honour that you haue done to mée, I thanke you, then they ſat downe at the Table, and when they had dyned, the King and Huon ſat together vppon the rich Carpets. Then Mouflet the Minſtrell opened his Vyoll, and played ſo melodiouſly, that the Paynims that heard him had great maruaile thereof, for the Vyoll made ſo ſwéet a ſound, that it ſéemed to be the Mermaides of the Sea, and Kinge Iuoryn and all his Lords had ſo great ioy, that it ſéemed vnto them that they were in the glorie of Paradiſe, ſo yt there was no Paynim, but that gaue him Gownes and Mantles and other iewels. The Minſtrell ſaw Huon ſit by the King, hee ſaide: Fréend, yeſterday I was your Maiſter, and nowe I am become your Minſtrell, I thinke nowe you haue little care for me, yet I pray you come vnto mée and gather together theſe cloathes, and put them into my Male as you haue done ere this. When the King and his Lordes heard that, they began to laugh. Now let vs leaue ſpeaking of them, and ſay ſomewhat of the old Gerames.
               
            
            
               Chap. LVII.
               
                  ¶ How the old Gerames arriued at Anfalerne by fortune, and the Admirall Galaffer retained him to mainetaine his warre: And how the faire Eſcleremond ſpake with him,
               
               
                  
                  
                     YE haue heard heere before the Aduentures that haue fallen to Huon, & how the old Gerames and xiij. with him▪ departed and left Huon, bicauſe he would not beléeue them whereby fell to him ſuch aduentures as yee haue ſince heard, and how Gerames and his companyons that were in the litle ſhippe, ſailed forth in the tempeſt, without any knowledge what was become of Huon, but they thought rather hée had been dead then aliue and ſo within a moneth after, they were driuen by another tempeſt to the port of Anfalerne.
               
               When Gerames ſaw how they were ariued there, he ſaid to his companie. Sirs wee be not ariued at a good Port▪ in this City dwelleth a Paynim king who beléeueth not in our god, a more fierce Paynim cannot be found frō hence to the red Sea, he is called the admirall Galaffer, without god haue pitie of vs, I cannot ſée but we are like to die, and we cannot returne backe. The ſame time the Admirall Galaffer was riſen from dinner, and looked out at a windowe, and behelde the ſea-ſide, and then he perceiued the little Shippe, where Gerames and his companie were in, when he ſaw it, he went downe with ſome of his men, deſiring to knewe what they were that there arriued: then he approached to the Shippe, and ſaid. Sirs, what men be you that are thus arriued at my Port? Sir, (quoth Gerames) wée be French-men, Pilgrimes, and are going to offer at the holy Sepulchre, the fortune of the Sea hath brought vs hether, and therefore Sir, if there be any Tribute that we ought to pay, we are readie to do your pleaſure. Sirs, (quoth the Admirall) haue no doubt, that by me or any of mine you ſhall haue any diſpleaſure, for if yée will abide with me, you are well arriued. Sir, (quoth Gerames) I would it might pleaſe you to ſhewe vs the cauſe why: Why, (quoth the Admirall) that I ſhall ſhewe you. True it is, héere néere mée dwelleth Kinge Iuoryn of Mombrance,
                  
who maketh vppon mée great warre, hée ſlayeth my men, and deſtroyeth my Countrey, whereof I haue great ſorrow in my heart. Sir, (quoth Gerames) if your quarrell be iuſt and rightfull, we ſhall be all readie to aid you truely, for Sir, without your quarrell be good, wee will not abide with you.
               Sirs, (quoth the Admirall) I ſhall ſhew you the troth, ſo it was, vppon a day I ſtood in a window, and looked downe to ye ſea-ſide, (as I did now when you arriued at this Port) and then I ſaw a Shippe comming, which tooke anker there as you be nowe, and in the Ship there was a Damſell and Ten Marriners, who thought to haue ledde her vnto Kinge Iuoryn of Mombrance, I cannot tell where they had taken her, but ſhée was Daughter to the Admirall Gaudiſe, that Mahound take his ſoule, and I knewe for certaine, that if King Iuoryn might haue the Damſell, hee would haue burnt her, becauſe it hath béen ſhewed him, that ſhe was the cauſe of the death of her Father the Admirall Gaudiſe, who was Brother to King Iuoryn, and ſo hée is Vncle to the Damſell, and when I was aduertiſed, that the ten Marriners would haue deliuered her into the hands of her Vncle Iuoryn, I tooke her from them, and ſlew them all, becauſe they would not deliuer her to me with entreatie, and thus I haue wedded the Damſell. When Iuoryn heard this, he made mée war, and was héere before my Citie with all his puiſſance, & hath ſlayne my men, and led away all my beaſts and prouiſion, and hath burnt and deſtroyed my Countrey, and euerie day he commeth and ouer-runnes all the Country, and he hath with him a young man, I know not of what countrey hee is of, but this laſt day hée ſlewe a Nephewe of mine, whome I right dearely loued, and who was called Sorbryn, hée was Sonne to my Siſter, for whome I haue ſuch ſorrowe at my heart, that it cannot be appeaſed, and he hath led away his Horſe called Blanchardyn, the which is the beſt horſe in ten Realmes, his like is not in all the world, wherefore I deſire you (as I may deſerue your ſeruice) to abide with mée, and

to doe ſo much, that I might haue the ſaide younge man taken Priſoner, and the horſe againe to me reſtored, and if you can this doe, I ſhall ſo reward you, that you ſhall alwaies be rich, and all thoſe in your companie.
               Sir, (quoth Gerames) if hée come any more hether, & that you ſhewe mée him, I ſhall doe my beſt to bring him, and the Horſe alſo vnto you. Freend, (quoth the Admirall) if you will ſhew me this courteſie, I ſhall abandon all my Realme to bee at your pleaſure and commaundement. With theſe words the old Gerames yſſued out of the Ship & all his companie, and entred into the Citie of Anfalerne with the Admirall Galaffer, & when they came to the Pallaice, Gerames ſayd. Sir, I and my companie require you to ſhewe vs the Damſell, for whoſe ſake you maintaine this war. Fréend, (quoth the Admirall) if you were a young man, I would not ſhew her vnto you, but I ſee well you bee olde and ancient, wherefore no young Ladie will ſet any thinge by you: then the Admirall tooke Gerames by the hand, and led him into the Chamber whereas Eſcleremond was, aſſoone as the Ladie ſaw Gerames, ſhe knew him, wherewith ſhe began to chang colour, and fell down in a ſwound in the Chamber, making a great out-crie. When the Admirall Galaffer ſaw that, he was right ſorrowfull, and ſaid: Faire Ladie, why doe you make this ſorrow? are you troubled at the ſight of this olde man that I haue brought hether? Nay ſurely Sir, (quoth ſhée) it is for a paine that hath taken mée in the right ſide whereby I haue often times great annoyance: but Sir, if it were your pleaſure, I would gladly ſpeak with this french Knight, for cuſtomably they know many things, and peraduēture he may ſhew me ſuch things as ſhalbe for my health, for French-men are right diſcréet in giuing of good counſell. Madame, quoth the Admirall) it pleaſeth me well that you ſpeake with him ſecretly. Then the Ladie called Gerames, and ſaid: Fréend, I pray thee giue me ſome good counſaile, that I may be eaſed of the paine that I endure. Madame, (quoth Gerames) for the honour of you and of the Admirall

that is héere preſent, I ſhall ayd you in ſuch wiſe, that you ſhalbe eaſed of the paine that you endure.
               Then Gerames who was ſubtill, well perceiued the mind of the Ladie, then he approached néere vnto her, and they ſat downe together on a Couch there by. Gerames, (quoth the Ladie) I pray you what aduenture hath brought you hether? Madame, (quoth he) wee bee come hether by reaſon of tempeſt of the Sea, but Ladie, (quoth he) I pray you what is become of Huon? By my faith, (quoth ſhe) I beléeue hee is dead, for when you departed from vs, ſuch a maruelous tempeſt roſe on the Sea, that all that were in our Shippe were periſhed, and the ſhip drowned and broken in ſmall peeces, except Huon and I, we ſaued vs on a Table of wood, wherevpon we arriued in an Iſle that was neere vs, and when wée were on the Land, there came vnto vs Ten Marriners, and they tooke me from thence, and 
                     ••
                  it Huon there blindfold, his hands and féet faſt bound, ſo that he had no power to reléeue himſelfe, and thoſe Ten Marriners brought me hether, and the Admirall Galaffer hath ſlayn them al, therefore I thinke ſurely that Huon is dead, Ieſus haue mercie vppon him, and thus I am héere with this Admirall, who hath aſſured me to wed mée, but as yet he neuer medled with me bodily, but I haue made him to beléeue, that I made a vowe to Mahound for twoo yeares to come, that no man ſhould haue vſe of my body, and that is for the loue of Huon, whome I cannot forget, the Admirall hath beleeued me, and for as long as I liue I ſhall neuer forget Huon, and ſhall alwayes be ready to die, in the payn to kéepe me from the bodily company of any man liuing. Ah Sir Gerames, if you might doe ſo much, that I might eſcape from hence with you, you ſhould do me a great courteſie, for if I might eſcape from hence and come into a chriſtian Realme, I would yéeld my ſelfe into ſome Abbie of Nunnes, to the entent that the reaſidue of my life, I might pray for the Soule of my Louer Huon. Madam, (quoth Gerames) be not diſmayed, for if I can eſcape from hence, whatſoeuer come to me thereof, I ſhall carie you with me. Then

the Admirall came vnto them, and ſayd: Fréend, you hold ouer-long talking with the Damſell, come away, you haue taried there long ynough; then Gerames departed from Eſcleremond, ſtrayning her by the hand, and the Admirall Galaffer tooke Gerames by the arme, and brought him into the Hall to Supper, and after Supper they communed of the Feates of the warre. Now let vs leaue ſpeaking of them, and returne to King Inoryn of Mombran
                        •
                     e, and noble Huon who was with him.
            
            
               Chap. LVIII.
               
                  ¶ How King Iuoryn came againe before Anfalerne, and how Gerames and Huon fought together, and at laſte they knewe each other. And how they entred into Anfalerne, and ſhut the Admirall without.
               
               
                  
                     NOw ſheweth the Hiſtorie, that about twoo dayes after King Iuoryn had made his courſe before Anfalerne, then Huon came vnto Iuoryn & ſayd. Sir, cauſe your men to be armed, and let vs goe viſite the Admirall Galaffer, for a man that is in warre ought neuer to lye ſtill, vntill he hath brought his enemie to vtter ruine, for it ſéemeth that he ſetteth but little by you, when he kéepeth ſtill your Neece againſt your will, hée being your Subiect, and one that holdeth his Lands of you. Freend, (quoth Iuoryn) you ſay truely, I ſhall doe by your counſaile, then he made to be cryed through the Citie, that euerie man ſhould make him readie, to go with the King before Anfalerne. Huon
                   who was deſirous to haue battaile, armed him, and tooke Blanchardyn his good Horſe, mounted on him without any ſtirrop, and tooke a great Speare in his hand with a good ſharpe head.
               
                  Now the ſame time as Huon was in the Pallaice, king Iuorins daughter was leaning in a window in her chamber, accompanied with diuers Ladies and Damſels, ſhee beheld Huon and ſhée ſaid. By Mahound, it is a goodly ſight to behould yonder young man ſitting on the horſe Blanchardyn, how well he becommeth his armour, a goodlier man cannot be found, nor a more hardie: for the laſt day he ſlew Sorbryn the valianteſt knight in all Pagany, and alſo wanne his good horſe. But yet I am diſpleaſed with him, for that whē he played with me at the Cheſſe, he was not ſo hardy as once to embrace and kiſſe me, if he had, I would haue loued him in ſuch wiſe, that if he had required of me my loue, I would not haue refuſed him, though my father had ſworne the contrarie an hundred times: thus the Ladies and Damſels deuiſed together, but Huon ſet little thereby. Thus king Iuoryn and his men iſſued out of the Citie of Mombrance, and came to the fields and then roade foorth toward Anfalerne, & at the laſt came before the gates of the citie, and there ordered them in battaile array, and Huon who had great deſire to attaine to renowne, came to the gate with his ſpeare in his hand, and cried alowd to them that were on the walles, and ſaid. Where is Galaffer your Lord? goe and ſhew him, that he come and Iuſt againſt him that hath ſlaine his Nephew, and that I will ſerue him in like ſort if I may méete with him in Battaile, or elſe he ſhall deliuer to me the faire Eſcleremond.
               
               
                  Galaffer was néere by, and heard what Huon ſaide, and knew well that it was he by reaſon of the horſe Blanchardyn, whereof he was right ſorowfull, & ſaid to Gerames. Friend, I ſhal ſhew you héere him that hath done me al this ill, now I ſhall ſée if yée will kéepe promiſe with me. Sir quoth Gerames, take no care, for by the faith that I owe to God, I ſhall render to you both the horſe and the man, to doe with them at your pleaſure. Then Gerames yſſued out all armed, well horſed, and tooke a good ſpeare in his hand, hee was a goodly knight of his age, puiſſant of bodie, and in his time

greatly redoubted, and when he was on his horſe, hee ſtretched himſelfe in his ſaddle in ſuch wiſe, that his ſtirrops ſtretched out a long handfull or more, he was greatly prayſed of the Paynims that ſaw him, and then the Admirall Galaffer commaunded euery man to be armed, and he himſelfe was armed richly. Then the gate was opened, and Gerames was the firſt that iſſued out with his company, when he was without the citie, he ſtrake his horſe with his ſpurres, ſo that he was a great ſpace before all his companie, with his ſpeare in his hand & his ſhield about his necke, and his white beard hanging downe on his breſt vnder his helmet. Nowe when Huon on the other part ſaw Gerames comming, hee ſpurred Blanchardyn, and came againſt Gerames, and ſo they met together without any word ſpeaking, and ſtrake each other on their ſhéeldes, ſo that all was broken, but their armour was ſo good that they tooke no hurt, but their ſpeares brake to their handes, and the ſhiuers flew vp into the ayre, and the ſtroakes were ſo rude, that both the knights & horſes fell to the earth, but they aroſe againe, and gaue each other great ſtroakes.
               
                  Gerames who was expert in déedes of armes, tooke his ſword with both his hands, and gaue Huon ſuch a ſtroake on the helmet, that perforce he was faine to ſet one of his knées to the earth the ſtroake was ſo heauy, and if it had not béen by the grace of God, he had béene ſlaine, and Huon was ſo aſtoniſhed with the ſtroake, that he had much adoo to recouer, but ſaid: Ah good Lord ſuccour me, and graunt me that before I die I maye ſée the faire Eſcleremond. Theſe words he ſpake openly, for he thought that Gerames had not vnderſtood him, for he little thought that it had béen Gerames yt fought with him, thē he came to Gerames with his ſword in his hand to haue béen reuenged, for he neuer before receiued ſuch a ſtroake as Gerames had giuen him. But Gerames vnderſtood Huon by his words and knew him, and therwith caſt downe his ſword to the earth, and had ſuch ſorow that he could not ſpeake a word. When Huon ſaw that, he maruayled

greatly why he caſt his ſword to the earth, and then Huon would not touch him, but ſaid. Paynim, what is thy mind to doe? wilt thou haue peace or elſe fight with me? Ah ſir quoth Gerames, come foorth and ſtrike of my head, for well I haue deſerued it ſéeing I haue ſtricken you ſo rudely, but I knew you not, whereof I am very ſory. When Huon heard him ſpeake, anon he knew well that it was Gerames, wherof he had great ioy in his heart for finding of him. The Paynims that regarded them, hadde great maruaile what thing the twoo Champions ment or thought to do. Sir quoth Gerames, it behooueth vs ſhortly to determine our buſineſſe, for I ſée on all parts Paynims aſſemble together to behould vs, I ſhall ſhew you what is beſt for vs twoo to doe, leape you vpon your horſe, and I ſhall leape on mine, then I ſhall take you, and lead you perforce as my priſoner to the Citie of Anfalerne, and there ſhall yée ſée your Loue Eſcleremond, who will haue great ioy with your comming, and ſhée will tell you other newes. Friend quoth Huon, I ſhall doe as yee deuiſe, then they leapt on their horſes, and Gerames came to Huon and laid hand on him, as though he tooke him Priſoner, and ſo led him toward the citie of Anfalerne, and his companie followed him, and when king Iuoryn ſawe how Gerames had led away Huon as Priſoner, he began to crie & ſaid: On forth yée Sarazins, how ſuffer you this yong man to be led away as a Priſoner to ye citie of Anfalerne? I ſhall neuer haue ioy at my heart if ye ſuffer him thus to be ledde away.
               Then the Sarazins daſhed into the preaſſe to haue reſcued Huon, and on the other part the Admirall Galaffer came & met Gerames and Huon, and then Gerames ſaid to him: Sir, goe and fight with your enemies, behould heere the young man that ſlew your Nephew Sorbryn, I ſhall lead him into the citie and ſet him in ſure priſon, and then I ſhall ſhortly retourne againe to you to fight againſt king Iuoryn. Friend quoth Galaffer, I require you ſo to doe, and aſſoone as yee haue ſet him in priſon retourne againe. Gerames departed

from the Admirall, and went to the citie with Huon and his xiij. companions with him, when they were entred into the Citie, they lifted vp the bridges and cloſed the gates, in the Citie there was no man of warre, for all were in the field with the Admirall againſt king Iuoryn, there were none but women, children & ould folkes, and when that Gerames and Huon ſaw how they were ſtrong ynough for them in the Citie, they went into the ſtréetes and cried Saint Dennis, and ſlew all that they met aſwell old men, as women and children, ſo that within a ſhort ſpace they had cleane wonne the towne. Many Paynims fled and leapt into the dikes, and brake neckes, armes, and legges, then they went into the Pallaice, and there they found the faire Eſcleremond, & when Huon ſaw her, he did of his helmet, and ranne and embraced her, and when the Ladie ſaw that it was Huon, the ioy that ſhee had was ſo great that it was maruaile to ſée it, there was ſuch ioy at their méeting that it cannot be recounted. Huon and the Ladie embraced & kiſſed each other many times, and ſhe ſaid. Ah Huon, ye be right hartily welcome, for I thought that I ſhould neuer haue ſéene you more. Ladie quoth Huon, I ought greatly to loue and cheriſh you, and I am right ioyfull that it hath pleaſed God that I haue now found you in good health and proſperitie, for a more truer man than ye be there is none liuing.
               When all the companie had made their ſalutations one to another, they went to dinner and were richly ſerued, for there was great plentie in the citie, and the Sarazins were without the Citie, wheras they fought and ſlew each other, there was ſuch ſlaying on both parts, that the fieldes were couered with dead men and fore wounded, many a horſe ran about the field and their Maiſters lying dead, theſe twoo Kings fought one againſt the other puiſſance againſt puiſſance, and twoo Sarazins that were eſcaped out of the Citie of Anfalerne, came to the Admirall Galaffer and ſaid. Ah Sir, your Citie is loſt by the Frenchmen, who be entred into it, there is neyther man nor woman therein but they are

all ſlaine, the old knight that came to you and his xiij. companions be all ſeruants to the young man that ſlew your Nephew, when the twoo Frenchmen fought one with another, they tooke togither acquaintance, and they be all ſubiects to the young man that was with king Iuoryn, and it is he that ſlew the Admirall Gaudiſe, and diſcomfited the gyant Agrapart, we knew him well when he entred into the citie, we would haue ſhewed you thereof, but we durſt not vntill yee were returned from the battaile. Now they be in your Pallaice which pleaſeth them, for there is neither man nor child liuing, but all are ſlaine except ſome xxx. Ladies and Damſels, who were with her that ſhould be your wife, and they be put out of the Citie, yée may ſée them ſitting without the gate pitiouſly wéeping.
               When the Admirall Galaffer heard that, he was heauy & ſorowfull, and ſaid to his men that were about him. Sirs, I pray you haſtily giue me ſome councell what I ſhall doe, for it is néedfull. Sir quoth they, it is now of neceſſitie that yée goe to king Iuoryn, and knéele downe at his foote, and pray him to haue mercie vppon you, other councell as now we cannot giue you. Sirs quoth Galaffer, I ſhall doe as yée haue ſaid, then the Admirall Galaffer with his ſword in his hand went through the preaſſe, and came to king Iuoryn, & alighted from his horſe and knéeled downe before him, and ſaid. Sir King, I yéeld to you my ſwoord, with the which if you pleaſe ſtrike of my head, for well I haue deſerued it. But Sir I pray you for the loue of Mahound haue mercie of me, I offer to make you ſuch amends as you & your Lords ſhall iudge, ſo that yée will aid me to take the Frenchmen that bee in my Citie, and haue taken away my wife your Néece Eſcleremond. Sir, the young man that yée ſo loued, who came but lately to your Court with a Minſtrell, is the ſame Frenchman that ſlew your brother the Admirall Gaudiſe, theſe tydings I haue heard by twoo meſſengers that knew him in your Court, and now there are with him xiij. other Frenchmen, whome I had retayned with me to maintaine

my warre, but they be al ſubiects to the yong man, and now all xiii. bee in my pallace, and my wife with them.
            
            
               Chap. LIX.
               
                  ¶ How Iuoryn cauſed Mouflet the old Minſtrell, to be brought to the gibet to haue beene hanged, and how hee was reſcued by Huon.
                  
               
               
                  
                     IVORIN heard Galaffer, and ſaide, Alas, I was vnhappie that I knew not this yong man that had ſlaine my brother, if I had, it ſhold dearly haue béene bought. Therefore Sir Galaffer, cauſe your men to withdraw from the battaile, and I ſhall withdraw mine, and I ſhall know of my Barons what counſaile they will giue me. Then both parties blew the retrait, and King Iuoryn ſaid to his Lords. Sirs, what counſaile will yee giue me, as touching the Admirall Galaffer? Sir (quoth they) giue him againe his lands, ſince he aſketh mercie, if he hath done ill, he offereth to make amends. Then Iuoryn called Galaffer, and ſayd: Sir Admirall, I render againe to you all your lands, and pardon you of all mine ill will, and beſide that, I ſhall helpe you to deſtroy the Frenchmen that are in your citie of Anfalerne. Then Galaffer kneeled downe, and thanked King Iuoryn for the courteſie that he ſhewed him and offered to doe, and ſo would haue kiſſed his feet, but Iuoryn would not ſuffer him, but lift him vp.
               Thus theſe two kings agréed together, and ſware together, to haue the death of Huon and his knights. Then Huon and his companie abandoned vp the citie of Anfalerne, becauſe hee had ſo few men to kéepe it, and ſo kept the Caſtle, the which was ſtrong inough, ſtanding on a rocke on the ſea

ſide, it was indéede impregnable, ſo it were well victualled, at the corner of the Caſtle there was a ſtrong towre, and vnderneath it was the Port whereas ſhips came to their anchor. When Iuoryn and Galaffer ſaw that the towne was giuen vp by the Frenchmen, they entered into it with all their great puiſſance, and lodged about in the towne, but in taking of their lodgings, Huon and Gerames, and ſuch as were with them, ſhot out darts, and quarrelled in ſuch wiſe, that there was not ſo hardie a paynim that durſt peere before the Caſtle, if he did, he was ſlaine or hurt. When Iuoryn & Galaffer ſaw the dealing of the Frenchmen, they rayſed vp a gibbet before the Caſtle, thereby to make the Frenchmen afraide, and then they tooke Mouflet the Minſtrell, and bound his hands behind him ſo ſore, that the bloud came out at the nayles, then they hanged his violl about his necke, and then he was brought before Iuoryn, who ſayd to him. A thou falſe traitour, ill haſt thou remembred the goodneſſe that my brother Gaudiſe hath done to thee, when he that ſlew him, thou haſt brought into my Court, thereby to do me deſpight. But I ſhall neither eate nor drinke, till thou haſt thy deſert, and that is to bee hanged.
               Alas quoth Mouflet, neuer in all my life haue I done or thought any treaſon, nor knew not that, that I brought to your Court, him that ſlew your brother the Admiral Gaudys, who was my Lord and Maſter, therefore Sir, great ſinne it were for you to put me to death, for that I am not guiltie of. Thou lyeſt falſe traitour (quoth Iuoryn) and ſo commaunded a thirtie men to leade him to the gallowes, and when they were come thither, they cauſed the minſtrell to mount vp on the ladder. The Frenchmē in the Caſtle had great maruaile who it ſhould bee that they would hang vp there: and when the minſtrell was aboue on the ladder, hee turned him towards the Caſtle, and cryed with an high voyce: Ah Huon, how will ye ſuffer me here to die? yet remember the goodnes that I haue done to you, and the courteſie that I did, when yee came all naked, I gaue you then cloathing, and meate

and drinke, and I abandoned to you all that I had, ill it hath béen employed without ye reward mée better. When Huon heard the Minſtrell, hée knew wel that it was Mouflet who had béen his maiſter, then hée ſaid to his company. Sirs, I require you arme you quickely, for the Paynims héere without haue reared vp a gybet, whereon they will hang a Minſtrell, who hath done me great pleaſure, I would be right ſorie if he ſhould haue any ill.
               Then Gerames and al his companions made them ready, and iſſued out of the Caſtle with Huon, by a ſecret poſterne, ſo that they that were about the gibet were not aware of of them, till Huon and his companie was among them. Huon ranne at him that ſhould haue hanged the minſtrell, and ſtrake him with his ſpeare cleane through, and ſo hee fell downe dead, and then Huon tooke downe the Minſtrell, and made him to flie away to the poſterne, and his violl about his necke, he that had ſéene him flie away, could not haue kept himſelfe from laughing, for he ranne ſo faſt, that he ſéemed to bee no old man, but rather of the age of thirtie yéere, and Huon and Gerames and his companie, ſlew and beate downe all the thirtie Paynimes, ſo that none eſcaped the death. When King Iuoryn and Galaffer perceiued that there was much adoe about the gibet, they ſayd, Sirs, the Frenchmen are come out of the Caſtle, goe and looke that ye doe ſo much, that none of thē enter againe. Then Paynims on euerie part iſſued out of their lodgings, and ranne thither hée that beſt might, without kéeping of any good order, & Huon and Gerames when they ſaw them comming, they made ſemblance to returne to ye citie a ſoft pace, and the Paynims came after them crying and howling like dogges, and when they approched néere, Huon ſodainely turned, and with his ſpeare he met ſo the firſt, that he ranne him cleane through the body with his ſpeare, ſo that he fell downe dead, and Gerames and his companie ſtrake ſo among the paynims, that the place ranne like a riuer of bloud of the dead Paynims: Huon ſtrake with his ſword with both his hands, hée ſtrake

none with a full ſtroke, but that he claue the head to the téeth, but finally, the force of the paynims was ſo great, that at length they could not abide it.
               Then Huon, who was expert in déedes of armes, perceiued that it was time to depart, he called his men together, and went toward the poſterne, the which with much payne they got in thereat, and ſo they entred in al xiii. companions, but yet they were ſo haſted and purſued, that Garyn of Saint Omer abode without, and defended himſelfe valiantly: but at laſt he was ſlaine by the Paynims, then Huon was right ſorrowfull, when hee ſaw that Garyn was not entered into the Caſtle, and pitiouſly complayned for him, and ſayd. A déere couſin, who for the loue of mee haue left your wife and children, and land, and ſignories, I am ſory of your death. Sir, quoth Gerames, leaue your ſorrow, and thinke to make good chéere, and to kéepe well our fortres, our Lord God hath alwayes ayded you, and ſhall doe through his grace, go we vp and make good chéere, for with this ſorrow wee can winne nothing.
               Then when they came into the Pallace, they met with Eſcleremond, and when Huon ſaw her, hee ſayd: My faire Loue, this day haue I loſt one of my good friends, whereof I am ſorrowfull. Sir, quoth ſhe, I am ſorie thereof, but that thing that cannot be recouered, muſt be left, wee be all made to die, God will haue mercy on his ſoule, with ſuch like worde Eſcleremond and Gerames appeaſed Huon, and when they were in the hall, they vnarmed them, and went to dinner, and afterwardes they looked out at the windowes, to ſée the countenance of the Paynims: then Gerames ſayd to the Minſtrell. Mouflet my friend, I pray thée take thy violl, and giue vs a ſong to make vs merrie, then the Minſtrell tooke his Inſtrument, and gaue them a moſt ſweete ſong, the which was ſo melodious for to heare, that they all beleeued that they had beene in Paradice, and they all made excéeding great ioy, with ſuch a cheerefull noyſe, that the Paynims that were without, did heare it, and ſayd

among themſelues. Ah theſe French-men are people to be feared and doubted, and they were right ſorrowfull for the men that they had loſte by the proweſſe of theſe Fourtéene perſons.
            
            
               Chap. LX.
               
                  ¶ How the good Prouoſt Guyer, Brother to Gerames, arriued at the Port of Anfalerne.
                  
               
               
                  
                     WHen that King Iuoryn ſawe and knewe the great loſſe that hée had receiued, hee was right ſorrowfull, and then the Admirall Galaffer ſaid. Sir, for the honour of Mahound bee not ſo ſore troubled, for a thing the which you ſhall well atchieue and bring to an end, you knowe well theſe French-men are as a bird being in a Cage, for they cannot eſcape neither by land nor by water, and they are without hope of any reſcue: to day they were Fourtéene, and now they be but Thirteene, you are lodged in a good Towne, and haue the féelds and the Sea at your pleaſure, it is not poſſible for them to eſcape, they haue neither Shippe nor Galley to flye in: Therefore Sir, appeaſe your ſelfe, ſuffer them to waſte their victuals.
               By theſe woordes ſomewhat King Iuoryn was appeaſed, and the French-men in the Caſtle deuiſed together, and Huon ſayd vnto Gerames. Fréend, you ſée well wée be héere incloſed, and wee can neither depart by Land nor by Sea, nor wee looke for no ſuccour of any man liuing, and héere before vs are lodged Paynims who haue ſworne our deaths. Sir, (quoth Gerames) true it is, but I hope in our Lord God that he will ſend vs ſome good aduenture, and if it pleaſe you, let vs two go downe and ſport vs by the water ſide, néere to the

Port vntill night come. I am content, (quoth Huon) wee may goe thether and not bee ſéene by the Paynims, for thether might come Shippe or Galley without daunger of the Towne: thether they went, and when it was néere hand night, Huon looked into the Sea, and ſaw a Ship comming thether-ward. Then Huon ſayd vnto Gerames: Fréend▪ behold yonder commeth a Ship with full ſayle, they will arriue at this Port, they be Chriſtian men I ſée well by the tokens that the Ship doth beare, for vppon the Maſt I ſée a red croſſe. Sir, (quoth Gerames) by all that I can ſée the ſhippe is of Fraunce, and therefore (as I haue ſaid to you before) God will ſend vs ſome good aduenture, & therewith by feare of the Tempeſt, the Shippe came into the Hauen and caſte their anchors.
               Then Huon approached to the Ship, and demaunded for the Patron, and for the maiſter of them that were in the ſhip, then the Marriners regarded the place whereas they were, and they knew plainly by the great Tower, that they were in the Port of Anfalerne, whereof they had great feare, and ſayd one to another. Ah good Lord God helpe vs, for we ſée well wee are but dead, ſéeing wee bée arriued héere in this Port, for wée knowe well, that the Lord of this place is the moſt cruelleſt Paynim betwéen this and the red Sea. Thus they complayned them one to another, and Huon (who was néere them) vnderſtood them well, and ſayd. Sirs, haue yée no doubt of death, for yée are arriued at a good Port: I require you to ſhew me from whence you come, and what yée bée? and they anſweared & ſayd. Sir, ſéeing you can ſpeake French we ſhall ſhew you, ſo that you will aſſure our liues. Sirs, (quoth Huon) haue no feare of death, nor of any hurt that yée ſhall haue, for wee that haue this place in kéeping, are French-men: therefore ſhew vs hardly your entents? Sir, (quoth they) ſince you would know what wée bee, wée are all borne in the Countrey of Fraunce, and one of vs is of Saint Omers, and ſome of the Citie of Paris, and of diuers other parts of the Realme of Fraunce. Fréends, (quoth Huon)

I pray you ſhew me, if there be any among you borne in the Citie of Bourdeaux. Sir, (quoth one of them) heere is one in this ſhip that was borne in Bourdeaux, an ould ancient man, I thinke he be of an hundred yeares of age, his name is Guyer, and wee are going on pilgrimage for the loue of our Lord Ieſus Chriſt, to viſit the holy Sepulchre, but fortune by force of Tempeſt of ye Sea hath cauſed vs to arriue héere, and this Tempeſt hath endured theſe thrée dayes and thrée nights paſſed, whereby wee be ſo wearie and ſo ſore trauailed, that wée can doe no more. Fréend, (quoth Huon) I pray you ſhew him foorth, that you ſpeake of.
               Then the Patron of the Ship commaunded, that the old man of Bourdeaux ſhould come forth, then Guyer the Prouoſt came to Huon and ſayd. Sir, behold me héere, what pleaſeth it you to ſay vnto mée? When Huon ſaw him, he knew incontinent that it was Guyer the Prouoſt, and ſayd: Fréend, I require you ſhew mee where you were borne? and what hath mooued you to come hether, ſéeing the great age that you be of? and to ſhew me what is your name? Sir, (quoth he) I ſhall ſhew you the truth, I had a Lord whome I loued entirely, hee was Sonne to Duke Seuin of Bourdeaux, and hee was called Huon, and it fell ſo out, that after the death of his Father about a Seauen yeares, King Charlemaine ſent for him to doe his homage to receiue his Land of him, the young man by the commaundement of his Mother, he and his brother Gerard with him tooke their way towards Paris, and by the way King Charlemaines Sonne called Charlot, was lying in a wood by the counſaile of certaine Traytours, and there lay in a waight to haue ſlaine Huon and his Brother Gerard, but the caſe fell otherwiſe, for Huon ſlew Charlot not knowing who it was, wherefore Kinge Charlemaine baniſhed him out of the Realm of Fraunce, and charged him ere he returned, to goe to Babilon to do a Meſſuage to the Admi-Gaudiſe. But his Brother Gerard aboad ſtill at Bourdeaux to kéepe the heritage, and then the Ducheſſe his Mother was ſo full of ſorrowe, that her Sonne was ſo baniſhed without

cauſe, that ſhee tooke thereof ſuch a maladie, that ſhee dyed thereof about fiue yeares paſt, and ſo thereby Gerard is Lord and Gouernour of all the Lands, and hee is married to the daughter of ye moſt cruelleſt Tirant from thence into Spaine, and this Gerard hath learned of him many ill cuſtomes, and hath left all the good wayes that was vſed in the dayes of Duke Seuin and of the Ducheſſe his Mother, and hee hath rayſed vp in all his Landes new Tayles, and Gables, and Impoſitions, and chaced and put from him all noble men, hee deſtroyeth the Burgeſſes and Marchants, Widdowes & Orphelings, there can no man ſhew you the ill that hée hath done and doth dayly, and he hath diſenherited me. And on a day the Barons of the Countrey deſired me, that I would take the paines to goe and ſearch aſwell by land as by water, if I might finde the young Lord Huon who is our rightfull Lord, it is now about two yeares that I haue ſearched for him in diuers Countreys, but I coulde neuer heare one word of him, whereof I am right ſorrowfull, & to ſéeke him I haue ſpent all my gould and ſiluer: howbeit, theſe good Marchants haue taken me into their Ship, and for the loue of God, they thought to haue brought me into Fraunce, but by fortune we be héere arriued at this Port.
            
            
               Chap. LXI.
               
                  ¶ Howe Huon and Gerames, and all their companie, with the faire Eſcleremond, departed from the Caſtle of Anfalerne, and ſayled thence on the Sea.
               
               
                  
                     WHen Huon vnderſtood the Prouoſt Guyer, he ſaid vnto Gerames. Sir, come foorth, héere I haue found your Brother. Then Gerames came to his Brother, and embraced and kiſſed him all wéping,

and ſaid: My deare fréend and Brother, you be right heartily welcome. Ah Brother, (quoth Guyer) nowe I care not whether I liue or die, ſéeing I haue found you, and if it were ſo that yet once ere I dyed I might ſée my Lord Huon: then I cared not howe ſoone I dyed. Ah deare Brother, (quoth Gerames) you ſhall not die ſo ſoone, and yet you ſhall ſée Huon, whoſe preſence you ſo ſore deſire, it is Huon to whome you haue ſpoken all this ſeaſon. Then Huon ſore wéeping came and embraced Guyer, and ſaid: My deare Fréend, your comming is a ioy to my heart, for a more truer Knight cannot bee found. Sir, (quoth Guyer) doe you know mée? Yea truely, (quoth Huon) and do you know mée? Yea Sir, (quoth Guyer) you are greatly deſired in Fraunce, and Brother Gerames, I deſire you to ſhew me where you haue béen ſince I ſawe you, for it is about Fortie yeares ſince you departed out of Fraunce: then Gerames ſhewed him all his life, and ſhewed at length how he found Huon.
               
               Longe they were talking together, whereof they of the Ship were right ioyfull, for then they ſawe well they were arriued at a good Port, and then Huon ſaid to ye Marriners. Sirs, I pray you make this night no great noyſe, nor make no fire, nor ſhewe no light, for héere before the caſtle is lodged two Admirals Paynims, who haue ſwoorne that they will neuer goe hence vntill they haue vs at their pleaſure: therefore I counſaile that wee may eſcape out of this caſtle, wée bée hére about thurteene perſons, and with vs a noble Ladie, wherefore I require you let vs come into your Ship or elſe we be all loſt, and feare not but you ſhall be well paid for your labour, ye ſhall haue gold and ſiluer as much as yée will deſire. Sir quoth the Patrone, yée néed not to ſpeake of any gold or ſiluer, for this our ſhip is yours to do therewith at your pleaſure. Sir quoth Huon, I thanke you of your courteſie, I pray you and your company come with me into the caſtle, and I ſhall charge your ſhip with gold and Siluer, and rich iewels and pretious ſtones, that you and all yours ſhalbe rich for euer, this muſt be done in haſt, before the Paynims

héere without perceiue vs, for if they perceiue vs, wee ſhal neuer get hence, but incontinent they will ſend ſome of their ſhippes and take this ſhippe.
               Sir quoth the Patrone, wee are ready to obey your commaundement, and then the Patron and xxiiii. Maryners went with Huon into the Caſtle, and charged all the treaſure that was within the caſtell, and other riches that Huon and his company had taken in the towne, they bare all into the ſhip, and vittayles ſufficient, then Huon tooke Eſcleremond by the hand all ſmiling, and ſaid. Fayre Ladie, one thing I demaund of you, be yee not diſpleaſed to leaue that country & land where as yée were borne? Sir quoth ſhée, I haue long deſired to ſée the day that I now doe ſée, therefore well wée may thanke our Lord God, that hath giuen vs that grace to be ſet out of the handes of the enemies of the faith of Chriſt, wherein wée ought to beleue, then Huon entred into the ſhip, and the faire Eſcleremond and Gerames and all the other cō
                  pany, ſo they were in number within the ſhip ſome xxxiiij. perſons, and with them was Mouſlet the Minſtrell, & when they were all entred into the ſhip, and the ſhip charged with all things neceſſarie, they weyed vp their anchors, and hoyſed vp their ſailes, and had ſo good and freſh a wind, that they were within a while farre from the lands of the twoo Admiralles Sarazins.
               They ſayled ſo long, that ere it was day light, they were paſſed the coaſt of the Roades, & ſo came by the Iſle of Creet: and ſo by the aid of God and good wind, they arriued at the Port of Brandis. And ſo about noone, the Admirall that lay at ſiege before the caſtell of Anfalerne, had gread maruaile that they could ſée no man ſtirring within the caſtle, then a Paynim ſaid to Iuoryn. Sir, know for troth, that within the caſtle yée ſhall find no man, the Frenchmen are all fled, but wée cannot tell how. When the twoo Admirals heard that, they were ſore troubled, and in haſt they ſet foorth a Galley and xxx. Paynims therein, commaunding them to goe to the Poſterne, which they did incontinent, and when

they came there, they found neyther man nor woman, but found the Poſterne open, and ſo they entred into the caſtle, and ſo opened the broad gates, and the twoo Admirals entred in ſore diſpleaſed that the Frenchmen were ſo eſcaped. Now let vs leaue ſpeaking of them, and retourne to Huon, who was arriued in ſauegard at the Port of Brandis.
               
            
            
               Chap. LXII.
               
                  ¶ How Huon and his company arriued at the Port of Brandis, and from thence went to Roome to the Pope, who wedded together Huon and the faire Eſcleremond, and of their departing from thence.
               
               
                  
                     WHen Huon and his company ſaw how they were arriued at the Port of Brandis, they iſſued out of their ſhippe, and deuouſtly went to the church of our Lady, and there gaue laud & praiſe to our Lord God, that had brought them thether in ſuch ſauegard, then they went to Garyn of Saint Omers lodging, when they came there, the Ladie of the houſe (who was right wiſe and courteous) came to Huon & ſaid. Sir, of your comming I am right ioyfull: but Sir I pray you where haue you left Garyn my Lord and huſband? for ſéeing I ſée him not with you, my heart trembleth, for feare leaſt he be dead, or elſe of ſome great incumbrance happened vnto him. Madame quoth Huon, to hide the troth from you, cannot cauſe you to haue him againe, for it hath pleaſed god that he is departed out of this world: wherefore I will coū
                  ſell you as much as yée may leaue dolour and heauineſſe, for wée muſt all come thereto, and I repute you ſo wiſe, that yée know well that for any ſorow or wéeping that ye make, yée cannot haue him againe. When the Lady had heard Huon,
                  
ſhe fell downe in a traunce, more like to be dead then aliue, than Huon and his companie ſet her vp, and comforted her as much as they might, then Eſcleremond tooke & brought her into her chamber, and did ſo much with her faire & ſwéet words, that ſomewhat ſhée appeaſed her, and then ſore wéeping ſhée came to Huon, and he ſaid. Madame appeaſe your ſelfe, and praye for him, for wee muſt all paſſe the ſame paſſage.
               With theſe wordes and ſuch other the Lady was appeaſed, then they waſhed and went to dinner, and after Gerames and other of his company went into the towne, and bought horſe and Mules to ryde on, and bought rich gownes all in one liuery, there they tarried about viij. daies, and on the ix. day they payed the Patrone of the ſhip in ſuch wiſe, that hee was rich euer after, and euery Mariner had a good reward, whereof they thanked Huon and offered to doe him ſeruice. Then Huon and Eſcleremond with all their company tooke their leaue of their hoſteſſe, whome they left ſore wéeping, and at their departing Huon gaue her a rich guift, whereof ſhe humbly thanked him, and when they were all readie and their baggage truſſed vp, they depatred and tooke the way towards Roome with great ioy and gladnes: whoſoeuer was ioyfull, Guyer the Prouoſt was ioyfull in twoo maners, one in that he had found his Lord Huon, and the other for that he had found his brother Gerames, and alſo bicauſe that his Lord Huon, had fulfilled the Meſſuage that King Charlemaine had charged him to doe to the Admirall Gaudiſe.
               
               So long they rode together, that in a morning they came to Roome, and alighted at their lodging, then they all together went to heare diuine ſeruice, and as they iſſued out of the Church, they met a ſeruant of the Popes, then Huon demaunded of him in what eſtate the Pope was in. Sir quoth the Squier, he is readie to heare ſeruice, then Huon and his companie leapt on their horſes, and road to the Popes Pallaice and their alighted, and then Huon held the faire Eſcleremond
                  
by the hand, and the good Prouoſt Guyer held his brother Gerames by the hand, and ſo all the other twoo and twoo together, then they found ye Pope ſitting in his throne deuiſing with his Cardinalles, then Huon approched and ſaluted him humbly. When the Pope beheld Huon, he knew him incontinent, and aroſe vp and came to him and embraced and kiſſed his cheeke, and ſaid. Faire ſonne Huon yee be welcome, I pray you ſhew me how is it with you, and ſhew me of your aduentures? Sir quoth Huon, I haue endured many euils and troubles ynow and all theſe that are come with me, but (thanked be our Lord god) it is ſo now, that I haue brought with me, the beard and great téeth of the Admirall Gaudiſe, and haue alſo brought his Daughter who is heere preſent, and Sir I require you to giue her Chriſtē
                  dome, and then I will wed her to my wife. Huon quoth the Pope, all this pleaſeth me right well to doe, and the rather ſéeing it is your pleaſure, & I deſire you to tarrie héere with me this night. Sir quoth Huon, your pleaſure ſhalbe mine.
               Thus Huon and his companie tarried with the Pope all that night, whereas they made great ioy, and on the nexts morning a Font was made readie, wherein the faire Eſcleremond was chriſtened without changing of her name, and alſo there was chriſtened Mouſlet the Minſtrell, and he was called Garyn, and when the Sacrament of Baptiſme was finiſhed, the Pope himſelfe ſaid ſeruice, firſt he confeſſed Huon, and aſſoyled him of all his faultes, then hee wedded him to Eſcleremond, and when diuine ſeruice was ended, then they went all with the Pope to his Pallaice, and there was made the ſolempnities of the Mariage, but to ſhew the maner of their ſeruice, with the meates and drinkes, and yt apparell of the Brides, it would be ouer-tedious to rehearſe it. But one thing I dare well ſaie, that there had not béene ſéene of a long time before ſuch a glorious and rich ſeaſt, for the Pope did as much for them as though they had béen his owne Brother and Siſter, the melodie of the Minſtrels that played was ſo ſwéet and delectable, that euery man was ſatisfied

with the hearing thereof, and ſpecially it was maruaile to heare Garyn the new chriſtened Minſtrell to play, hee played ſo ſwéetlye on his vyoll, that it was geat ioy to heare it.
               Thus there was great ioy in the Popes Pallaice, and euen as they were well ſerued at dinner, ſo it was better at ſupper, and at night euery man withdrew himſelfe, and the new Brydes lay together in great pleaſure all that night, & in ye morning they aroſe and heard ſeruice, and then dined, and then they truſſed vp al their Baggage and charged their Somers, Mules, and Mullets, and ſadled their horſes, and then Huon and Eſcleremond went and tooke their leaue of the Pope, and thanked him for the honour and great courteſie that he had ſhewed them. Sir quoth the Pope, if it would pleaſe you to tarrie longer heere with me, my goodes and my houſe ſhould be at your commaundment. Sir quoth Huon, I cannot render ſufficient thankes to your Holines for the good that yée haue done to vs: But Sir, longer I cannot tarrie, for the great deſire that I haue to accompliſh the reſt of my buſineſſe, therefore Sir, I recommend you to our Lord God. The Pope kiſſed Huon, and tooke Eſcleremond by the hand: thus they tooke their leaue, and at their departing, the Pope ſent to them a Somer charged with gold, and cloathes of ſilke, and thus they departed from Rome.
               
            
            
               Chap. LXIII.
               
                  ¶ How Huon and his companie arriued at the Abby of Mauryſe, whereas hee was receiued by the Abbot and Couent, with great reuerence.
               
               
                  
                  
                     AFter that Huon had taken leaue of the Pope, he and his companie departed, and the faire Eſcleremond was mounted on a faire mule, and ſo long they rode, till they might ſée ye town of Burdeux. When Huon ſaw it, he lift vp his hands to the heauens, thanking God of his grace, that he had brought him thether in ſauegard, and then he ſayd to Eſcleremond. Faire Ladie, yonder you may ſée the Citie and Countrey whereof ye ſhall be Lady and Duches, though it hath béene ere this time a Realme. Sir (quoth Guyer the Prouoſt) it is good ye regard wiſely your buſineſſe, the which toucheth you right néere, and Sir, if you will doe after my counſell, ſend firſt to an Abby that is here by, called the Abby of Mauriſe, the Abbot is a notable Clarke, let him know of your comming, and that ye wil dine with him. Sir (quoth Huon) your counſell is to be beleeued: and then Huon ſent to the Abbot, certifying him of his comming.
               When the Abbot knew of Huons comming, he was right ioyfull, for he loued intierly Huon, wherefore he ſore deſired the ſight of him, then hée called all his Couent, and charged them in the vertue of obedience, to make them ſelues readye to receiue Huon, the rightfull Inheritour to the country of Bourdeaux, though the kings of Fraunce be our founders. But as to our good neighbour wée will doe this reuerence, for honour is due to them that deſerue it. Then the Couent as they were commaunded, ordered themſelues, and ſo went out of the Abby to méete Huon, who when hée ſaw them, hée alighted on foote, and alſo Eſcleremond and Gerames and all the other, thus the Abbot and his Couent in rich cluthes ſéeming, mette with Huon, when Huon was néere to the Abbot he was right ioyfull, and the Abbot who anon knew Huon, came to him right humbly and ſaid. Sir Duke of Bourdeux, thanked be god that ye are come home, for your preſence

hath long béene deſired, then they embraced each other with wéeping teares for ioy, then the Abbot welcomed the Prouoſt Guyer and all the other: But he knew not Gerames, for for if he had, he would haue made him great feaſting.
            
            
               Chap. LXIIII.
               
                  ¶ How the good Abbot ſent word to Duke Gerard of Bourdeaux, how his brother Huon was in the Abbey of Mauriſe.
                  
               
               
                  
                     THVS the Abbot with his Couent brought Huon to the Abbey of Mauriſe, and Huon and Eſcleremond on foot followed them, & when he came into the church, Huon offered greate gyftes, and after theyr offerings and prayers made, they went into the hall, and went to dinner: how well they were lerned, it neede not to be rehearſed, they had euerie thing that néeded, the Abbot ſate by Huon and ſaid. Sir, I pray you ſhew me how ye haue done, & how ye haue ended your meſſuage, that ye were charged to do by King Charlemaine. Sir quoth Huon, thanked be our Lord God, I haue accompliſhed and done all that I was commaunded to do, for I haue brought with me the Beard and the foure great Téeth of the Admirall Gaudiſe, and alſo I haue brought with me his Daughter the faire Eſcleremond, whome I haue wedded in the citie of Roome▪ and to morrow by the grace of God I will depart to goe to King Charlemaine my ſoueraigne Lord. Sir quoth the Abbot, of that I am right ioyful, but if it were your pleaſure, I would ſend to certefie your comming to Gerard your Brother, that he might ſee you before yée depart hence. Sir quoth Huon, I am content that yée ſend for him.
               Then the Abbot commaunded a Squier of his to goe for Duke Gerard, and ſo he went and reſted not, till he came to

                  Burdeux before Duke Gerard, & ſaid. Sir, if it be your pleaſure to come to the Abbey of Saint Mauriſe, there ſhall ye find your brother Huon,, who is come lately from beyond the ſea: when Duke Gerard heard certainely, how his brother Huon was come to the Abbey of Saint Mauriſe, hee was ſo ouercome with ire and diſpleaſure, that his viſage became like a flame of fire, and ſayd to the meſſenger: Goe and returne, and ſay to my brother Huon, that I will incontinent come and viſite him. Sir (quoth he) I ſhall ſhew him of your comming, and ſo departed, and came again to the Abby, and ſhewed Huon what his brother Gerard had ſayd. And when Duke Gerard ſaw that the meſſenger was departed he was ſorrowfull and penſiue, and called to him his father in law, his wiues father, who was named Gibouars, the moſt falſeſt traitour that was from the Eaſt to the Weſt, and Gerard ſaid to him: Sir, I pray you giue me counſell in that I haue to doe, for all the diuels in hell haue brought my Brother Huon from the parts beyond the Sea, and he is now preſent in the Abbey of Saint Mauriſe, the Abbot there hath ſent me word thereof, and that I ſhould come thether to ſpeake with him, for as to morrow he would depart to goe to Paris to the king, ſo that when he is come thether, he will doe ſo much that all his land ſhalbe rendred to him, and that I ſhal haue neuer a foot of land left me, but that which yée haue giuen me with my wife your Daughter, wherefore deare Father in law, I pray you in this great matter to councell and aid me, or elſe I am but loſt. Faire Sonne quoth Gibouars, diſmay you nothing, for without my wit doe faile me, I thinke to play him a tourne, that it had béen better for him to haue tarried where he was, than to haue come hether to claime my land.
            
            
               
               Chap. LXV.
               
                  ¶ How Gybouars of Beam and Gerard practiſed Huons death, and how the traitour Gerard came to ſee his brother Huon, who with great ioy receiued him.
               
               
                  
                     THus as ye haue heard, theſe two traitours conſpired, and then Gybouars ſayd to Gerard. Faire ſonne, go ye your way to your brother Huon, and take with you but one Squier, and when you come there, make to him all the chéere you can, and ſhew him as great loue as ye can doe, and humble your ſelfe to him, to the intent that he take in you no ſuſpicion. But when the morning commeth, haſt him to depart, and when ye c
                     •
                  me with him néere ſuch a little wood, find ſome rigorous words to him, and make as though ye were diſpleaſed with him, and I ſhall be readie in that ſame little wood ambaſhed, and xl. men of armes with me. And when I ſee that words are betwéene you, I ſhall iſſue out and ſlay al thoſe that come with him, ſo that none ſhal eſcape aliue, and then take your brother Huon, and caſt him into priſon, in one of the Towres of your Pallaice in Bourdeaux, and there miſerably he ſhall end his dayes, and then in haſte ye ſhall ride to Paris. But ere ye goe to Paris, ye ſhall take from him the Admiralles beard and great téeth, and then ye ſhall ſhew to the King, how Huon your brother is returned, without bringing either beard or téeth of the Admirall Gaudys, and how for that cauſe you haue put him in priſon. The King will beleeue you, for he hateth Huon greatly, becauſe of the death of his ſonne Charlot, whom hee ſlew: for the hate that the King hath to him in his heart, ſhall neuer depart from him, and therefore ſonne, when you be with your brother,

demaund of him, if he haue the Admirals beard and téeth or not, and whether he doe beare them himſelfe, or who elſe, for if he haue them not, he ſhall neuer haue peace with the King, but he will cauſe him to be ſlaine of an euill death, either hanged or drawne, for your brother laide hoſtage, promiſing that he would neuer returne, without he brought with him the Admirall Gaudys beard and great téeth, and alſo he promiſed, that he would neuer enter into his heritage, till he had ſpoken with the King, and that was enioyned him on paine of death.
               Thus as ye haue heard, theſe two Traitours deuiſed and concluded the death of Huon. Gerard (quoth Gibouars) thinke well on your buſineſſe, and I ſhall goe and aſſemble together fortie of my moſt ſecret ſeruants, and in other places where I can get them, to furniſh this enterpriſe. Sir (quoth Gerard) I ſhall goe to the Abbey to ſee my brother, when it is a little néere to night. So when the houre came, the falſe Traytor departed from Bourdeaux, and with him but one Squier, and ſo they rode till they came to the Abbey, and there alighted, and when he perceiued his brother Huon, hee imbraced and kiſſed him with ſuch a kiſſe as Iudas kiſſed Chriſt.
               When Huon ſaw his brother Gerard come with ſuch humilitie, the water fell from his eyes with kindneſſe, and embraced him and kiſſed him, and ſayd. Right déere brother, I haue great ioy to ſee you, I pray you ſhew me how ye haue done ſince my departure? Sir (quoth Gerard) right well now I ſee you in good health. Brother (quoth Huon) I haue great maruaile that ye bee thus come alone without company. Sir (quoth Gerard) I did it for the more humilitie, becauſe I know not how ye ſhall ſpeede with the king, nor whether ye ſhall haue againe your land, or no, if God will that ye ſhall haue it, I ſhal aſſemble al the Barons of the court to receiue you, & to make you cheere according, this Sir I ſhall do till you returne, for often times theſe great Princes are mutable, & lightly beleeue, for this cauſe Sir, I am ſecretly come

to you. Brother, (quoth Huon) your aduiſe is good, I am content that you thus doe, and to morrow betimes I will depart towards Paris; then theſe two Brethren tooke each other by the hand making great ioy. Brother, (quoth Gerard) I am right ioyous when I ſée you thus returned in health and proſperitie, haue you accompliſhed the Meſſuage that Kinge Charles charged you withall? Brother, (quoth Huon) know for troth, that I haue the beard and great téeth of the Admirall Gaudiſe, and beſide that, I haue brought with me his Daughter the faire Eſcleremond, whom I haue taken to my wife, and wedded her in the Citie of Rome, and alſo I haue héere with me thirtie Somers charged with gould and ſiluer, and rich Iewels garniſhed with pecious ſtones, whereof the halfe part ſhall be yours, and if I ſhould ſhew thee the paines, trauailes, and pouerties that I haue endured ſince I ſawe you laſt, it would bee ouer-long to rehearſe.
               Sir, (quoth Gerard) I beléeue you well, but Sir, I pray you ſhew me by what meanes or aid you did bring your Enterprize to an end? Brother, (quoth Huon) it was by a king of the Fayrie called Oberon, who did mée ſuch ſuccour and ayd, that I came to my purpoſe, and ſtrooke off the Admirals head and ſo tooke his beard and great téeth. Brother, (quoth Gerard) and how do you kéepe them, and where? Brother, (quoth Huon) behould héere Gerames, who hath them in his ſide, King Oberon did ſet them there by the Fayrie, and by the will of God. Sir, (quoth hée) which is Gerames? Brother, (quoth Huon) héere you may ſée him before you, he with the great hoarie beard. Sir, (quoth Gerard) of what Land is hée of? He is of the beſt Fréends that I haue, (quoth Huon) and he is Brother to the good Prouoſt Guyer, you neuer heard ſpeake of a truer nor more noble man, I found him in a wood, whereas hee had dwelt about Fortie yeares in penance, God ayded mee greatly when I found him, for if hée had not béene, I could not haue returned hether, much paine and pouertie hee hath endured for my ſake, and nowe Brother,

I pray you ſhew me how ye haue done ſince I departed from you? it hath béene ſhewed me that ye are very richly married, I pray you where was your wife borne, and of what lineage is ſhe of. Sir (quoth Gerard) ſhe is daughter to Gybouars of Cecyle, who is a great Lord and Signior. Brother (quoth Huon) I am ſorie that yee haue taken ſuch aliance, for I know him for the moſt vile traytour that can bee found, and the moſt vntrueſt. Sir (quoth Gerard) ye doe ill to ſay ſo, for I take him for no ſuch perſon.
            
            
               Chap. LXVI.
               
                  ¶How theſe two Brethren departed from the Abbey about midnight, and how the Traitor Gerard began to fall at rude words with Huon, when they approched neere the wood whereas Gibouars lay in ambuſh.
               
               
                  
                     THus as theſe two brethren deuiſed of Gibouars, the Abbot came to them, and demanded of Huon, if it were his pleaſure to goe to ſupper. Sir (quoth Huon) when it pleaſe you, I and my brother ſhall be readie. The fayre Eſcleremond, who was wearie of trauaile, was in her chamber apart, and diuers other of her company with her, whereas ſhe ſupped and lay that night. Huon was ſomewhat troubled, becauſe his brother had taken to his wife the daughter of a Traytour, thus they waſhed, and ſate them downe to ſupper, where they were richly ſerued: and at another table ſate the Prouoſt Guyer and Gerames his brother, and diuers other Barons.
               
                  Gerard beheld the Prouoſt, whom hee vtterly hated, becauſe hee went to ſeeke for Huon. Hee ſware to him ſelfe, that if hee might once goe out of the Abbey, that he ſhould bee the firſt that ſhoulde looſe his life, and hee did eate and

drinke but little for thinking to accompliſh his ill Enterprize. When they had ſupped, they aroaſe from the board, and their bedds were made readie. Then Huon called the Abbot apart, and ſayd: Sir, I haue brought hether with me great riches, I will leaue it héere with you to keepe vntill my returne, and I pray you for any manner of thing that may fall, deliuer it vnto no man liuing, but all onely to my ſelfe, and if God giue me the grace to returne, your part ſhall bee therein. Sir, (quoth the Abbot) all that you take mée to keepe ſhall bée ſafely kept to your behoofe, and I ſhall doe ſo that you ſhall bée content: then hee went to bed and Gerard with him, where Gerard ſayd, Brother if you thinke it good I ſhall call you vp betimes, for it ſéemeth that to morrow the day will be hot. Brother, (quoth Huon) I am content.
               Thus they lay together in one bed, but the Traytour Gerard had no lyſt to ſleepe, for the great deſire that he had to be reuenged of his Brother, who neuer did him any treſpaſſe, but alas why did not Huon know his entent? if hée had, the matter had not gone ſo to paſſe. At laſt the houre came that the Cockes began to crowe, then Gerard awooke Huon, and ſaid: Brother, it were good for vs to ariſe for anone it will be day, it is good to ride in the coole, but the ill Traytour, his thought was otherwiſe. When Huon heard his Brother, he roſe vp, and euery man aroſe vp and made them redie, Sir quoth Gerames, how is it that yée be ſo haſtie to depart from hence? I pray you let me ſléepe a little longer. Sir quoth Gerard, that is ill ſaid, for he that hath buſineſſe to doe that toucheth him néere, ought not to ſléepe nor reſt vntill his buſineſſe be finiſhed. By my troth quoth Huon, my Brother ſaith troth, for I haue a great deſire to ſpeake with King Charlemaine, then euery man truſſed vp their things and tooke their horſes, and the faire Eſcleremond was readie and mounted on a ſtately mule, and ſo they all tooke their leaues of the Abbot, who was right ſorowfull that they would depart ſo early. Then the gates were opened, and

ſo departed Fourtéene in a companie, and Eſcleremond made the Fiftéene, and Gerard rode before to lead them the right way that he would haue them to ride, and Eſcleremond being very ſumptuouſly apparelled rode very ſoberly, and ſhe came to Huon and ſaid. Sir, I cannot tell what ayleth me, but my heart is ſo ſore troubled, that all my bodie trembleth. Madame quoth Huon, be not diſmaid, nor haue any feare, for yée be in a good countrey, where by the grace of god, yée ſhall be ſerued like a Princeſſe and Ladie of the countrey, and with thoſe wordes ſpeaking, her Mule ſtumbled on the one foot before, ſo that ſhée had néere hand a great fall, then Huon approched to her, & tooke the bridle of the Mule in his hand & ſaid, Faire Ladie haue yée any hurt? No Sir (quoth ſhée) but I had almoſt fallen.
               By my faith quoth Gerames, we haue done very ill, for that wée departed from the Abbey before day light. Sirs quoth Gerard, I neuer ſaw men ſo fearefull for ſo ſmall a cauſe. Sir quoth Gerames, I know not why yée ſpeake it, but if I might councell yée, we would not goe one foot farther, but returne againe to the Abbey till day light. By god quoth Gerard, it were great folly to returne againe now for the ſtumbling of a Mule, I neuer ſaw men ſo fearefull, let vs ride foorth and make good chéere, I ſée the day beginneth to appeare. So they road foorth vntill they came to a croſſe, whereas there was foure wayes, this was about a League from the Abbey. Then Huon reſted and ſayd: Loe, héere is the border of the Territorie of the Abbey of Saint Mauriſe, and this one way is to Bourdeaux, the which way I will not ride, for ſo I haue promiſed to King Charlemaine, to whome I neuer yet falſed my faith, if I did, it ſhould bee the cauſe that I might looſe my Signiorie, and this other way goeth to Rome, & this other way before vs is ye right way into Frāce, the which way I will ride and none other. So they road foorth and all their companie, and within a while they were néere to the wood, within a bow ſhoot whereas the Traytour Gybouars lay in ambuſhment.
               
                  Now when Gerard ſaw his houre and time to ſpeake vnto his Brother Huon, he ſaid: Brother I ſée you are in mind to goe into Fraunce vnto Kinge Charlemaine, to haue your Lands and Signories, the which I am ſure you ſhall haue, it is a long ſpace that I haue kept it & maintained the Countrey in peace and reſt, and good iuſtice, and haue wonne but little, nor haue hadde but ſmall profit, not the value of one pennie, and I am maried to a noble Ladie, Daughter to a great Lord, and it troubleth my heart ſore when you repute him for a Traytour, if hée knewe it by likely-hood it might turne you to great folly, for wee beléeued that you ſhould neuer haue returned, therefore nowe I may ſay that I am not woorth a pennie: Therefore I would knowe of you, howe you would ayd mée, and what part I ſhall haue at your returne out of Fraunce? Brother, (quoth Huon) I haue great maruaile of this that you ſay, you knowe well that in the Abbey of Saint Mauriſe I haue left Twentie Somers charged with fine gould, and I haue ſaide vnto you, that your part ſhall bée therein as much as mine, nor I ſhall haue no penny but that one halfe is yours. Brother, (quoth Gerard) all this ſuffizeth not to me, for I would haue part of the Signorie to maintaine mine eſtate. When Huon vnderſtood his Brother, his bloud roaſe into his face, for hée ſawe well his Brother ſearched all that he could to fall at debate with him, and Gerames who was ſage and wiſe, perceiued anone that the matter was like to goe euill, and ſayd vnto Huon. Sir, graunt to Gerard your Brother his demaund, you are both young inough to conquer Landes. Gerames, (quoth Huon) I am content that he ſhall haue Bourdeaux or Gerone, let him take which hee liſt. Brother, (quoth Huon) ſhewe which of theſe two you will haue, and I will haue the other.
            
            
               
               Chap. LXVII.
               
                  ¶ How theſe Traytours ſlewe all Huons Company, except Gerames, and Eſcleremond, and Huon himſelfe, the which all three were faſt bound handes and feete and blindfold, and ſo brought vnto Bourdeaux and were put in priſon.
               
               
                  
                     WHen the falſe Traytour Gerard ſaw and vnderſtood his Brother, how hée did graunt him his deſire, & ſaw how that in no wiſe hée wold ſtriue with him: hee was therewith ſo diſpleaſed that he was néere hand in a rage, then he came to the Prouoſt Guyer, and ſayd. Guyer, Guyer, falſe Traytour, by thée and by thy purchaſe I am like to looſe all my Signorie, but by the faith that I owe vnto him that created mée, before I die I ſhall ſtrike off thy head, nor I ſhall not let to doe it for any perſon, and therewith when he ſawe his time, he cried his word and token, and Gybouars who was in the wood with Fortie men armed, brake out with their ſpeares in their reſts, and when Huon perceiued them, it was no maruaile though hee was abaſhed: then humbly he beſought our lord God to ſaue his body from miſfortune, and gladly hée would haue returned to the Abbey, but hée was ſo ſore ouer-layd that hee could not, then hée drewe out his Sword, and gaue therewith the firſt that came ſuch a ſtroake, that he claue his head to the téeth, and ſo fell dead to the ground, and Huon ſtrake ſo vppon the right hand and vppon the left, that whoſoeuer he ſtrake a full ſtroake, néeded after no Surgion, if hée had béene armed hée would not lightly haue béene taken without great loſſe, but his defence could not auaile him, for he and all his companie were vnarmed, and all the other Fortie were cleane armed, & they all

fought cruelly, in ſuch wiſe that within a while Twelue of Huons men were ſlaine in the place, & none eſcaped aliue except Huon, who was beaten downe to the earth & his hands bound: then Gerard the Traytour came to Gerames, who was beaten downe by force, and then hee cut open his right Side, and tooke out thereof the Admirall Gaudiſe beard and foure great teeth, the which were ſet there by Kinge Oberon of the Fayrie.
               
                  Huon ſéeing the old Gerames lying on the earth, hee ſayd with a hie voice vnto Gerard: Brother I pray you ſhew me that courteſy, as not to ſlay that old Gentleman, but ſaue his life. Brother, (quoth Gerard) that hée hath, let him keepe, other hurt hee ſhall none haue at this time, then they bound his eyes, and then they came to Eſcleremond, who lay on the earth in a ſwound they bound her hands and eyes, and ſo ſet her whether ſhée would or not vppon a horſe, and Huon as he was blindfold, hée heard the cries & wéepings that ſhe made, then he ſayd: Brother Gerard, I pray you for the loue of our Lord Ieſus Chriſt, ſuffer none ill to be done to that good Ladie, who is my Wife, nor no diſhonour. Brother, (quoth the Traytour Gerard) thinke on your ſelfe, & ſpeake no more, I ſhall doe as it pleaſeth me. Then they ſet Huon & Gerams on two horſes, & the falſe Traytour tooke the Twelue dead bodies, and did caſt them into the great Riuer of Gerone, then they tooke that way to the Citie of Bourdeaux, and led the thrée Priſoners faſt bound vpon thrée horſes. Pitie it was to heare the noble Ladie Eſcleremond complaine, and ſhe ſaid vnto Huon: Ah Sir, you haue ſayde to me, that when wée were once in your Countrey of Bourdeaux, that you woulde cauſe mee to bée crowned with gould: but now I ſée well, yt in great paine & miſerie we muſt vſe the reſidue of our liues, you haue found héere an ill Brother, ſince hée hath purchaſed for you ſo much ill, ſurely there is better faith & troth among the Sarazins, then is in the people of the Realme of France. Madame, (quoth Huon) your trouble more diſpleaſeth mée, then mine owne, God ſend to my Brother Gerard ſuch reward

as he hath deſerued, for ye treaſō that he hath done vs.
               Thus they complayned, and wiſt not whether they were caried, they entred into ye Citie of Bourdeaux an houre before day. Alas that the good Burgeſſes of ye City had but knowen, how their Lord Huon was ſo falſely betrayed, if they had knowne it, he had béene reſcued, and Gerard & Gybouars hewen all to péeces, but the falſe Gerard brought them by priuy darke Lanes to the Pallaice, for that they ſhould not be perceiued. Thus they came to the Caſtle, where they alighted and vnarmed them, then they tooke Huon and Eſcleremond & Gerames, and put them all into a deepe Priſon all thrée together, & ordained that they ſhould haue euery day barley bread and water, and commaunded the Iaylor to giue them none other thing, & alſo commaunded, that neither man nor woman ſhould ſpeake with them, the Iaylor promiſed ſo to doe, for he was ſeruant to Gybouars, & ſuch as the Maiſter was, ſo was the Seruant. Thus Huon betraied pitiouſly by his Brother Gerard, & ſet in priſon, and with him his wife Eſcleremond, and Gerames wounded on the Side as he was.
               Now wee will leaue to ſpeake of this pitious company, enduring great ſorow in the horrible priſon in the greate Tower of Bourdeaux.
               
            
            
               Chap. LXVIII.
               
                  ¶ How the Traytours returned to the Abbey of St. Mauriſe, and ſlewe the good Abbot, and tooke away all the Treaſure that Huon had left there.
               
               
                  
                     THus as ye haue heard here before how Gerard and Gybouars had put in priſon Huon and Eſcleremond and Gerames in great miſerie, and when it was day, Gerard and Gybouars departed out of Bourdeaux and all their company, and road againe vnto the Abbey, and ſo came thether to dinner, then Gerard
                  
ſent for the Abbot to come and ſpeake with him. When the Abbot heard how Gerard was come againe to the Abbey, he had great maruaile, and ſo came to Gerard and ſayd: Sir, you be welcome, I pray you what aduenture hath brought you hether againe ſo ſhortly? I had thought that you had been gone with your Brother Huon. Sir, (quoth the Traitour) after that my Brother Huon was departed hence, hée remembred his riches that he left with you to kéepe, and bycauſe he ſhall haue great neede thereof, to giue gifts vnto the great Princes and Lordes that be about King Charlemaine, to the entent that his buſineſſe may take the better effect: Therefore my Brother hath ſent mée vnto you, deſiring you to ſend his goods vnto him by mée. Sir, (quoth the Abbot) when your Brother Huon departed hence, true it was, that hée left with mée his riches to kéepe, and charged mée, not to deliuer it to any perſon liuing, but all onely to his owne perſon: Therefore Sir, by the faith that I owe vnto my Patron Saint Mauriſe, I will not deliuer vnto you one penny.
               When the Traytour Gerard vnderſtoode that anſweare, he ſayd: Dane Abbot thou lyeſt, for whether thou wilt or not, I will haue it, and no thankes to thée, and yet thou ſhalt alſo repent thy woords. Then Gerard ſudainly tooke the Abbot by the haire of the head, and Gybouars tooke him by the one arme, and did ſo ſtrike him with a ſtaffe, that hee all to bruzed him, and then did caſt him to the earth ſo rudely, that his heart burſt in his bodie, and ſo dyed. When ye Monkes ſaw their Abbot ſlaine, they had great feare, & ſo fled away, and the two Traytours with their Swords in their hands, went after them with ſore threatnings, & when the Monks ſawe howe they could not eſcape for the two Traytours and their men, they fell downe on their knées, humbly praying them to haue pitie of them, and they would ſhew them all the gold & treaſure that was in the houſe, to do therewith at their pleaſure. Then the Traytour Gybouars ſaid how the Monks had ſpoken well, & when the Monkes ſaw how they had peace, they ſhewed to ye two Traitors the place where ye
                  
treaſure was, and deliuered to them the keyes, ſo they tooke away all the treaſure that Huon had left there, and beſides that, all the treaſure of the church, croſſes, ſenſers, chaleſſes, copes, and candleſtickes of ſiluer, all they tooke and caryed away, & if I ſhould recite all the riches that they had there, it ſhould be too long to be rehearſed. In that houſe there was a Monke who was couſin to Gibouars, whome the twoo Traytors made Abbot of that place, ſo when they had atchieued their enterpriſe, they departed with all that riches, wherewith was charged xv. ſtrong Sommers, they left not in the Abbey the value of a Florent, for euerie thing that was good they tooke with them, and ſo road vntill they came vnto Bourdeaux. Nowe as they paſſed through the Towne, they were greatly regarded of all the Burgeſſes of the Citie, who had great maruaile from whence their Lord came with ſo great riches. Theſe Traytours paſſed foorth vntill they came to the Pallaice, and there they diſcharged their Somers, then Gerard tooke the Treaſure that fiue of the Somers did carie, and laid it in his Chambers and Coffers, then hée ordained that Ten Somers ſhould be truſſed foorth to goe to Paris, and ſent them forward, & ſayd how hée would follow ſoone after. Then he and Gibouars dyned, and after meat they mounted vppon their Horſes, and the new Abbot Coozen to Gibouars with them, and two Squiers and about ſi
                     •
                  e other Seruants, and ſo road in haſt to ouer-take their Somers with their treaſure, and ſo within two Leagues they ouer-tooke them, & ſo then they all together road ſo long, vntill on a Wedneſday they came to Paris, they lodged in the Stréete next vnto the Pallaice in a good Hoſtrie, and were well ſerued, and ſo reſted vntill the next morning: then they aroſe and apparelled them in freſh array, and they led with them fiue of their Somers with riches, and two of them they preſented to the Quéene, & the other thrée to the King, wherefore they were receiued with great ioy, then after they gaue great guifts to euerie Lord in the Court, and ſpecially to the Officers, wherefore they were greatly praiſed.
               
                  But whoſoeuer tooke any guift, Duke Naymes would take neuer a penie, for he thought that all that riches was not well gotten, and that they did it for ſome craft, thereby to attaine to ſome falſe & damnable enterpriſe, this Duke was a noble, wiſe, and a true knight, and of good councell, and he very well perceiued their malice. Then the King commaunded the thrée Coffers to be brought and ſet in his chamber, and would not looke into them vntill he had ſpoken with Gerard, whome he cauſed to ſit downe by him, and Gibouars in like manner, and alſo the new Abbot, for it is an old ſaying and a true, that they that giue are alwaies welcome. Gerard quoth king Charlemaine, yée be welcome: I pray you, ſhew me the cauſe of your comming. Sir quoth Gerard, I ſhall ſhew you, the great buſineſſe that I haue to doe with your Maieſtie and your Lords, hath cauſed me to giue theſe large guifts that I haue giuen to you and others, and Sir I am ſorowfull at my heart for that which I muſt ſhew you, and I had rather be beyond the Sea, then to ſhew you that thing which I muſt néedes doe, for to hide it, that cannnot auaile me, yet I neuer ſhewed any thing in all my life with ſo ill a will, for I ſhall be blamed of many perſons, howbeit, I loue better to defend mine honour then I loue all the world beſide. Gerard quoth the King, yée ſay troth, for better it is to ſhew the troth, then to be ſilent in ſo great a matter which ſo much toucheth your honour.
            
            
               Chap. LXIX.
               
                  ¶ How the Traitour Gerard ſhewed to King Charlemaine, how Huon his brother was retourned to Bourdeaux, without doing of his Meſſuage to the Admirall Gaudiſe.
                  
               
               
                  
                  
                     SIr, quoth Gerard, true it is that you haue made me Knight, and beſide that, I am your liege man, wherfore I am bound to kéepe your honour to my power, for I am certaine I ſhall ſhew you ſuch newes, that all that bee in your Court will be ſorrowfull, much more my ſelf. Gerard quoth Charles, come to the point, & vſe no more ſuch language nor ſuch ceremonies, by that I ſée in you, it is but euill that you will ſay. Sir quoth hee, but late as I was in my houſe at Bourdeaux, and with me diuers Lords and Knights, as we were deuiſing together, I ſaw my Brother Huon enter into my houſe, and thrée with him, the one was a yong damoſell, and the other an old man called Gerames.
               
               When Duke Naymes of Bauyer heard Gerard, he had great maruaile, when he ſayd that Gerames was one of them, and ſayd: Ah deere God▪ I heare that, which with great paine I can beleeue, for if it be the ſame Gerames that I thinke it be, he and I were companions together at a tourney holden at Chalons in Champanie, where he ſlew by miſaduenture, the Earle Salamon. Sir, quoth Gerard, I ſhall ſhew you as I haue begunne, true it is, when I ſaw my brother Huon, I was greatly abaſhed, howbeit I did him honour, and made him good cheere, and made him and all his companie to dine: then after dinner I reaſoned with my brother, and demaunded of him, if he had beene at the holy Sepulcher of our Lord God. But when hee ſaw that I demaunded that of him, he was ſore abaſhed, ſo that hee wiſt not what to anſwere, and then I perceiued by his words that hee had not beene there. And then Sir, after I demaunded of him, if hee had furniſhed your meſſage to the Admirall Gaudys, but hee could giue me no anſwere, nor ſay any words that I could beléeue, and when I ſaw that I could find no truth in any of his words, I tooke him, and ſet him in priſon, howbeit, it

was full ſore againſt my will, but I conſidered in my ſelfe, that I muſt owe vnto your grace, faith & fidelitie, and that I am your man, and that for no man liuing, (though he were neuer ſo néere of my kinne) yet I would not be found with any treaſon, and therefore Sir, my Brother, his wife, and his Companion, I haue retained them in my priſon: wherefore Sir, it is in you to doe herein what it ſhall pleaſe you beſt. When all the Princes and Lords that were there vnderſtood the words of Gerard, and that he had taken his Brother Huon, and had put him in priſon, there were none but that were ſorry thereof, and many (for the loue that they bare to Huon) began to wéepe, and demaunded of Gerard, who had done that déed, ſaying, ſurely it is done by ſome manner of treaſon.
            
            
               Chap. LXX.
               
                  ¶ How the King commaunded that Huon ſhould be ſent for from Bourdeaux, to the intent that he ſhould die.
               
               
                  
                     WHen the Emperour Charlemaine vnderſtood Gerard, he aroſe vp on his féet, ſore troubled and full of yre, for by Gerardes wordes, the ancient hate and diſpleaſure that the King had to Huon for the death of Charlot his ſonne, was renewed in his heart, and ſaid openly that euery man might heare him. Lordes that be héere preſent, before you all I ſummon them that were Pledges for Huon, in ſuch wiſe, that if the Traitour Huon be not rendred into my hands, to doe with him my pleaſure: I ſhall cauſe thē to be hanged & drawne, and there is no man in my court that may be ſo hardy, as to ſpeake or deſire the contrarie, but I ſhall cauſe him to die a ſhamefull death. And when he had thus ſaid, he ſate him

downe againe, and called Duke Naymes to him and ſaid. Sir Duke, ye haue heard what Gerard hath ſayd of his brother Huon. Sir quoth the Duke, I haue well heard him but I beléeue the matter to be otherwiſe then hee hath ſayd, for there is no man will ſay the contrarie, but that all that Gerard hath ſayd, is done by falſe treaſon, and you ſhall finde it ſo, if the matter be wiſely enquired of. Sir quoth Gerard, you may ſay as it pleaſeth you, but I take God to witneſſe, and my father in Law Gibouars, and this good notable religious Abbot, and his Chaplaine, that all that I haue ſayd is true, for I would not for any thing ſay that which is not iuſt and true.
               Then Gibouars and the Abbot his Chaplaine anſwered and ſaid, how it was true that Gerard had ſayd. By my faith quoth the Duke Naymes, all you foure are falſe lyars and theeues, and the King is ill counſelled if he beléeue you. Naymes (quoth the King) I pray you how ſeemeth it vnto you, this matter betwéen the two brethren? Sir quoth the Duke, it is a great matter, he that is here before you, is the accuſer of his brother, and hath ſet him in priſon, & now he is come and accuſeth him here before you, becauſe hee knoweth well he cannot come hither to defend himſelfe. I ſhould do a great euil déed, if I had a brother that were baniſhed out of France, and if hee came to mee for refuge, and I then to take him, and ſet him faſt in priſon in mine owne houſe, and then after to goe and complaine vpon him, to the intent to purchaſe his death. I ſay there was neuer Noble man would thinke ſo to doe, and they that haue done thus, are all falſe Traytours: all Noble men ought not to beléeue any ſuch, and ſpecially he that will purchaſe ſuch a deede againſt his owne brother, I know well, al that they haue imagined and done, is by falſe treaſon, therfore I ſay according to the right, that all foure are falſe Traytours, and I iudge for my part, that they are worthie to receiue a villanous death, for they are foure falſe witneſſes.
               When Gerard heard Duke Naymes, he changed colour,

and waxed as white as ſnow, repenting in himſelfe the déede that he had done to his brother, hee curſed to himſelfe Gybouars, in that hee beleeued his counſell, yet hee anſwered Duke Naymes and ſayd. Ah Sir, ye doe me great ill to owe me your ill will. Gerard (quoth the Duke) it is for the ilneſſe that is in you, ye that would be one of the Peeres of France: certainly of ſuch a Councellor as you bée, the King hath litle néede, I had rather haue loſt one of my hands, then I ſhould once haue conſented thereto. Duke Naymes, quoth the King, I will you cauſe to come before me, all ſuch as were pledges for Huon at his departing. Then the Duke cauſed them to appeare before ye Kings preſence, of whom there were diuers Dukes and Earles. Then King Charlemaine ſayd, Sirs, ye know well yee bee pledges for Huon of Bourdeaux, and you know the paine that I laide on your heades, if Huon did not accompliſh my meſſage that I gaue him in charge, the which hee hath not fulfilled, wherefore without you deliuer Huon into my handes, yee ſhall not eſcape, but that ye ſhall die all. Sir (quoth Duke Naymes) for Gods ſake I require you, beleeue me at this time, I counſell you to take a good number of your notable men, & ſend them to Bourdeaux, and let them take Huon out of priſon, and bring him to you, and heare what hee himſelfe will ſay, and if it be true that Gerard hath ſayd, then I deſire you to haue no pittie on him, but I beléeue ſurely yee ſhall finde the matter otherwiſe then Gerard his brother hath ſayd. Naymes quoth the king, your ſaying is reaſonable, I accord thereto, I will he be ſent for.
            
            
               Chap. LXXI.
               
                  ¶ How the Emperor Charlemain went himſelfe to Bourdeaux, to cauſe Huon to bee ſlaine, for the great ill will that he bare to him.
               
               
                  
                  
                     YE haue heard before, how the good Duke Naymes did ſo much, that King Charlemain was content to ſend for Huon, but the king was ſore diſpleaſed with him, that hée would not abide ſo long as to ſend for him, but he made himſelf readie to go thether in perſon with all his traine, and commanded that the pledges ſhould be ſet in priſon till his returne: but the good Duke Naymes became pledge for them all to bée forth comming, and ſo they went not to priſon. The King made him readie, and tooke with him twelue of his Péeres, and ſo tooke their way towards Bourdeaux: God aide Huon, for hee was now in perill of his life, if God had not pitie on him.
               Thus as I haue ſhewed you, King Charlemaine nobly accompanied, rode ſo long by his iourneyes, that hee came within the ſight of Bourdeaux, and when he approched neere to the Citie, Gerard came to the king and ſaid. Sir if it pleaſe you, I would gladly ride before you into the Citie, to ordain to receiue you accordingly. Gerard quoth the King, it is no néede that you goe before to prepare for my comming, there be other that ſhall goe before, you ſhall not goe till I goe my ſelfe. When Duke Naymes heard the kings anſwere, hee ſaid to the king. Sir you haue anſwered like a noble Prince, bleſſed be he that counſelled you ſo to ſay: thus the king rode forth, without giuing any knowledge of his comming, and ſo entered into the Citie of Bourdeaux, and rode to the Pallaice and there alighted. Then dinner was made readie, & the King ſate down and Duke Naymes by him, and at other bordes other Lords and knights, and there they were richly ſerued: great brute was made in the Pallaice, ſo that Huon being in priſon, had great maruel of the noyſe that he heard, and demaunded of the Gailer what noyſe it was that hee heard aboue in the Pallaice: the Gayler anſwered with

great pride and deſpight, and ſayd, It néedes not you to demaund, for you are like to know it too ſoone, but ſince you would know it, I ſhall ſhew you the truth, it is king Charlemaine and all his Barons, who are come hether to iudge you to be hanged. Goe thy way falſe traitour quoth Huon, canſt thou not ſhew to me none other tydings but that? thus Huon anſwered the Gayler, and there was as great brute in the Citie as in the Pallaice, with lodging of the kings men.
               The Commons and Burgeſſes of the Citie of Bourdeaux had full great maruaile, why the king came thether at that time ſo ſodainely, and the king ſitting at the table made good 
                     •
                  heere, but Duke Naymes who ſate by him, began to wéepe, and could neither eate nor drinke, he roſe vp then ſodainely, ſo 
                     •
                  udely that hee ouerthrew cuppes and diſhes vpon the table. Naymes quoth the King, you haue done ill thus to doe. Sir quoth Duke Naymes, I haue good cauſe thus to doe, and I haue wondrous great maruaile that I ſée you ſo doted, I am in ſuch ſorrow thereby, that I am néere hand out of my wits: how is it that you be come into the Citie of Bourdeaux, for to eate and to drinke, and to take your eaſe? you néede not to haue gone out of France for that, for you had meate and alſo good wines ſufficient at home in your owne houſe. Ah right Noble and worthie Emperour, what meane you to do? it is no ſmall matter to iudge to death one of your twelue Peeres, & it is not poſſible to giue any true iudgement, when you and we are full of wine and ſpices. But Sir ſayd the Duke, by the Lord that mee fourmed, that whoſoeuer this day doth eate or drinke wine, as long as the life is in my bodie, I ſhall neuer loue him. Naymes quoth the King, I am content with your will.
               Then the King commanded that the table ſhould be auoyded & commanded incontinent Huon to be taken out of priſon and brought before him, they that had commiſſion to doe it, went to the priſon, and there they tooke out Huon and his wife Eſcleremond, and old Gerames, and they were all three brought before the King and his Barons. Huon ſawe

where King Charlemaine ſate among all his Lordes, and they all aroſe when they ſaw Huon and his companie ſo pale and ill coloured, by reaſon of the noyſome priſon that his brother had put them in, and Eſcleremond and old Gerames were greatly regarded: and when the Pledges ſawe Huon before the King, they ſaid. Sir, now yée may ſée Huon for whom we be pledges, wee truſt now to be quit and diſcharged, it lyeth now in you to doe with him at your pleaſure. Sirs (quoth ye King) I hold you quit, you may go from hence forth where you pleaſe, for Huon cannot now ſcape our handes, then Huon kneeled downe before the King right humblie, and when Duke Naymes ſaw him, the drops fell from his eyes, and ſayd to the king. Sir I require you giue Huon audience, and heare what hee will ſay. I am content quoth the King, let him ſay what hee will, then Huon kneeling on his knées ſayd.
               Sir, in the honour of our Lord Ieſus Chriſt, I firſt crie mercie to God, and to you and to all your Barons I complaine me of that falſe traitour that I ſée there, who was my brother, if there had béene any faith or troth in him, but I beleeue in all the world cannot be found ſo cruell and falſe a Traytour, for Cayne that ſlew Abell his brother, was neuer ſo falſe nor ſo cruell. When all the Lords heard Huon, they al beganne to weepe, ſaying each to others. Ah good Lord, where is the beautie become that was woont to be in Huon? we haue ſéene him ſo faire, that no one could paſſe him in beautie, and now wee ſée him pale and leane and ill coloured, it appeareth well, he hath not béene alwayes in the Ladies Chambers, nor among damſels to ſport and to play with him. Thus they deuiſed of him, and tooke no heede of Gerard who was by them. Then Huon ſpake againe, and ſayd to the King.
               Sir, true it is, the meſſage that you gaue me in charge to doe vnto the Admirall Gaudys, I haue doone to the verie vttermoſt as you haue commaunded vnto mee, and I haue paſſed the Sea, and came vnto Babilone to the

Admirall Gaudys, & there I required of him in the preſence of all his Lords, to haue his beard & foure great téeth. But when he had heard my demaund, he held it for a great folly, and ſo incontinent he caſt me into priſon, whereas I had died by famine, if the Admirals Daughter had not béene, whome yée may ſée yonder ſitting by the piller, and alſo by the aid of good King Oberon whome I ought greatly to loue, he is a king of the Fairie right puiſſant, and is in the Citie of Momur, and he knowing of the perill that I was in, had pitie on me, and came and ſuccoured me in ſuch wiſe & with ſo great a puiſſance, that in Babilon he ſlew al ſuch as would not beléeue in our Lord Ieſus Chriſt. Then he tooke me out of priſon, and then we entred into the Pallaice, and there wee ſlew all ſuch as wee found there. Then I went to the Admirall Gaudys and ſtrake off his head, and then I cut off his beard, and opened his mouth and drew out foure of his great téeth, and when I had them, then I deſired king Oberon to aid me, and to finde the meanes that I might ſafely bring the Beard and Téeth to your preſence, and to ſhew me where I might beſt kéepe them. Then the good king Oberon, by the grace of our Lord God and by the puiſſaunce that God had giuen vnto him, he cloſed them within the ſide of Gerames, ſo that they could not be perceiued, and Sir know for troth, ye neuer heard of ſuch a man. Now when I ſaw that I had fourniſhed your meſſuage, I retourned, & tooke with me the faire Ladie Eſcleremond Daughter to the foreſaid Admirall Gaudys, and the Twelue gentlemen that went with me out of Fraunce, who alwaies haue béen with me. And Sir, if I ſhould ſhew you the great paines and pauerties that I and they haue ſuffered, it would be too long to rehearſe, but I may well ſay, if the grace of God had not been, I had neuer come hether againe, if I had had x. liues I could neuer haue eſcaped the death. Next after all theſe paines and trauailes that I and they that were with mee ſuffered, by the grace of God we came and arriued at Rome, whereas the Pope receiued me with great ioy, & there wedded

me to Eſcleremond the Admiralles daughter, whom you may ſée yonder all deſolate, and full of diſpleaſures, and not without cauſe.
               When the Barons that were there heard the pittious complaints of Huon, euerie man of pitie beheld the Lady, who pale and ill coloured ſate ſore wéeping, ſo that ſuch as regarded her, were conſtrained to take part of her ſorrow, there was no man but they began ſore to wéepe, and Huon who was before the King, was ſorrowfull to ſée his wife make ſo great dolour. Then hee ſayd vnto the King. Sir, if you will not beleeue my ſaying, ſend to Rome to the Pope to know the truth, if you proue my words contrarie, I ſubmit my ſelfe to receiue ſuch death, as you and your Barons can deuiſe, if the Pope doe not beare witneſſe of that I haue ſayd, God forbid that I ſhould ſhew you any thing otherwiſe then truth. I haue ſayd nothing, but hee ſhall ſhew tokens that my ſaying is true, and I can ſay more if I would ſhew all, but it is not néedefull that I ſhould make a long ſermon. But Sir, thus as I haue ſhewed you, I did returne from the place that you ſent me to, and Sir know for truth, I came not ſo vnprouided, but that I brought with me great plentie of gould and ſiluer, and my companie came all with mee, and I purpoſed not to reſt in any place till I had ſpoken with your grace, for the great deſire that I had to ſee you, and ſo along I rode till I came to an Abbey heere hard by, a foure leagues hence called Saint Mauris, becauſe the Abbey was of your foundation, and not pertayning to the land of Bourdeaux, for I would not haue entred into this towne, becauſe of the commandement that you gaue me.
               Thus I came and lodged me in the Abbey, and the Abbot receiued me with great ioy, and hee ſent word of my being there to my brother Gerard, and the traytour came to mee like a falſe traytour, and brought with him but one Squire, whereby now I may perceiue, that in him was nothing but falſeneſſe and treaſon. Huon quoth Duke Naymes, your reaſon is good, for if he had beene true as he ought to haue been,

he ought to aſſemble the Barons and Lords of the Country, and ſo to haue come with them, and haue receiued you with reuerence and honour. Sir quoth Huon, it is true, but the Traytour did otherwiſe, for when hee was come to mee, by great ſubtiltie hee demaunded how I had ſped in my iourney, and whether I had ſpoken with the Admirall Gaudys or not, and declared to him your meſſage, and if I had brought with mee his beard and foure great teeth: and I ſhewed him I had accompliſhed your whole commandement, then the vnhappy Traitour demaunded where I kept them, and I ſhewed him, for I had no miſtruſt in him. Then he ſo exorted mee, that at the houre of midnight hee made me to ariſe haſtily, and mkde me and al my company ready, and ſo leapt on our horſes and rode forth our way, and when 
                     〈◊〉
                   came to a croſſe way, and ſaw that I tooke the way into France, he beganne to ſpeake rigorouſly, to haue occaſion of ſome ſtrife betwéene vs, and neere thereunto was a little wood, whereas there lay in ambuſhment Gibouars and his companie, fortie men of armes well armed, and they came and ranne at mee and my companie that were vnarmed, whereby they found in vs but ſmall reſiſtance, and ſo finallie the twelue Gentlemen that were with mee, were all ſlaine and all to hewen, and then they tooke their dead bodyes and did caſt them into the Ryuer of Gerone, then they ſtrake me to the earth, and bound faſt mine féete and handes, and blindfolded mine eyes, and in like ſort they did to my wife, and then they came to Gerames, and the Traitour my Brother came to him, and with a ſharpe knife opened his ſide, and there 
                     〈◊〉
                   tooke the beard and foure great treeth of the Admirall Gau
                        ••
                     s, the which were ſet there by king Oberon, the 
                     〈◊〉
                   Traytour knew the place whereas they lay, by rea
                  
                     •••
                   that I had ſhewed him therof before, would to God that the ſame time that hee came to Gerames to doe that cruell 
                     〈◊〉
                   that Gerames had beene armed, I am ſure then the 
                     〈◊〉
                   durſt not haue regarded him, to haue done him 
                     〈…〉
                  , but Sir when he had taken out the beard and téeth,

then he bound Gerames handes and féete, hurt as he was, as Sir ye may know the truth by him. Then Gerames ſtept forth and lift vp his cloake, and ſhewed the king the wound in his ſide, the which euerie man might ſée that was there. Sir quoth Huon to the king, when he had done all this, hee ſet vs on three leane horſes, and ſo brought vs into this towne bound hands and féete, and then ſet vs in a déepe priſon, and ſo hath kept vs hetherto with bread and water, and ſo hath taken from vs all the riches that wee brought with vs, and Sir, if hee be ſo hardie to ſay the contrarie, that it is not true that I haue ſayd, let him and Gybouars, like traytours as they be, arme themſelues, and I ſhall fight againſt them both, and if I can conquere them both, whereof I haue no doubt (with the aide of our Lord God) then let them haue as they haue deſerued: and if I cannot ouercome them, nor make them to ſhew the truth, I will that then incontinent you cauſe me to be drawne and hanged.
               By my faith quoth Duke Naymes, Sir, Huon can ſay nor offer no more, for hee offereth to proue the contrarie of that Gerard hath ſaide. Sir quoth Gerard, my brother ſayth at his pleaſure, becauſe hee knoweth well that I will not ſtriue againſt him, becauſe he is mine elder brother, let the king doe as it ſhall pleaſe him, as for me, I neuer conſented to doe ſo cruell a deede as hee layeth to my charge. Ah good Lord quoth Duke Naymes, how the falſe Traitour can cloke and couer his ilneſſe. Huon quoth Charlemain I cannot tel what you haue done, but I will you ſhew mee the beard and 
                     •
                  oure great teeth of the Admirall Gaudis. Sir quoth Huon, I crie you mercie, I haue ſhewed you how they be taken from me, by the falſe traytour my Brother Gerard. Huon quoth the Kinge, yée know well at your departure out of Fraunce, I charged you vppon paine of your life, that i
                     •
                   by aduenture you returned againe into France, that you ſhould not bée ſo hardy as to enter into this Citie of Bourdeaux, vntill you had ſpoken with mee firſt, and to keepe mee promiſe, you deliuered to mee Hoſtages, the which I haue quit ſéeing I

haue you in my handes, it lyeth now in mée either to hange you or to draw you, or to giue vnto you any other iudgment, for at your departure you were agréed that I ſhould ſo doe, and by the faith that I owe vnto Saint Denis, before it bee night I ſhall cauſe thée to bee hanged and drawne, and that ſhall I not let ſo to doe for any man liuing, for nowe I take you in your owne houſe.
               Sir, (quoth Huon) God forbid that a Kinge of Fraunce ſhould doe ſo great a crueltie. My Lord, I crie you mercie, for Gods ſake doe not to mee ſo great an out-rage, for you may knowe right well that perforce I was brought hether, and therefore great King, I require you let mee haue rightfull and true iudgement. By my faith Huon, (quoth Duke Naymes) it is but a ſmall requeſt that you make, for your right is ſo cleare, that if reaſon may be ſhewed to you, there is no man can ſay the contrarie, but that your Lands ought to bee rendred vnto you franke and frée, and your Brother Gerard to bee hanged and ſtrangled. Then the Duke ſaid to the King: My Lord, I require you haue pitie of Huon, and doe nothing to him but right, and you ſhall doe great ſinne without you doe him right. Naymes, (quoth the King) you know well it is in mée to cauſe Huon to die, but ſéeing that he is one of my Péeres, I will order him by iudgement.
               When the Lordes and other Knightes heard the King ſay ſo, they were right ioyfull, for then they beleeued that the King would haue pitie of Huon, but whoſoeuer was ioyfull, yet Duke Naymes was not content, and ſayde to the King: My Lord, by that I ſée and heare, you beare Huon but ſmall 
                     •
                  o
                     •
                  e, ſeeing that you will put him to iudgement, conſidering his deedes and ſayings to be true, and namely whereas hee 
                     •
                  ffereth to prooue it by the holy Father the Pope, then Huon with-drew backe and leaned him to a piller there by. Then the Kinge called vnto him all his Peeres and Lordes, and 
                     〈◊〉
                  .
               Sirs, I require you by the faith and truth and homage that you beare vnto mée, that for me, nor for mine amitie,

that you ayd not Huon againſt mée, nor lay nor doe no falſehood, but the moſt rightfull iudgement that you can make, doe, I charge you giue true iudgement, without any fauour or partialitie. When the Lords heard the King ſay ſo vnto them, and that he coniured them ſo ſore to doe right and iuſtice, well they perceiued, that the King had great hate vnto Huon, and that the death of his Sonne Charlot was not forgotten out of his mind. Then they all together drew apart into a Chamber, right penſiue and mourning, and they ſat downe on benches, and beheld each other without ſpeaking of any word a long ſpace. When Duke Naymes ſaw that, hée aroſe vppon his féet and ſayd: Sirs, yée haue heard how the King hath charged vs to ſay the troth, wée may perceiue well by him, that hee beareth great hate vnto Huon, who is one of our Companions, and therefore Sirs, I require you, that euerie man by himſelfe will ſay his aduiſe as hée thinketh.
            
            
               Chap. LXXII.
               
                  ¶ How the Twelue Peeres drew to counſaile, to giue ſentence vppon Huon, either with him or againſt him.
               
               
                  
                     THen there roſe vp a knight called Gaulter, hée was yſſued of the lineage of Ganelon, who was one of the Péeres of Fraunce, then hée ſayd. Sirs, as for mée, I ſay, ſéeing the caſe as it is, that Huon by right iudgement ought to bee hanged and drawne, for as yée know well, the King hath founde him in the Citie of Bourdeaux: therefore I ſay that the King may (without doing any ſinne) put him to death, and Sirs, if yee thinke that I haue ſayde good reaſon, agrée yée then to the ſame, and let Gerard his Brother be Lord and Maiſter of all

the Landes and Signiories that ſhould appertaine vnto Huon. I conſent and will as much as toucheth my part, that Gerard be one of the Péeres of Fraunce, in the place of Huon his Brother, and when Gaulter had ended his reaſon, Henry of Saint Omers ſpake and ſayd.
               Sir Gaulter, goe and ſit downe, your wordes can beare none effect, for they bée of no valure. But Sirs, (quoth hée) ſhortly to ſpeake and righteouſly to iudge, I ſay that it is reaſon, that Huon be reſtored to all his Landes, for his déede is well prooued and by good witneſſe, as our holy Father the Pope, for wee may beléeue ſurely, that Gerard his Brother that thus hath betrayed him, hath done it by falſe couetouſneſſe: therefore I ſay and iudge that Gerard bee drawne at horſe tayles, and then hanged vntill hée be dead. Then hée ſayd no more, but ſat downe againe.
               When Henry of Saint Omers had ſayd his reaſon, yt Earle of Flaunders aroſe vp and ſaid to Henry. All that you haue ſayd, I will not conſent thereto, but I ſhall ſhewe you mine aduiſe what ought to bée done. Sirs, yée all knowe well the world, the which as nowe is little woorth, for nowe adayes cannot be found ſuch true Fréends as were woont to bée, yée may well ſée by theſe two Brethren, ye ſtrife that is betwéene them is foule and diſhoneſt, wée ſhould doe well, if we could find the meanes by any manner of wayes to appeaſe them, and therefore I counſaile, let vs all together goe to the King, and deſire him to haue mercie & pitie of both theſe twoo Brethren, and that it might pleaſe him to appeaſe them, & ren
                  
                     •
                  er to Huon all his Landes, and if wee could bring it to this point, it ſhould bée a good déede as to accord them together.
            
            
               Chap. LXXIII.
               
                  ¶ How the Peeres layd all the deede vppon Duke Naymes, to giue the iudgement vpon him: But for all that euer he could ſay or doe, the King iudged Huon to die.
               
               
                  
                  
                     AFter that the Earle of Flanders had ſpoken, the Earle of Chalons roſe vp and ſaid. My Lord of Flanders, your reaſon is good, and you haue ſpoken like an Noble man: but I know ſurely, that the King will doe nothing at our deſires. But Sirs if ye thinke it good, let vs all put the whole matter vpon Duke Naymes of Bauyer, and all that hee will ſay, let vs agrée thereto, then all the Lords accorded together, and ſayd how the Earle of Chalons had ſayd right well. Then they came to Duke Naymes, and deſired him that he would take the charge of that matter vpon him, and whatſoeuer he did, they were all agreed thereto: when the Duke heard them, he ſtood ſtill a certaine ſpace, and beganne to ſtudie on the matter, and tooke all the tenne Peeres to counſell with him.
               And when the faire Eſcleremond ſaw Huon her huſband in that danger, among them with whom he ſhould haue béene in ioy, then ſhe beganne ſore to wéepe, and ſayd. Ah Huon, I ſée here great pouertie, when in the ſame proper towne whereas you ought to be Lord, to be in this danger, and beſide that, ye are not beleeued nor heard of any man that is here, for any proofe or witneſſe that yee can ſay or ſhew. King Charlemaine will not beléeue that you haue béene in the Citie of Babylone, and yet ſurely there you haue beene, for I ſaw you there ſlay my Father the Admirall Gaudys, and tooke his beard, and drew out of his mouth foure of his greateſt teeth, great pitie it were if you ſhould die for your truth and faythfulneſſe, but the thing that moſt feareth me, is that I ſée none that be héere likelie to be a Noble man, except the King, (who is chiefe of all other) and yet me thinkes hee is full of falſhood, for I ſée none other but he that ſéekes your death. But I promiſe to God, that if hee ſuffer you to haue this wrong and thus to die, I ſay then as for my part, that Mahound is better worth then your King Charlemaine, and

it be ſo that you receiue death without a cauſe, I will neuer more beléeue in your king, but renounce his law, and beléeue in Mahound.
               
               There were many Lords and knights that heard the Ladies words, whereof they had ſuch pitie, that the moſt part of them beganne to wéepe. And when Huon heard his wife, he turned toward her, and ſayd. Ladie I deſire you to leaue your ſorrow, and truſt in God almightie, who ſo oftentimes hath ſuccoured vs, you know not what he will doe, let vs bee content with his good pleaſure. Thus with ſuch words Huon appeaſed the fayre Eſcleremond. And Duke Naymes, who was in counſell with the other Peeres, ſayd to them. Sirs I haue great ſorrow at my heart bicauſe of theſe two Brethren, ſo that I cannot tell what counſaile to find: I deſire you all in this waightie matter to counſaile me, and ſhewe mee your opinions therein. Sir, (quoth the Lords) other counſaile you ſhall not haue of vs, for we haue layde all the matter vppon you, to doe therein what it ſhall pleaſe you. Sirs, (quoth the Duke) to diſſemble the matter auayleth not, but ſince that Huon muſt paſſe by iudgement, how ſay you, ſhall he be hanged or drawne? Sir quoth Gaulter, who was the firſt ſpeaker, mée thinkes he can eſcape none otherwiſe? Ah Traytour quoth the Duke, thou lieſt falſely, for it ſhall not follow after thy councell, whether thou wilt or not, there is no man this day that ſhall be ſo hardie as to iudge him to die, therefore Sirs yet ſhew me againe, whether yée will agrée to my councell. Sir quoth they, wée haue laid the charge vpon you, the which we will all abide by, but whoſoeuer was glad, Gaulter was ſorowfull & angrie, for he would haue conſented to the death of Huon.
               
               Then all the Barons right ſad and penſiue went out of the counſell Chamber, and they could find no manner of wayes how to ſaue Huon, but they all prayed to God to aide and ſuccour him. And Huon ſeeing the Barons comming ſo ſadly together, thought that the matter was not at a good poynt, whereby hee beganne ſore to weepe: when Eſcleremond
                  
and Gerames ſaw the ſorrow that Huon made, they had great pitie thereof. Then Huon beheld Duke Naymes, for he knew well all the matter lay in his hands, he feared greatly the iudgement that ſhould be made vpon him and ſaid. Thou very God and man, as I beléeue verily that thou didſt die on the holy croſſe to redeeme vs all, and that on the third day thou didſt riſe from death to life: I require thee humbly in this great neede to ſuccour me as truely as I am in the right, for more wrong no man can haue. Then the Duke Naymes of Bauier came to the king, and ſayd. Sir, will it pleaſe you to heare what we haue deuiſed? Yea quoth the king I deſire nothing elſe to know. Well Sir quoth the Duke, then I demaund of you, in what place of your Region thinke you to iudge one of your Peeres of Fraunce? Naymes quoth the King, I know well you be a Nobleman, and all that you ſay is to deliuer Huon of Bourdeaux, but I will ye know, all ſhall not profite him. Then the Duke ſayd, Sir to ſay ſo ye doe great wrong. Therefore ſir regard well in what place you will haue one of your Peeres iudged, if you know not where it ſhould be done, I will ſhew you. In your Realme are but three places to doe it in: The firſt is the Towne of Saint Omers, the ſecond is Orleance, and the third is Paris, and therefore Sir, if you will proceede vpon Huon by iuſtice, it is conuenient that it bee done in one of theſe three places, for here in this town he cannot be iudged.
               
                  Naymes quoth the King, I vnderſtand well why you ſay this, I well ſee and perceiue, that you entend to none other end, but to deliuer and quit Huon: I had thought to haue entreated him by the order of iuſtice, to the intent that none of you ſhould haue reprooued mee, therefore I ordained that he ſhould haue beene iudged by you that bee the Péeres of France, and I ſée well you haue done nothing therein, and therefore as long as you liue, you ſhall meddle no more with that matter, but by the beard that I beare on my chinne, I ſhal neuer dine nor eate meat after this dinner, til I ſée him hanged and drawne, for all your bearing of him againſt me▪
                  
Then he commanded the tables to be ſet vp, and when Gerard vnderſtood the king, he was ioyfull thereof in his hart, but he made no ſemblance of ioy, becauſe of the Lords that were there preſent. When Huon and Eſcleremond had heard how the King had ſworne the death of Huon, the dolorous weepings and teares that they made were ſo extreame, that hard it were to declare it, and Eſcleremond ſayd to Huon. Ah Sir, now I ſee well that great pitie it ſhall be the departing of vs two, but if I had a knife, I would not abide your death, but firſt I ſhoulde ſlay my ſelfe before this falſe and vntrue king. Her complaints were ſo pitifull, that moſt part of the Lords wept for pitie, and the old Gerames ſorely wept and ſayd: Ah good Lord God, in what howre was I borne? in great dolour and paine haue I continued my youth, and now in mine age thus ſhamefully to die? Thus all three made ſuch ſorrow, that it would haue made a hard heart to lament. All three thought no otherwiſe but to die, becauſe they had heard King Charlemaine make ſuch promiſe, but that which God will ſaue, no man can let: and god ſaue the good king Oberon, for king Charlemaine ſhalbe forſworne, as ye ſhal heare hereafter. Now let vs leaue ſpeaking of this pitious companie, and ſpeake of the noble king Oberon of the Fayrie, who as then was in his wood.
            
            
               Chap. LXXIIII.
               
                  ¶ How king Oberon came to ſuccour Huon, and made Gerard to confeſſe all the treaſon that he had purchaſed againſt Huon his brother.
               
               
                  
                  
                     YE haue heard before, how King Oberon was diſpleaſed with Huon, bicauſe he had broken his commandement. But when Huon had béen at Rome, and confeſſed all his ſinnes, and was aſſoiled of the Pope: then King Oberon was content, and in his heart forgaue all the ill will that he had to Huon, and as he ſat at dyner he began to wéepe. When his Seruants ſaw that, they had great maruaile, and ſayd vnto him: Sir, we deſire you to ſhew vs, why you doe weepe and be ſo troubled? there is ſome diſpleaſure done vnto you: therefore for the loue of our Lord Ieſus Chriſt, wee deſire you hide it not from vs.
               Sirs, (quoth the Kinge) I remember nowe the vnhappie Huon of Bourdeaux, who is returned from the farre parts, and he hath paſſed by Rome, and there hath taken his Wife in mariage, and is confeſſed of all his ſinnes, for the which ſinnes he hath béen by me ſore puniſhed. But it is time if euer I will doe him any good, now to ayd him and to ſuccour him againſt King Charlemaine, for he hath ſworne neuer to goe to bed, vntill he haue hanged & drawne the poore Huon, but by the grace of our Lord God, Charlemaine ſhall bée forſworne: for at this time I ſhall ſuccour and ayd him, for he is as now in ſuch a danger, that without he be ſuccoured, incontinent death is néere him, he was neuer in his life in ſuch perill. He is now in the Pallaice at Bourdeaux, & his Wife the fayre Eſcrelemond and the old Gerames, with fetters on their feete, being in great ſorrow, and king Charlemaine is ſet at dinner, and hath made his oath to hang Huon, but yet whether hee will or not, he ſhall be periured, for I will goe to my Fréend Huon and helpe him at his neede, therefore I wiſh my Table and all that is thereon, neere to King Charlemaines Table, and ſomewhat aboue his about two foot hyer, & alſo I will, bicauſe I haue heard ſay, that often times of a little Caſtle commeth a greater: therefore I will that

on my table be ſet my Cup, my Horne, and my Armour, the which Huon conquered of the Gyant Angolaffer, and alſo I wiſh with me a C.M. men of armes, ſuch as I was woont to haue in battaile. He had no ſooner ſaid the words, but by the will of god and the puiſſance of the Fayrie, his table and all that king Oberon had wiſhed, was ſet iuſt by king Charlemaines table, more higher and greater then his was.
               When king Charlemaine ſaw the table, and the Cuppe, Horne, and coate of maile, he had great maruaile, and ſaid to Duke Naymes: Sir Duke, I beléeue you haue enchaunted mée. Sir, (quoth the Duke) neuer in my life I me
                     •
                  le
                     •
                   with any ſuch matter: the Lords & ſuch as were there, were greatly abaſhed howe that matter came to paſſe. Gerames who ſat néere to Huon, when he ſaw the Table, the Cup and horne of Iuorie, & the Armour thereon, he knew them well, and ſaid to Huon. Sir, be not diſmayed, for on yonder Table that you may ſée, is your Cup & horne of Iuorie, and coat of maile, whereby I perceiue that you ſhall bée ſuccoured by King Oberon. Huon beheld the Table, & had great ioy when he ſaw it, then he lifted vp his hands to heauen and thanked our Lord God, that hée would viſit ſuch a poore ſinner as hee was ſaying: Ah Kinge Oberon, in many great needs haue you ſuccoured me. Therewith arriued King Oberon in the Citie, whereof the Burgeſſes & the Commons were greatly abaſhed, when they ſaw ſuch a number of men of war enter into their citie, without any knowledge before. When king Oberon was within the Towne & all his company, he ſaid to his Lords: Sirs, looke that you ſet good watch at euery gate, ſo that no man go out, the which they did diligently, for at euerie gate they ſet x.M. men. Then King Oberon tooke the way to the Pallaice, and at the gate he left x.M. men, commanding them vpon payn of their liues, that they ſhould not ſuffer any man to paſſe out, and alſo he commanded, that if they heard him blow his Horne of Iuorie, that incontinent they ſhould come into the Pallaice to him, & ſlay all ſuch as they ſhould find there. Then king Oberon went vp into the

Pallaice, and many of his Lords with him, he was richly apprrelled in cloath of gold, and the border thereof was ſette with rich precious ſtones, goodly it was to behold, for a fayrer little perſon could not be found: hee paſſed iuſt by King Charlemaine, without ſpeaking of any word, and went ſo néere to him, that he ſhouldred him ſo rudely, that his bonnet fell from his head. Ah good Lord quoth Charlemaine, I haue great maruaile what this dwarfe may be, that ſo rudly hath ſhouldred me, and almoſt ouerthrowne my table, he is fierce when hee thinkes ſcorne to ſpeake to me, howbeit, I will ſee what hee will doe, I cannot tell what hee thinketh to doe, but me ſeemeth hee is right ioyfull, and alſo he is the fayreſt creature that euer I ſaw. When Oberon had paſſed by the King, he came to Huon and wiſhed the fetters from all their féete, and led them before Charlemaine without any woord ſpeaking, and cauſed them to ſit downe with him at his own table that he had wiſhed thither: then he tooke his cup, and made thereon thrée croſſes, then incontinent the cup was ful of wine, then King Oberon tooke it, & gaue it to Eſcleremond to drinke, and then to Huon, and ſo to Gerames, and when they had all three dranke well, he ſaid to Huon. Friend ariſe vp, and take the cuppe and beare it to King Charlemaine, and ſay vnto him, that he drinke to you in the name of peace, if hee refuſe it, hee did neuer ſuch a follie in all his life. King Charlemaine, who ſate néere to them at his owne table, hearing king Oberons words, wiſt not what to thinke, and ſo ſate ſtill and durſt not ſpeake one word, for the great maruailes that he ſaw there, and no more durſt none of his men, for they were ſo abaſhed, that there was none there but that gladly would haue béene a hundred leagues thence. But whoſoeuer was afrayde, Gerard was not verie well pleaſed.
               Then Huon roſe from Oberons table, and tooke the cuppe, and went therewith to king Charlemaine, and deliuered it to him. The king tooke it, & durſt not refuſe it, as ſoone as it was in his hands it was drie & voyde, & not a drop of wine therin.

Fellow quoth the King, you haue inchaunted me. Sir quoth Oberon, it is becauſe you are full of ſin, for the cup is of ſuch dignitie, that none can drinke thereof without he be a noble man, and cleane without deadly ſinne, and I know one that ye did not long agoe, the which as yet you were neuer confeſſed of, and if it were not to your ſhame, I ſhould ſhew it héere openly, that euery man ſhould heare it. When the Emperour Charlemaine heard King Oberon, hee was abaſhed, and afraid that King Oberon would haue ſhamed him openly: then Huon tooke againe the cuppe, and then incontinent it was full of wine againe, and then Huon bare it to Duke Naymes, who ſate next to Charlemaine. Naymes tooke the cup and dranke thereof at his pleaſure: but all the other could not touch the cup they were ſo full of ſinne. Then Huon returned to king Oberon, and ſate downe by him, then Oberon called to him Duke Naymes, and commanded him to riſe from Charlemaines table, and to ſit downe by him at his table, the which Duke Naymes did, for hee durſt not ſay nay. Then Oberon ſayd to him. Sir Duke Naymes, right good thanks I giue you, in that you haue béene ſo true and iuſt to Huon, and thou King Charlemaine that art Emperour of the Romaines, behold here Huon, whom wrongfully and without cauſe you haue diſenherite, and would take from him all his lands, hee is a Noble man and true, and beſides that I ſay vnto you for truth, hee hath done your meſſage vnto the Admirall Gaudys, and I ayded to bring him to his death, and then hée tooke out of his mouth foure of his greateſt téeth, and alſo did cutte off his white beard, and I did 
                     •
                  loſe them within the ſide of Gerames by the will of God, this that I haue ſayd, you may bee ſurely beléeue, for at all theſe déedes I was preſent. Sée yonder falſe Traitour Gerard, who by his malicious intent hath done this treaſon, and to the ende that you may know the matter more ſurely, you ſhall heare it confeſſed by his owne mouth.
               Then Oberon ſayd to Gerard, I coniure thée by the diuine puiſſance and power that God hath giuen mee, that héere

before King Charlemaine and all his Lords, thou ſhew and declare ye troth of this treaſon, which thou haſt done againſt Huon thy Brother. When Gerard vnderſtoode Oberon, hee was in ſuch feare that hée trembled for dread, for hée felt in himſelfe, that hee coulde haue no power to hide the troth of the treaſon, & then he ſayd. Sir, I ſée well to hide the troth cannot auaile mée, therefore true it is, I went to the Abbey of Saint Mauriſe to ſée my Brother Huon, and Gybouars accompanied with Fortie men at armes, wee departed from this Citie and layde our ambuſhment in a little wood about twoo Leagues from this Citie, to watch when my Brother Huon ſhould paſſe by that way. Gerard, (quoth King Oberon) ſpeake out hyer that you may the better be heard, and that euerie man may heare the treaſon & falſeneſſe that you haue done vnto your Brother. Sir, (quoth Gerard) I wote not what to ſay, for I haue done ſo ill and falſely againſt my Brother, that more ill I could not doe, and I am aſhamed to recount it. But to ſay truely, that before it was midnight, I made my Brother to riſe and to depart from the Abbey, and when wee came néere the place where as my Father in law Gibouars was with his ambuſhment, I began to ſtriue with my brother ſo highly, that Gibouars might heare mee, who when he heard me ſpeake, he brake forth of his ambuſhment, and ranne at my brothers companie, and ſo ſlew them all, except theſe three that be here, then we tooke the dead bodies, and did caſt them into the Riuer of Gerone, then wee tooke Huon and his wife, and the old Gerames, and bound their handes and féete, and blindfolded their eyes, and ſo brought them on thrée leane horſes into the Citie, and I tooke out of the ſide of old Gerames the beard and foure great téeth, the which (if it pleaſe you) I ſhall fetch from the place where I left them.
               
                  Gerard quoth Oberon, you ſhall not neede to take that labour, for when it ſhall pleaſe me, I can haue them without you. Well Sir quoth Gerard, thus when I had ſet them in priſon, I went backe againe to the Abbey, and then I demaunded

of the Abbot and Couent, where the treaſure was that my Brother had left there, and that hée ſhould deliuer it to me, bearing him in hand that my Brother Huon had ſent for it. The good Abbot would not deliuer it to me, wherefore Gybouars and I ſlew him, & then wée made this Monke héere the Abbot, who is néere of kinne to Gybouars, to the entent that he ſhould ayd to beare vs witneſſe, and to iuſtifie our ſayings. Then we tooke all the treaſure that was there, and brought it hether, then I charged Tenne Somers, the which I had with me to King Charlemaines Court at Paris, the which treaſure I gaue part thereof to the King, and to other, by whom I thought to be aided to performe mine vnhappie Enterprize, and I beléeued ſurely, that by reaſon of the riches that I gaue, that my Brother ſhould haue receiued death, and thereby I to haue béene Lord and Maiſter of all his Landes and Signiories, and all this treaſon that I haue ſhewed, Gybouars cauſed me to doe it, or elſe I had neuer thought to haue done it.
               
                  Gerard, (quoth King Oberon) if it pleaſe our Lord Ieſus Chriſt, you and he both ſhalbe hanged by the necks, there is no man liuing ſhall ſaue you. Sir Emperour Charlemaine, you haue well heard the confeſſion of Gerard, of ye great treaſon that Gybouars and he haue done vnto Huon: but by the Lord that fourmed me to his ſemblance, both they two and the Abbot and his Chaplaine, ſhall bée hanged for their falſe witneſſe. By the faith that I owe to Saint Denis, (quoth King Charlemaine) they cannot eſcape it. Sir, (quoth Duke Naymes) it is great ſinne to trouble a noble man, you ſhall doe well if all foure be hanged. When all the Lordes heard Gerard confeſſe that great treaſon that hée had done vnto his Brother, they bleſſed them, and had great maruaile of the falſe treaſon that the one Brother did to the other.
            
            
               
               Chap. LXXV.
               
                  ¶ How King Oberon cauſed to be hanged the foure Traytours, Gerard, Gybouars, and the two Monkes, for their falſe witneſſe, and of the peace made betweene Huon and Charlemaine: And how King Oberon gaue vnto Huon his Realme of the Fayrie.
                  
               
               
                  
                     WHEN King Oberon had heard Gerard confeſſe the treaſon done to his Brother, and heard howe Gerard had offered to goe and fetch the beard & great téeth, and how he had denied him to goe: then he ſayd, I wiſh them here vpon this Table, he had no ſooner made his wiſh, but they were ſet on the Table, whereof all ſuch as were there hadde great maruaile. Sir, (quoth Huon to King Oberon) humbly I require you, that of your grace you will pardon my Brother Gerard all the ill that he hath done againſt me, for he did it by Gybouars, and as for me, héere, and before God I pardon him, and Sir, if you will doe thus, I ſhalbe content therewith. And to thentent that we may vſe our liues from henceforth in good peace and loue, I will giue him the halfe part of my Lands & Signiories, and Sir, in the honour of our Lord Ieſus Chriſt, haue pity of him. When ye Lords that were there preſent vnderſtood Huon, they all for pity began to wéepe, & ſayd among themſelues, that Huon was a noble knight, and that it had béen pity if ye matter had framed otherwiſe. Sir Huon, (quoth Oberon) it is not neceſſarie to requeſt this, for all the gold that is in the world ſhall not reſpit their deaths. I wiſh by the puiſſance that I haue in the Fayrie, that here beneath in the meadow there be a paire of Gallows, and all iiij. thereon hanged. Incontinent it was don, & all iiij. hanged: thus as ye haue hard ye traitors were paid their deſerts.
               
                  When king Charlemaine had ſéene the great maruailes that were done by king Oberon, he ſayd to his Lords. Sirs I beléeue this man be ſome God himſelfe, for there is no mortall man can doe this that he hath done. When Oberon vnderſtood the Emperour, he ſayd. Sir know for truth I am no God, but I am a mortall man as you be, and was engendred on a woman as you were, and my father was Iulius Ceſar, who engendred me on the Ladie of the Secret Iſle, who had béene before louer to Florymont ſonne to the Duke of Albany, ſhe bare me nine moneths in her wombe, and I was begotten by Iulius Ceſar, when he went into Theſſaly after Pompey the Great, he was amorous of my mother becauſe ſhe propheſied that my Father Iulius Ceſar ſhould winne the battaile as he did, and when I was borne, there were with my mother many Ladies of the Fairye, and by them I had many gifts, and among other there was one, that gaue mee the gift to be ſuch a one as you ſée I am, whereof I am ſory, but I cannot be none otherwiſe, for when I came to the age of thrée yéeres, I grew no more, and when this Ladie ſawe that I was ſo little, to content againe my mother, ſhee gaue me againe, that I ſhould be the faireſt creature of the world, and other Ladyes of the Fairie gaue me diuers other gifts, the which I ouerpaſſe at this time, and therefore Sir know for truth, that aboue all things God loueth faith and troth, when it is in men, as it is here in Huon, and becauſe I know for certaine that he is true and faithfull, therefore I haue alwaies loued him.
               After that king Oberon had ended his words, and ſhewed the Emperour Charlemaine of all his eſtate, he called Huon and ſayd. Sir ariſe vp, and take the beard and the téeth, and beare them to king Charlemaine, and deſire him to render you your landes as he promiſed. Sir quoth Huon, I ought ſo to doe, then Huon came to King Charlemaine, and ſayd. Sir by your grace, and if it may pleaſe you, receiue here the beard and téeth of the Admirall Gaudis. Huon quoth the King, I hold you quit, and I render to you all your lands and ſigniories,

and pardon you of all mine ill will, and put all rancour from mée, and from hencefoorth I retaine you as one of my Péeres. Sir, (quoth Huon) of this I thanke God and your grace. Then the Emperour Charlemaine clipped and kiſſed Huon, in token of peace and loue.
               When the Lords ſaw that, they wept for ioy, and thanked God that the peace was made, and eſpecially Duke Naymes was ioyfull: then within a while diuers of ye Lords departed from the Court. Then king Oberon called Huon vnto him and ſayd: Sir, I commaund you as dearely as you loue mée, that this ſame day foure yeare to come, that you come into my Citie of Momur, for I will giue you my Realme and all my dignitie, the which I may lawfully do, for at my birth it was giuen me that I might ſo doe, for it lyeth in mée to giue it whereas I thinke beſt, and bicauſe I loue you ſo entirely, I ſhall ſet the crowne vpon your head, and you ſhalbe King of my Realme. And alſo I will, that you giue vnto Gerames all your Landes and Signiories in theſe parts, for he hath well deſerued it, for with you and for your loue, hee hath ſuffered many great trauailes. Sir, (quoth Huon) ſéeing this is your pleaſure, I ought well to be pleaſed therewith, and I ſhall accompliſh all your commandements. Huon, (quoth Oberon) know for troth, I ſhall not abide longe in this world, for ſo is the pleaſure of god, it be houeth me to go into paradice, where as my place is appointed in the fayrie, I ſhall bide no longer, but beware as dearly as you loue your life, that yée faile not to be with me at the daie that I haue appointed, beware that yée forget it not, for if yee faile, I ſhall cauſe you to die an ill death, and therefore remember it well. When Huon heard king Oberon, he was right ioyfull, and ſtooped downe to haue kiſſed his féet, but then Gloriant and Mallaborn tooke him vp. Then ſaid Huon: Sir, for this great guift I thanke you.
            
            
               
               Chap. LXXVI.
               
                  ¶ How King Oberon departed, and tooke leaue o f king Charlemaine and of Huon and Eſcleremond, and alſo how king Charlemaine departed from Bourdeaux.
                  
               
               
                  
                     WHen king Oberon had imparted to Huon as much as he would that he ſhould doe, then he ſaid to Huon, how he would depart, and tooke leaue of him, and kindly embraced him: then Oberon ſtoode ſtill a little while and beheld Huon and began to lament, when Huon ſawe that, he was ſorie in his heart and ſaid. Ah Sir king, I deſire you to ſhew me why you make this ſorow at your departure? Huon quoth Oberon I ſhall ſhew you, it is for pitie that I haue of you, for I ſweare by him that created me, that before I ſhall ſée thée againe, thou ſhalt ſuffer ſo much paine, trauaile, pouertie, hunger, thirſt, feare, and aduerſitie, that there is no toong can tell it, and thy good wife ſhall ſuffer ſo much, that there is no creature that ſhall ſée her, but ſhall haue great pitie of her. Ah Sir quoth Huon, then I require you to aide & comfort me. Huon quoth Oberon, what comfort would ye haue of me? Sir quoth Huon, I deſire you to let me haue your horne of Iuory, to thintent that if I ſhould haue any néed, that you may ſuccour me, for ſo well I know you, that you will come and ſuccour me. Huon, (quoth Oberon) ſéeing I haue agréed you with Charlemaine, truſt not on me to be ſuccoured in any of your buſineſſe, ſuffice you with the gift that I haue giuen you, euen all my Realme and puiſſance that I haue in the Fayrie, truſt on none other ſuccour of mē. Sir, I am ſorrie thereof quoth Huon, yt it may be none otherwiſe.
               Then King Oberon tooke leaue of King Charlemaine, and

of Duke Naymes, and of all other Lords there preſent, and went to Huon and embraced him, and tooke his leaue of him, and of Eſcleremond and Gerames, and ſayd to Eſcleremond: I commend you to God, and deſire you, if you haue done well hetherto, that you will perſeuere euer better and better, and beare alwaies fayth and honour to your huſband. Sir quoth ſhe, I pray God I liue no longer then, if I doe the contrary. Thus King Oberon departed, and after his departure, king Charlemaine made readie his companie, and tooke leaue of Huon and of Eſcleremond and Gerames, and they brought the King about two leagues off, and then tooke their leaues of him, & of Duke Naymes, and of all the Lords. Then the king ſayd Huon, if any war be moued againſt you, or if that you haue any great affaires to do, let me haue knowledge thereof, and I ſhal come and ſuccour you, or elſe ſend you ſuch aide as ſhall bee ſufficient. Sir quoth Huon I thanke your grace, and ſo tooke his leaue of the king, and returned to Bourdeaux, whereas he was receiued with great ioy. Now let vs leaue ſpeaking of Huon, and ſpeake of Oberon of the Fayrie.
            
            
               Chap. LXXVII.
               
                  ¶ How king Oberon deuiſed with his knights, in the Citie of Momur in the Fayrie, of the deedes of Huon of Bourdeaux, and of that which ſhould happen after to him.
               
               
                  
                     WHen King Oberon was departed from Bourdeaux, he came to his Citie of Momur, and there he began ſore to wéep, Then Gloryant demaunded of him, why he made that ſorrow? Gloryant quoth Oberon, it is for the vnhappy Huon, he is alone, and I know well hereafter hee ſhall be betrayed, and all for Eſcleremond his wife, for though that hee haue ere this time ſuffered great trauaile, and much trouble and pouerty,

yet I know ſurely, that he ſhall ſuffer more then euer he did, and hée ſhall haue no ſuccour of any man liuing. Why Sir, (quoth Gloriant) how can that be? for Huon is a great Lord, and hath many fréends, and is the moſt hardieſt Knight now liuing, and hée is at accord wich King Charlemaine, therefore he were a great Foole that would make him any warre, or doe him any diſpleaſure. Well, (quoth Oberon) God aid him in all his affaires, for ere it be long hée ſhall haue much to doe.
               Thus Oberon entred into his rich Pallaice, and ſayde againe. Ah deare Knight Huon. I knowe well you ſhall bee betrayed for the loue of your Wife, who is faire and good, and if you take not good héede, you ſhall leaue her and your ſelfe in great perill of death, and if you eſcape the death, yet you ſhall ſuffer ſuch paine and pouertie, that there is no Clearke liuing ſo ſage that can put it in writing. Sir, (quoth Gloriant) mée thinkes this cannot bée, ſéeing the loue that is now betwéen him and Charlemaine. Gloriant, (quoth Oberon) yet I ſay againe vnto you, that before this yeare be paſſed, Huon ſhall be in ſuch diſtreſſe and ſo hardly kept, that if he had Ten Realmes, he would giue them all to be out of that danger that he ſhalbe in. Then Gloriant was penſiue, and ſaid. Alas Sir, for Gods ſake neuer leaue Huon your fréend in ſuch danger, but rather ſuccour him. Nay ſurely, (quoth Oberon) that will I not doe, ſéeing I haue promiſed him my dignitie and Land, he ſhall not be aided nor ſuccoured by me, for he ſhall be cloſed in ſuch a place, that I would not goe thether for Tenne of the beſt Cities of the world. Nowe let vs returne vnto Huon, being in his Pallaice at Bourdeaux.
               
            
            
               
               Chap. LXXVIII.
               
                  ¶How Huon tooke homage of his men, and chaſticed his Rebels, and of three Pilgrimes, by whom much ill fell after, as yee ſhall heare.
               
               
                  
                     AFter that king Charlemaine
                   was departed from Bourdeaux, & that Huon was returned, he aſſembled al his Barons, to whome hee made good chéere, and there they tooke their Landes and Fées of him, and made their homage. Then hée tooke a Thouſand choſen Knights with him, & road to his Lands, and tooke poſſeſſion of Townes and Caſtles, and was obayed in euerie place: except of one named Angelers, who was Coozen germaine to Amerie, whom Huon had ſlaine before at Paris, before the Emperour Charlemaine for the loue of Charlot. This Angelars was falſe and a Traytour, and hee had a ſtrong Caſtle within thrée Leagues of Bourdeaux, he would not hold of Huon, nor obay him though he was his Leige-man. When Huon ſaw that he wold not hold of him, nor doe him homage: he was ſore diſpleaſed, and made promiſe, that if that he might get him perforce, he would ſurely hange him vp, and as many as were in the Caſtle with him.
               Then Huon aſſailed the Caſtle, and they within defended themſelues valiantly, ſo that many were hurt and ſlaine on both parts, Huon was there eight daies, and could not win the Caſtle: then Huon ordained before the place a paire of Gallowes, and vppon the ninth day he made a freſh aſſault by ſuch ſtrength, that hee wanne the Caſtle and entred perforce. Angelars was taken and Fortie men with him, and they were all hanged on the Gallowes. Then Huon gaue

the Caſtle vnto one of his Knightes, and then hee departed, and went to the Caſtle of Blay, whereas hee was receiued with great ioy. And the faire Eſcleremond was in the Pallaice at Bourdeaux, well accompanied with Ladies & Damſels, and as they were deuiſing together, there entred into the Pallaice thrée Pilgrimes, who right humbly ſaluted the Ladie Eſcleremond. Sirs, (quoth the Lady) I pray you ſhew mee out of what Countrey yée are come? Madame, (quoth one of them) knowe for troth that we are come from Ieruſalem, and haue made our offering to the holy Sepulchre, wée haue ſuffered much pouertie in our iourney, wherefore Ladie wee require you humbly for the loue of our Lord Ieſus Chriſt, to giue vs ſome meat. Sirs, (quoth ſhée) you ſhall haue ynough, and then ſhe commaunded two of her Knights to ſée that the Pilgrimes ſhould haue meat and drinke, and ſo they were ſet at the end of the Hall, and a Table couered for them, and thereon bread, fleſh, and wine, they were well ſerued. Then ye Ducheſſe Eſcleremond went to viſit them, and demaunded where they were borne? and whether they would goe? Madame, (quoth they) wee bee all thrée borne at Vyenna, and thether wee would returne. Sirs, God bee your guide, (quoth the Ladie) and ſhe gaue them Ten Florents, whereof they had great ioy & thanked the Ducheſſe: but alas, that guifte was ill beſtowed, as you ſhall heare héereafter.
               They departed & tooke their way, and trauailed ſo longe, that vpon a Tueſday they arriued halfe a League from 
                     Ʋyenna, and there they met Duke Raoul who was going a kauking, hée was a great and puiſſant Lord of Lands and Signiories, and hardy in déedes of armes, great pittie it was that he was ſuch a Traytour, for a more ſubtill man coulde not be knowne, for all the daies of his life he was euer a moouer of warre and ſtrife, and to doe treaſon without hauing regard either to kinne or other, God confounde him, for by him and his cauſe Huon ſuffered ſo much ill, that it cannot bee recounted. This Duke Raoul was to marrie, thus as

hée was in the feelds a hauking, and twentie Knights with him, he met the ſaid thrée Pilgrimes, and anone hee knewe them. Then he road vnto them and ſaid: Sirs, yée be welcome home, they were ioyfull, when they ſawe the Duke their Lorde ſalute them ſo humbly, and for ioye thereof they ſhewed him ſuch newes, that by the occaſion thereof, twentie Thouſand Knights loſt after their liues, and Raoul himſelfe receiued the death, and Huon had ſuch trouble, that hée had neuer none ſuch before, as you ſhall heare héereafter.
               Then the Duke ſaid to the Pilgrimes: Freends, I pray you ſhew mee, by what Countreys you haue paſſed to come hether. Sir, (quoth they) we haue paſſed by Fraunce, and firſt we were at Bourdeaux, and there we found the Duches Eſcleremond wife to Huon of Bourdeaux, of whome you haue hea
                     •
                  d ſo much ſpeaking, for ſhe is ſo faire and ſo well fauoured, ſo ſwéet, pleaſant and gracious as can bée deuiſed, ſhée is Daughter to ye Admirall Gaudiſe, whom Huon hath ſlaine and taken her to his wife, great pitie it is that Huon ſhould haue ſuch a wife, for ſhe were méeter to be wife to a puiſſant Kinge, for whoſoeuer had ſuch a wife to lye by, might well ſay that there were none like her in all the world, would to our Lorde God Sir, that ſhee were your wife. When the Duke heard that, hee chaunged colour, and greatly coueted the Ladie in his heart, ſo that he was ſtriken with ſuch violent and burning loue, that he had to the Ladie Eſcleremond, as he promiſed and ſware that he would haue her whoſoeuer ſayd the contrarie, and ſaid that he would ſlay Huon, & them haue Eſcleremond to his Wife. Thus Duke Raoul ſware the death of Huon, & then hée departed from the Pilgrimes: ill was beſtowed the almes that Eſcleremond had giuen them.
            
            
               
               Chap. LXXIX.
               
                  ¶ How Duke Raoul of Auſtrich, by the report of the Pilgrims▪ was amourous of the faire Eſcleremond, and of the Tourney that was proclaimed, to the entent to haue ſlaine Huon.
                  
               
               
                  
                     THus Duke Raoul returned to the Citie of Vyenna right penſiue, & ſent for his priuie counſaile, and then he commaunded them to aſſemble as many people as they could, bicauſe he ſayd that he would goe to his Vncle the Emperour of Almaine, to whome he ſent a ſecret Meſſuage, that hee ſhould cauſe a Tourney to bee proclaimed in ſome conuenient place, to the entent that the Knights of Almaine and of other Countreys ſhould aſſemble there. The falſe Traytor did it for a craft; to the entent that Huon by his proweſſe and hardineſſe ſhold come to that Tourney. The Meſſenger roade foorth vntill he came to Straſbrough, whereas hee found the Emperour who was vncle to Raoull, for he was the Emperours brothers ſonne. When the Emperour heard the meſſuage, hee was ioyfull, and not a little pleaſed to heare ſuch newes frō his Nephew Duke Raoull, whome he loued entierly, and to doe him pleaſure, he ſent to all Lands vnder his obeyſance, to all Knights and Squiers, ſuch as of cuſtome were woont to iuſt and tournay, deſiring them to come at a day aſſigned to the citie of Mayence, for there he would kéepe open Court.
               Now the Emperour knew not for what entent his Nephew Raoull had deuiſed that tournay: Alas he did it but to find the place to ſlay Huon, to thintent to haue his wife Eſcleremond. Then Duke Raoull aſſembled his Barons, eſpecialle ſuch as he had perfect truſt in, he ſhewed them at large the cauſe why he had aſſembled all the people to goe to the

tournay. Therefore Sirs quoth he, I will that yée ſweare to me the death of Huon of Bourdeaux, for I will that yée and I put all our vttermoſt to ſlay him, and then I will wed his wife, of whome I am ſo amourous, that I cannot ſléepe nor take any reſt. The ſame time that they thus made promiſe and ſware the death of Huon, there was among them a varlet with Duke Raoul, who in his youth had ſerued Huon of Bourdeaux: now when he vnderſtood, that if Huon came to ye Tournay, there hee ſhould be murdered: as priuily as he could, he departed from 
                     Ʋyenna, and neuer reſted vntill hee came to the Citie of Bourdeaux, whereas he found Duke Huon in his Pallaice with his Lords, who had béen before aduertiſed, that there ſhould be held a great Tournay at Mayence in Almaine, and he deuiſed with his Lords how to goe thether.
               The ſame time the Varlet came thether, and humbly ſaluted Duke Huon, who ſaid to him: Friend where haſt thou béen ſo long? Sir quoth the Varlet, I come now from Vyenna in Auſtrich, where Duke Raoul who is Lord thereof, hath proclaymed a Tourney in euery Countrey, but Sir, if you goe thether, you ſhall bée ſlaine, for this Tourney is deuiſed for none other entent, bicauſe it is too well knowne, that there can bee no hye déedes of armes done in any place, but that you will bee preſent at it. And when they haue ſlayne you, then Duke Raoul will haue the Ducheſſe your Wife in mariage: therefore Sir, (for Gods ſake) aduiſe you well that you come not there, in as much as you loue your life, for you cannot eſcape, there be twentie Thouſand men that haue ſworne your death, therefore if you enter into the Tourney, you can neuer eſcape the death, and I haue heard Duke Raoul ſweare, that when he hath ſlaine you, hée will keepe all your Landes. When Duke Huon had heard the Varlet, hee ſware by God and made a ſolemne promiſe, that Duke Raoul ſhould dearely buy his falſe treaſon.
               Then the Ducheſſe Eſcleremond knéeled downe before Huon and ſayd: Deare Lord, I deſire you to forbeare your going

thether at this time, for I haue heard often repeated, that this Duke Raoull is puiſſant and hath great Lands, & beſides is Nephew to the Emperour of Almaine, and alſo I haue heard ſay, that a faller Traytour there is none lyuing in this world. Madame quoth Huon, I haue well heard you, but by the Lord that fourmed me to his Image, though I ſhould looſe halfe my landes, yet will I goe to ſée the Traytor, what, thinketh he to abaſh me with his threatenings? If I may méete him at the Tournay, or in any other place where ſoeuer it be, though he had with him ten Thowſand men of armes, and that I had alonely but my ſwoord in my hand, I ſhall ſlay him whatſoeuer ſhould fall thereof, and let our Lord God do with me as it ſhall pleaſe him: I ſhall neuer haue ioy at my heart till I haue ſlaine him.
               When the Ducheſſe heard Huon how he would doe none otherwiſe, and that ſhée could not let him of his enterprize, ſhe was ſorrowfull and ſaid. Sir, ſéeing it is your pleaſure, reaſon it is that I muſt be content, but yet Sir I deſire you to take with you x.M. men well armed, to thintent that ye be not found vnprouided: ſo that if ye be aſſayled, yet yée may be of ſufficient puiſſance to reſiſt your enemies, and that it will pleaſe you to ſuffer me to goe with you, and I will he armed with my ſhéeld and ſwoord by my ſide, and if I may méete Duke Raoull, I ſhall giue him ſuch a buffet, that I ſhall ſtrike him from his horſe, for I am ſo diſpleaſed with him, that there is no ioynt in me but in trembleth for anger, and I ſhall neuer haue ioy at my heart till I be reuenged of him. When Huon heard the Ducheſſe his wife, he was well comforted, and began to laugh and ſaid. Faire Ladie, I giue you great thankes for your wordes, but yee are too farre gone with child to ride armed, it is a vij. moneths paſt ſince yée were firſt with child, then Huon made to be proclaimed in all his lands, that euery man ſhould be readie to goe with him to the Tourney at Mayence. The Dukes entent was anon knowen throughout all the countrie,

ſo that it being ſpread abroad, the brute therof came to the hearing of the Duke Raoull, and when he heard that Huon would come to the Tournay hee was not a little ioyfull thereof, then hee ſware he would go and ſée Eſcleremond in the guiſe of a Pylgrime, and then hee putte on a beggers garment, and tooke a ſtaffe and a wallet, hée ſhewed his intent to them of his priuie Councell, they would haue ſtopped his going, but they could not.
               Thus he apparelled himſelfe like a beggar, and with an hearbe rubbed on his face and handes, that ſuch as had not ſéene him otherwiſe apparelled, could not haue knowne him, hée was ſo foule and blacke, then he deſired his men to kéepe ſecret his enterpriſe. Then hee departed from Vyenna, and neuer reſted till hee came to the Citie of Bourdeaux, and ſo went vnto the Pallayce, where hée founde Huon amongſt his Barons making great chéere and feaſt, for vnto him were come diuers Lords and Knights, deuiſing of the Tourney that ſhould be holden at Mayence. Thus Raoull came before Huon, and deſired him for the honor of our Lord God to giue him ſome meat and almes. Friend quoth Huon, thou ſhalt haue inough, but I pray thée tell me from whence thou commeſt, and whether thou wilt go, and of what countrie thou art. Sir quoth Raoull, I was borne in the countrey of Berry, but it is xx. yeres paſt ſince I was there, when I departed thence I was but yong, for if I ſaw my father or mother now before me I ſhould not know them, & Sir I came frō beyond the Sea, wheras I haue been priſoner among ye Sarazins, the ſpace of 14. yéeres in a ſtrong Caſtle, where I haue ſuffered much diſeaſe of hunger and cold, and at the laſt I eſcaped, by reaſon of a yong man, to whome I promiſed that if hée could bring mee to Acre in ſauegard, that I would then giue him twentie Duckets of gold, the yong man was couetous to haue the money, and founde the meanes that hee brought mee to Acre, whereas I founde a kinſman of mine, who payed the yonge man the money the which I had promiſed vnto him, and alſo hee gaue

me fifteene Ducates, the which I haue ſpent with comming hether. Fréend, (quoth Huon) I pray vnto God to ayd thée, for if thou wert not ſo ill apparelled, thou ſhouldeſt ſéeme a man of a high lineage, for it ſéemeth to me if thou wert well armed & weaponed, and were in ſome buſineſſe, thou wert like ynough to be feared.
            
            
               Chap. LXXX.
               
                  ¶ Howe after that Duke Raoul had beene at Bourdeaux in the guiſe of a Pilgrime to ſee the faire Ladie Eſcleremond, he returned againe to Vyenna.
                  
               
               
                  
                     AFter that Huon hadde long deuiſed with Raoul, hée waſhed & ſat downe to diner and the Ducheſſe his wife by him, then Huon commaunded that at the end of the Table right before his Table, Raoul the Pilgrime ſhould bee ſet, and there hee was well ſerued: but Raoul had litle care either of meat or drinke, for his thought was of another matter whereupon he ſore ſtudied, for before him he ſaw the noble Ducheſſe Eſcleremond, of whom he was ſo amourous, that he could not withdraw his eies from her, for the more he beheld her, the more hee was embraced with her loue, he thought he neuer ſawe before ſo faire a Ladie in all his life, ſo that for the great beautie that was in her, hée changed often times his colour, but it could not bee perceiued, bicauſe he was ſo blacke and foule with rubbing of certaine hearbes, and he ſayd within himſelfe, that whoſoeuer had ſuch a Ladie to his Wife, might well make auant to be the happieſt man of the world, euen hee that might but haue his paſtime with ſo faire a Ladie, & ſw
                     ••
                  re by the Lorde that fourmed him, though he ſhould bée damned in hell for euer, he would ſlay Huon and haue his Wife in mariage, and all

                  Huons Lands to be his for euer. Alas that it had not pleaſed our Lord God, that at this houre Huon might haue knowne the treaſon of Raoull, hee ſhoulde then haue bought it full dearely.
               When the Traytour had eaten and made good théere, Huon gaue him a Gowne, ſhirt, hoſe and ſhooes, and monney for his diſpence, Raoul tooke it, he durſt not refuſe it but thanked Huon, and ſo tooke his leaue and departed, hee durſt no longer tarie for feare of knowledge, and aſſoone as hée could he departed out of the Towne: of his iourneys I will make no long rehearſall, but he laboured ſo long that he arriued at Vyenna, then he went to his Pallaice, whereas he was well receiued of his Lords, and they laughed when they ſaw him in that apparell. Then within a while after hee made him readie, and his men who were a great number, and ſo departed from Vyenna, and tooke the way to Mayence. When his Vncle the Emperour of Almayne was aduertiſed of his comming, he went and met him without the Towne to doe him the more honour, and when he ſaw him, he was ioyfull and kiſſed him, and ſaid: Faire Nephew, I am glad of your comming, I haue long deſired to ſée you. The good Emperour knew nothing of the treaſon, that his Nephew had purchaced againſt Huon of Bourdeaux, for if he had knowne it, to haue dyed in the quarrell, he would neuer haue conſented to that treaſon. Thus hand in hand the Emperour and his Nephew Raoul entred with great ioy into the City of Mayence, wheras they were highly receiued, great ioy was made at their comming, much people were in the Towne come thether to Iuſt and Tournay, and many other to behould the Tryumph. Now let vs ſpeake of Huon of Bourdeaux.
               
            
            
               
               Chap. LXXXI.
               
                  ¶ How Duke Huon tooke leaue of the Ducheſſe his Wife, and how he arriued at Mayence, and went to the Pallaice.
               
               
                  
                     WHen Huon ſawe his time to depart from Bourdeaux, to goe to the Tourney at Mayence, he made readie his traine, and tooke with him tenne Thouſand men of armes for the guard of his perſon, of the beſt horſemen in all his Countrey: then he tooke his leaue of the faire Eſcleremond his Wife, who began ſore to weepe when ſhe ſaw his departure, right ſwéetly they kiſſed together at their departing. Then he tooke his Horſe, and hee and his companie departed from Bourdeaux, and reſted not vntill he came to Coleyne on the Rheine, there hee taried two dayes to refreſh him, and vpon the third day he armed himſelfe, and called his companie before him and ſaid: Sirs, I will take my leaue of you all, for none of you ſhall goe with me, be nothing abaſhed, for hée that alwayes hath ſaued mee out of all perils, will not forſake mee at this time.
               When hiſ men heard him, they had great maruaile that he would take his Voyage alone, and hee ſaide vnto them. Sirs, haue no doubt of me, for I ſhall not die vntill mine houre be come. They of Coleyne enquired nothing of their eſtate, for as then there was no warre, and they beléeued that they would goe to the Tourney. When his Lords ſaw that he would thus depart, they were ſorrie that he would goe to the Tourney alone, and ſaid one to another, we feare greatly that he ſhall neuer returne againe, & wee ſhall neuer haue ſuch another Maiſter againe. Sirs, (quoth Huon) you ſhall not need to take any ſorrow for mée: for certainly I knowe

well, if any perilous buſineſſe ſhould come to mee, that I ſhould be aided by King Oberon: but he needed not to haue ſaid ſo, for when Kinge Oberon departed from him, hee had him not to truſt vpon any ayd from him, and therefore Huon was a foole and ill aduiſed to truſt thereon, or to vndertake ſo perilous an Enterprize as he did, wherby he was in great perill of death, as yee ſhall heare héereafter.
               When Huon was readie, he leapt vpon his horſe without any ſtirrop, cleane armed as he was, and after ſtretched him ſo in his ſtirrops, that the leathers ſtrained out thrée fingers, he was a puiſſant Knight armed or vnarmed, and greatly to be feared, hee tooke leaue of his men, and left them wéeping in that Citie of Coleyn. Then hee road towards the Citie of Mayence, and ſo long he road that he had a ſight of the Citie, and then he ſaw about in the meadow many Tents and rich Pauilions, pitcht vp with pummels of fine gould ſhining againſt the Sunne. Huon behelde them well, and ſo paſſed foorth and entred into the Citie, whereas he ſaw euerie ſtréet full of Knights and Squiers, abiding there vntill the day of the Tourney. Huon paſſed foorth vntill he came to the Pallaice, whereas hee founde the Emperour and his Nephewe Raoul, whom Huon loued but little, as he ſhewed well ſhortly after as yée ſhall heare.
               When Huon was come before the Pallaice, hee ſawe the Emperour and Raoul his Nephew going vp the ſtaires: then Huon met with a great Almayne, and ſaid to him. Fréend, I pray thée ſhew mée what be yonder two Princes that goe vp the ſtaires, and that ſo much honor is done to them? Sir, (quoth he) the firſt is the Emperour, and he that followeth is his Nephew Duke Raoul, he was Sonne to the Emperours Brother, the Tourney that ſhalbe made, is done for the loue of him, & at his requeſt, and after the Tourney, he thinketh to marrie a great Ladie, whoſe name ſhall not bee knowne till the Tourney be done. When Huon heard that, hee bluſhed in the face for the great yre that he was in, for he knew well, that Raoul (if he could find the means) would haue from

him his Wife the faire Eſcleremond: but he promiſed in his mind, that firſt hee ſhould dearely buy her. Fréend, (quoth Huon) I deſire you to do ſo much for me, as to hold my horſe vntill I returne againe out of the Hall, and that I haue ſpoken with the Emperor and with his Lords. Sir, (quoth the Squier) with a good will I ſhall héere hold your horſe vntil you come. Nowe God ayd Huon, for ere he might returne againe, he was in great perill of death, as ye ſhall heare.
            
            
               Chap. LXXXII.
               
                  ¶ How Huon ſlew Duke Raoul in the preſence of the Emperor, ſitting at his Table, and of the maruailes that hee did: And how in the chace that was made after him, he ſtrake downe the Emperour, and wanne his good horſe.
               
               
                  
                     H
                     Ʋon who was ful of ire and
                   diſpleaſure, went vp into the Pallaice, and came into the Hall, whereas hée found many people, there was the Emperour, who had newly waſhed his handes, and was ſet at the Table. Huon preſſed foorth before the Table with his Sword in his hand, and ſaid. Noble Emperour, I coniure thée by the great vertue diuine, & by your hopefull part of Paradice, or that your Soule is to be damned, if caſe be that you ſay not the troth, and giue true iudgment without falſhood, nor to ſpare to ſay ye troth for no man liuing, although he be your néereſt Parent. Fréend, (quoth the Emperour) ſay your pleaſure, and I ſhall anſwere you. Sir, (quoth Huon) if you haue wedded a Ladie, & loue her dearely, and that ſhe be faire, good, ſwéete, and ſage, and repleat with all good vertues, and that you know ſurely, that ſhe loueth you entirely, as a good true wife ought to loue her Lord and Huſband, and then a Traitour priuily to purchaſe

your death for loue of your Wife, and if by aduenture after
                     •
                  ward you find him in the féeld, or in town, meadow or wood, in Pallaice or in Hall, and that you might accompliſh your thought and your deſire, againſt the ſame Traitour who did purchace the ſaid treaſon againſt you: I demaund then of you, if you would ſlay him or not?
               Fréend, (quoth the Emperour) you haue coniured me, and I ſhall anſweare you to the troth. Not for the value of ten Cities I will not lye, therefore know for troth, if I hadde a Wife ſuch a one as you ſpeake of, adorned with ſuch faire vertues, and whereof there bee many ſuch: Howbeit, if I had ſuch a one as you recite, and that I knew ſurely that ſhe loued me entirely, then if I kn
                     •
                  w any man liuing that wold purchaſe me ſuch a treaſon, although he were my neere Parent, if I might find him in what place ſo euer it were, and though I ſhould be ſlain in the quarrel, there ſhould neither be Church nor Aulter that ſhould ſaue his life, but that with my two hands I ſhould ſlay him: and alſo my heart ſhould ſerue me further, that after I had ſlaine him, I would draw out his heart out of his bodie, and eat it for deſpite. When Huon heard the Emperour, he ſayd: Oh right noble and vertuous Emperour, iuſt and true iudgement you haue giuen, the which I repeale not, but I ſhall ſhewe you what hath mooued me to demaund of you this iudgement, if ſuch a caſe ſhould haue fallen vnto you. And Sir, to the entent that you ſhall know the troth what hath mooued me thus to doe, you may ſée héere before you he that would do in like caſe againſt me, which is your Nephew Raoull, who hath purchaced my death like a cruell and a falſe Traytor, to the entent to haue Eſcrelemond my Wife and all mine heritages: the iudgement that you haue giuen is iuſt and true, you ſhall neuer bee blamed in any Court, but you ſhall therein bee named a noble Prince, and therefore Sir, hauing found him ſo néere me, that purchaceth for my death and ſhame, I ſhould neuer be worthy to appeare in any Princes court, without I were reuenged of him, and I had rather die then to forbeare him

any longer.
               Therewith he drew his Sword, and when Raoul ſaw the cleareneſſe of the Sword, he was affraid bicauſe he was vnarmed: howbeit, he thought that Huon would not haue béen ſo hardy, as to doe him any hurt in the preſence of his Vncle the Emperour: but when hee ſaw that Huon did lift vp his Sword to ſtrike him, he was in great feare, & fled to the Emperor to ſaue his life, but Huon perceiued him ſo quickly, that he ſtrake him with a reuerſe ſtroke in ſuch wiſe, yt he ſtrake off his head from his ſhoulders, and the bodie fell downe before the Emperour, & the head fell vpon the Table in the diſh before the Emperour, whereof he had great dolor. God giue me good lucke, (quoth Huon) this Traitour ſhall neuer be amourous of my wife, for now I am ſure inough of him. The Emperour who ſat ye Table, had great ſorow at his heart when he ſaw his Nephew dead before him, then he cried aloud and ſaid. Sirs yée my Barons, looke that this Knight eſcape you not, I will neuer eat nor drinke vntill I ſée him hanged, I ſhould haue great ſorrow at my heart if he ſhould eſcape. Huon vnderſtood him well, and feared him but litle, but with his ſword he layd on round about him, and ſtrake off armes, handes, and legs, ſo that there was none ſo hardy that durſt approch néere to him, he ſlew ſo many that it was fearefull to behold him, within a ſhort ſpace hee had ſlaine moe then eight and Twentie, and the Emperour was in ſuch feare, that hee wiſte not howe to ſaue himſelfe, for the great maruailes that he ſaw Huon do, he doubted bicauſe he was vnarmed, and Huon cried and ſaide: Traytours I doubt you nothing. Then on all parts Almaines and Bauiers aſſailed Huon, but hee defended himſelfe by ſuch force and puiſſance, that by the murder that he made, the bloud ranne vpon the pauement like a Riuer.
               
                  Huon might haue tarried too long, for the Emperour and his men went and armed them, & Huon who ſaw well, that hée could not long endure without great perill of death, ſtriking with his ſword round about him, he withdrew backe

downe the ſtaires of the Pallaice, and none durſt approach neere him, bicauſe they were vnarmed and for feare of him. Huon by his hie proweſſe, for all his enimies, came vnto his horſe and mounted vpon him, and ſo yſſued out, and there was a Knight called Galeram, who was coozen Germaine to Duke Raoul, and he was cleane armed and mounted on a good horſe, and hee followed Huon and ſaid: Abide Villaine, thou haſte ſlayne Duke Raoul my Coozen, without thou returne vnto mée, I ſhall ſtrike thee behind.
               When Huon heard him, hée ſware he had rather die then to refuſe to turne vnto him, then hee turned, and they couched their Speares, and they met ſo fiercely together, that they gaue each other maruailous great ſtroakes, Galerames Speare brake all to peeces, and Huon who had employed all his force and vertue, ſtrake Galeram vppon the Sheeld with his Speare, the which was bigge and ſtrong, ſo that Galeram fell out of his Saddle ſo rudely, that in the fall hée brake his necke, and ſo lay dead vppon the earth, and Huon who thought hee had not béen dead, returned againe to him, but when he ſaw that he ſtirred not, he departed thence: but hée taried verie long, for he ſaw well hee was cloſed in round about, & ſaw well without God had pitie of him, hee was not like to ſcape without death or taken Priſoner. They caſt at him Darts and Swords, and one with a ſharpe Swoord came vnto him and gaue him a great ſtroake, but his good Armour ſaued his life, for all the ſtroakes that hée had receiued, he neuer remooued out of his Saddle.
               When Huon ſaw in what danger hee was, he called vpon the Lord God humbly, praying him to deliuer him out of that perill, with his ſword he did maruailes, hee ſlew and claue heads to the braine, that hee ſéemed rather a Spirit of hell then a man, for he that had ſeene him, would haue ſayde that he had beene no morta
                     •
                  l man. Hee ſaw paſſe by him a Knight of Almayne, called Sir Hans Sperguer, as he paſſed by, Huon gaue him ſuch a ſtroke that hee claue him to the gyrdle: whereof the Almaynes were ſo abaſhed, that none

durſt approach néere to him, they feared him ſore. Alas that his men at Coleyne had not knowne what caſe he was in, they were ſo farre off. Huon who fared like a wilde bore, he layd on round about him, ſo that his ſword was all bloudy, of the men that hee had ſlaine and maimed. They caſt darts at him ſo, that at laſt his horſe was ſlaine vnder him, wherof he was ſorrowfull: howbeit like a couragious Knight, with his ſword ſtill fought valiantly with his enemies, and he ſaw where the Earle of Seyne came to him, to haue ſtriken him with his ſword, but Huon met him ſo haſtily, that hee had no leyſure to ſtrike him, and Huon gaue him ſuch a ſtroke, that his helmet could not ſaue his life, for Huons ſword entred into his braine, and ſo he fell downe dead among the horſe féete.
               
                  Huon who was quicke and expert, tooke the dead knights horſe, and leapt vppon him, and when he ſaw that he was new horſed againe, he was ioyfull, and then hee was able to depart in deſpight of his enemies: but the Emperour who had great ſorrow at his heart for the death of his nephew Raoull, made great haſte after Huon with ten thouſand men with him, and ſo came from Mayens all on the ſpurre, deſiring to ouertake Huon, and ſo rode on before his men, for his horſe was ſo good, that hee would runne as faſt as a byrde could flie, in all the world there was no horſe like him. The Emperour on this horſe followed Huon, and as he rode, hee ſaw all the way dead men lie that Huon had ſlaine, he ſpurred his horſe, that anon he ouertooke Huon, and ſayd. Thou Traytour, turne thy ſhéeld towards me, or elſe my Speare ſhall goe through thy bodie: for the ſorrowe that lyeth at my heart, for loue of my Nephew whome thou haſt ſlaine, conſtrayneth me to make haſt to be reuenged of thée, nor I ſhall neuer haue ioy at my heart vntill I haue ſlaine thée, much it greeueth mee that I am conſtrayned to ſlay thee with my Speare, for I had rather hang thée. When Huon heard the Emperour who was ſo néere him, & ſaw how he was mounted on ſo good a horſe, he called vpon our Lord God, & deſired

him of his grace to ayd him to conquere that horſe, and when he ſaw that the Emperour was farre before his men, he turned his horſe head towards the Emperour, and couched his ſpeare, and the Emperour came againſt him like the tempeſt, and they mette together ſo rudely, that their ſpeares were pearced, ſo that the Emperours ſpeare brake all to ſhiuers, and Huons ſpeare was ſo rude & ſtrong, that he ſtrake ye Emperour with ſuch puiſſance, that hee was ſtriken from his horſe to the earth ſore aſtonied, ſo that he wiſt not where he was, and Huon who had great deſire to haue the Emperours horſe, alighted quickly from his owne horſe, and tooke the Emperours horſe and mounted on him, and was thereof right ioyous, then he ſayd to himſelfe, that hee doubted not them all, he ſtrake the good horſe with his ſpurres, and found him quicke and light vnder him.
               There he left the Emperour lying on the earth, who was not a little content that he was ſo ſoone ſuccoured, for if the Almaines had not quickly come, Huon had ſlaine him, but when the Almaynes came to their Lord, and found him lying on the earth, they beléeued verily he had beene dead they beganne to make great ſorrow, and the Emperour who was come againe to himſelfe ſayd. Syrs, thanked be God I féel
                     •
                   no hurt, but I may well ride, but I haue great ſorrow at my heart, that Huon hath thus ledde away my good horſe, and is eſcaped away, and alſo hath ſlaine my two nephewes: but Sirs I counſell you that none follow him, for it ſhall be but a loſt time, for the good horſe that is vnder him and he that is on him is ſo valiant in armes, yt he is greatly to be doubted, therefore I counſell let vs returne backe again, for we may looſe more then wee ſhall winne, but by the grace of God, ere it be thrée moneths paſt, I ſhall aſſemble ſuch a number of men, that the vallies and mountaines ſhall bee full of men, then I will goe to the Citie of Bourdeaux, and will not depart thence till I haue woonne it, and if I may get Huon, I ſhall make him die of an euill death, and ſhall take and waſt all his lands.
            
            
               
               Chap. LXXXIII.
               
                  ¶ How Huon after that he was mounted vpon the Emperours good horſe, he arriued at Coleyn, where he found his men, and howe hee departed thence: And of the Emperour who laye enambuſhed in a wood, abiding there to haue ſlaine Huon.
                  
               
               
                  
                     THus as yee haue heard Huon departed with the Emperors good horſe, and left the Emperour lying on the earth, who commaunded his Barons to returne backe, and not to follow Huon any further. Therewith there came to the Emperour a Knight called Godun, he was borne at Norembridge, and he ſayd. Sir, if you will beléeue me, and doe after my councell, you ſhall doe otherwiſe, you ſhall returne to Mayence this night, and ordaine foure Thouſand of ſuch men as you haue heere, and ſend them within two Leagues of Coleyne on the hye way into Fraunce, and there you ſhall find a little wood, and there let them lye enambuſhed till Huon paſſe by them, for I know well he will goe ſtraight to Coleyne this night, & lodge in a French-mans houſe that dwelleth there, and in ye morning ſurely he will depart thence, and ſo paſſe by the ſaid ambuſhment, ſo that it ſhall not be poſſible to ſaue himſelfe alone, but either he ſhall be ſlaine or taken.
               When the Emperour heard Godun, he ſaid: Sir, you haue giuen me good counſaile, and this is likely to be done, but it were conuenient to ſend more then foure Thouſand, for the great deſire that I haue to get him into my hands, conſtraineth me to cauſe him to bee taken, to the entent to be reuenged of him: therefore I would goe my ſelfe, and take with mée ten Thouſand men, and ſhall go and ly in the place that

you haue appointed, for I ſhall neuer haue perfect ioy at my heart as long as Huon is aliue, for he hath cauſed much ſorrow at my heart, for the death of my two Nephewes whom ſo pitiouſly hee hath ſlaine, let vs take our way about twoo Leagues beſide Coleyne, néerer wee will not approach, to the entent that our comming bée not knowne. Then hee choſe out ten Thouſand of the moſt valianteſt men in his companie, and the reſt he ſent backe to Mayence. Thus the Emperour road foorth, and road ſo long that day and night, that an houre before it was day he came to the ſayd wood, and there layd his ambuſh. And Huon rode ſo, after he was departed from the Emperor, that late in the Euening he came to Coleyne, whereas hee was receiued of his men with great ioy, then Gerames ſaid. Sir, I require you ſhew vs of your aduentures, then Huon ſhewed them euerie thing, and the manner how he had ſlaine Duke Raoul, and how hee departed from Mayence, and how he was purſued, and howe hee wanne the Emperours good horſe: whereat Gerames and all the other had great ioy, and thanked God of his faire aduenture, and hadde great maruaile howe hee eſcaped: but they knewe nothinge what the Emperour was about to doe, nor that hee was in the woode abydinge there for Huon.
               
               That night Huon and his companie were at Coleyne making good chéere, and the next morning they heard ſeruice, then they mounted on their horſes & iſſued out of the towne, they were to the number of thurteene Thouſand hardy fighting men, and when they were out in the feelds, Huon like a good man of warre ſaid. Sirs, I deſire you let vs keepe together, and ride like men of warre, to the entent that we be not ſuddainly taken, and ſo they did: the day was faire and cleare, they might well be perceiued a farre off, as they were by the Emperour of Almaine, who lay enambuſhed for Huon, the Emperour eſpied them firſte, and ſayde to his companie. Sirs, yonder a farre off I ſée many people comming towarde vs, they ſéeme vnto mée men well expert in armes,

neuer beléeue me but they be Frenchmen, and he that is their Captaine is Huon of Bourdeaux, he is not come hether like a ſmall Perſonage, but he is highly accompanied like a great and mightie Prince: I ſée well he is valiant by that he hath done, hee is ſo noble & hardy that none may be compared to him, you haue well ſéene, howe that hee all alone came into my Pallaice, and there ſlewe my Nephew Duke Raoul, wherewith my heart is in great diſpleaſure, hee is greatly to bee doubted, for without God helpe vs, wee ſhall haue ynough to doe with him, would to God that hee and I were at accordment and agréed, for he is ſo noble and ſo valiant that he feareth no man. You haue well ſéen ſince he departed from Mayence, he hath ſlaine more then fortie of my men, and hath borne me to the earth, and he hath taken from me my good horſe, whereby he may be wel aſſured, that there is no man ſhall take him if he be vppon his backe: howbeit we muſt ſet vpon him, for my heart ſhall neuer be in eaſe as long as he liueth: therefore Sirs, I deſire you euerie man, this day ſhew the loue that you beare vnto me, and the ſauegard of your liues, for to fly away auaileth not: therefore Sirs, ſet on together, and doe ſo that wee may haue the firſt aduantage.
            
            
               Chap. LXXXIIII.
               
                  ¶ Of the great Battaile within two Leagues of Coleyn, between the Emperor of Almaine and Huon of Bourdeaux, and of the Truce that was taken betweene them.
               
               
                  
                     H
                     Ʋon who roade before his
                   Barons deuiſing with old Gerames, regarded on his right hand towards ye litle wood, and he ſaw in the wood great cleareneſſe, by reaſon of the Sunne ſhining on the healmes

and on the ſpeares poynts, whereby he perceiued plainely, that there was much people hidden in the wood, hee ſhewed them to Gerames and to his other companie, and ſayd: Sirs bee in a ſurety, that without battaile we cannot ſcape, héere is the Emperour who lyeth in waite for vs. I deſire you let vs doe ſo, that hee ſhall haue no cauſe to make any auaunt of vs, yonder you may ſée them, how they ſet themſelues in order to abide vs, therefore let vs quickly ſette on them: and ſo they did in ſuch wiſe, that with the very running of their horſes the earth trembled, and the ſunne loſt his light, by reaſon of the powder that roſe vp into the ayre from both parts.
               
                  Huon who ranne before on his puiſſant horſe, behelde Godun who was formoſt in his companie, hee ranne at him with a ſtrong ſpeare, ſo that he ranne him cleane through the body, ſo that hee fell downe to the earth, and with the ſame ſpeare Huon met Craſſyn Polinger, who bare the Emperors banner, Huon ſtrake him ſo fiercely, that he bare horſe and man and banner all to the ground, whereof the Almaines and Bauiers were ſorrowfull. Huon did ſo much ere his ſpeare was broken, that he firſt bare fiue to the earth, ſo that they had no power after to reléeue themſelues, there were many ſpeares broken, and many a knight borne to the earth, and there dyed among the horſe féete, for the father could not helpe the ſonne, nor the ſonne could not helpe the father, and many a horſe ranne abrode in the field, and their Maiſters lying dead in the bloud and myre. Huon who rode about in the battaile ſlaying and wounding his enemies, behelde on his right ſide, and ſaw the Earle Sauary ſlaying many of them of Bourdeaux. Ah good Lord quoth Huon, if yonder knight raigne long, he ſhall doe me great damage. Then hée rode to him, and gaue him ſuch a ſtroke with his ſword, ſo that he ſtrake off his ſhoulder and arme ſo rudely, that it fell vpon the earth, ſo that for the great paine that the Earle Sauary endured, he fell from his horſe, and there was ſlaine among the horſe féete, whereof the Emperour (who was

there by) right ſorrowfull when he ſaw another of his nephewes ſlaine, and ſayd. Ah Huon, of God bee thou curſed, ſince thou haſt ſlaine ſo many of my friends, I ſhall neuer haue ioy in my heart, till I haue thée in my hands to hang thée. Sir (quoth Huon) ere you haue taken me, you are like to looſe more of your friendes, and beware of your ſelfe, that you come not into my handes, by your nephew Raoull yee haue all this damage, who by his falſeneſſe thought to haue betrayed me, and to haue had my wife: if I haue ſlaine your nephewes and your men, I haue doone it in defending mine owne body, I ſay to you if you bee not well aware of me, I ſhall bring you to the poynt that it ſhall be hard for you to be carried away in a litter. Huon quoth the Emperor, the great hate that I haue to thée for the death of my nephewes, makes me féele much dolour at my heart, that I had rather die then that I ſhould not bee reuenged of thée, therefore beware thou of mée, for I ſhall neither eate nor drinke, till I haue thée either quicke or dead.
               Then they two went backe to take their courſe together, but ere they met, the Almaynes came running thether, for the feare that they had of looſing their Emperour, and on the other part came thither the olde Gerames, who fought ſo fiercely, that whomſoeuer he ſtrake with a full ſtroke, had no neede of any Surgion, and his companie fayled not for their parts, and Huon with his good ſword opened the thick preaſe, ſo that the Almaynes greatly doub
                     •
                  ed him. Huon with his noble chiualrie, cauſed his enemies to recule backe halfe a bowes ſhoote. Then there was a knight of Almain ſaw well, that without ſome remedie were found, the Emperour and his companie were like to be ſlaine, he went out of the battell as priuily as he could, and ranne on the ſpurres, and reſted not till hee came to Coleyn, where incontinent he rode to the Prouoſts houſe, and found him in his houſe newly reine from maſſe, then the Knight ſayd to him. Sir Prouoſt, if euer you will ſée the Emperour aliue, cauſe the commons of this Citie to be armed, and come and ſuccour the Emperour

haſtily, for when I came from him he had great neede of ayde: there is Huon of Bourdeaux, who hath ſlayne thrée of his nephewes, and this other day he was lodged in this Citie, the Emperour knoweth well that you knew nothing thereof, for Huon had lodged his men in the ſuburbs, and in other little houſes, becauſe hee would not be perceiued. Syr Prouoſt make haſte in this buſineſſe.
               When the Prouoſt heard what daunger the Emperour was in, he ſounded the watch bell, and made to be cryed in euery ſtréete, that euery man that was able to beare armes, ſhould arme them, and goe out into the field to ſuccour the Emperour, who was in great daunger of his life. When the Bourgeſſes of the towne heard that crie, euery man armed them as well as they could, ſome were harneſſed behind, and ſome in a Iacke all ſmoked, and with ſtaues and other weapons, what a foote and a horſe backe, there went out of the Citie twentie thouſand men, if you had ſéene the horſemen, you would haue laught at them, for it ſéemed they were ſet on horſe backe in deſpite, there was neuer ſéene ſo rude a companie it was no maruaile, for they were not accuſtomed to ryde in harneſſe. The Prouoſt went before, and exhorted them to doe their deuoirs, ſo they tooke their way to come to the battaile, whereas Huon and his companie did part of their willes, and the Emperour ſéeing that, he began to looſe his men and place, hee rode ſearching in the battaile for Duke Huon, whereas he found by aduenture Huon, who had then newly ſlaine by aduenture the Emperours Seneſchall.
               When that the Emperour ſawe him ſlaine, he was right ſorrowfull, and in a great rage he cryed to Huon and ſayd
                     •
                  : Thou knight that neuer art ſatiſfied to ſhedde the bloud of my men, to abate my linage and force, I pray thée turne thy ſhield vnto mee, for if thou kneweſt the great hate that I beare thée, thou wouldſt neuer appeare before me. Sir quoth Huon, I maruell that you ſo ſorely hate me, & haue tarry
                     •
                  d ſo long for reuēge, therfore beware, for if I can I wil ſend you

after your Nephewes, whome yée ſay that yée loue ſo well. They tooke their courſe with great and rude ſpeares, and ſo came together like the tempeſt, and met ſo rudely, that the buckles of their Armour all to braſt, and the Emperours ſpeare brake all to péeces, but Huons ſpeare was bigge and ſtrong, & therewith he ſtrake the Emperour with ſuch puiſſance, that his ſpeare ranne through his ſhoulder, ſo that the Emperour fell to the earth ſo rudely, that with the fall he brake the bone of his thigh, whereby he was in ſuch dolour that he ſwounded. And when Huon ſaw him lye on the ground, hee came to him with his ſwoord in his hand, and would haue ſlaine him if he had not béene ſuccoured: but there came ſo many Almaines, that whether Huon would or not, they tooke the Emperour and bare him out of the field, and laid him in the wood, and then demaunded of him how he did. Sirs quoth he, I am ſore hurt, for my thigh is broken, whereby I endure more gréefe than I can abide, but as for death, I truſt by the grace of god I ſhall eſcape it. When they heard that, they were all ioyfull, and ſaid: Sir, know for troth, that your men are ſore diſcomfited, for they be ſo ſore oppreſſed by Huon and his men, that wée feare all your men will be ſlaine, wée will goe againe to the battaile, and leaue ſome with you to looke vnto your Maieſtie. Well quoth the Emperour, but your force nor your defence cannot auaile you any thing againſt Huon, nor againſt his men. But I ſhall ſhew you what yée ſhall doe, yée ſhall ſend quickly to Huon, and deſire him in my name to ceaſe ſlaying of my men, and that there may be a truce had betwéene him and me, for the ſpace of halfe a yéere, for within that time I hope to finde ſome other treatie that hee and I might be friendes: and if he refuſe this, then I ſee none other remedie but that wée ſhall be all ſlaine or taken, and then he will cauſe me to die in ſome noyſome priſon. Sir (quoth his knights) we ſhall doe your commaundement, but we feare sore that we ſhall not be heard. Sirs quoth the Emperour, goe to him and doe the beſt yée can.
               
                  Then they returned to the battaile, whereas they founde their companie readie to flie away, for they were neere all ſlaine and taken, the Knights from the Emperour came to Huon, and deſired him in the name of the Emperour that he would ceaſe the battaile, and ſound the treatie, and they would do likewiſe in the ſame manner, and that there might be a firme truce betweene them for halfe a yeere, and in that ſeaſon they truſted that ſome good wayes would be found, that the Emperour and hee might be good friendes together. Sirs (quoth Huon) if the Emperour your Maſter had mee in that danger which he is in, hee would not ſuffer me to ſcape aliue for all the gold in the world, howbeit, I am content that he haue truce for halfe a yeere, the which I ſhall ſurely kéepe on my part, and if I be aſſayled, I ſhall defend mee, and if ſo be that hee come to Bourdeaux to aſſayle mee, by the helpe of God and my good friendes, I ſhall doe the beſt that I can. But if he will haue peace with mee, and pardon mee his diſpleaſure, for the death of his nephewes, I ſhall be readie to make peace, and I ſhall make amends for al wrongs, though I was not the beginner.
               Then Huon cauſed the retrait to bee ſounded, and in likewiſe ſo did the Almaynes, who had thereof great ioy: it came to them at a good poynt, for elſe all had béene ſlaine or foyled. When he had the vpper hand, now that he purſued ſtill his chaſe, for then he might haue had an end of that warre, and neither ſhield nor ſpeare more broken, whereas after many a man was ſlaine, and was the cauſe that the Citie of Bourdeaux was loſt, and the fayre Eſcleremond taken and ſet in priſon in the Citie of Mayens, and Huon ſuffered ſo much paine and trouble, that no mortall man can ſhewe it. Thus as you haue heard Huon granted the truce, and ſo both parts withdrew, whereof the Emperour and his companie were right ioyfull. Then Huon called his companie, and ſhewed Gerames and his Lords how he had graunted truce to the Emperour for halfe a yeere, and therefore I charge you all not to breake the peace: the Emperour was glad when hee

heard it, for he knew well hee had ſcaped a great daunger. Then he charged all his men on paine of death, that they ſhould not breake the truce. And Sirs (quoth he) I pray you make readie a litter that I may be carried to Coleyne, for the paine that I féele in my legges cauſeth all my bodie to tremble, and when I come there, I will tarrie till I bee whole. Sir (quoth his Lords) your commandement ſhal be done, then they layde the Emperour in a litter, ſore complayning the loſſe and death of his nephewes and Lordes that were ſlaine, and his legge gréeued him ſore. Then Huon ſayd to Gerames, Sir thanked be God we haue vanquiſhed the Emperour, and ſlaine many of his men, therefore it is good that we returne now to Bourdeaux, I haue great deſire to ſée my wife Eſcleremond, who thinking long for my comming, I am ſure ſhee is ſorrowfull that I haue tarried ſo long Sir (quoth Gerames) if ye haue great deſire to returne, ſo haue al other of your ſeruants, they would gladly ſee their wiues and children, and ſome would ſée their louers.
            
            
               Chap. LXXXV.
               
                  ¶ How Huon graunted the truce to the Emperour, and howe the Prouoſt of Coleyne came and aſſayled Huon, not knowing of any peace taken.
               
               
                  
                     WHen Huon vnderſtood the old Gerames, he had great ioy, then he ſounded the Trumpets with ſuch brute, that maruaile it was to heare, and commanded euery man to ſet forward towards Bourdeaux. Then he beheld on his right hand, and ſaw them of Coleyne comming in a great number, they were well néere twentie thouſand Burgeſſes and other, they came with banners diſplayde readie to fight. When Huon
                  
ſaw them, he had great maruaile from whence they ſhould come ſo haſtily. Then he ſayd to his men: Sirs, I perceiue cléerely we be betrayed, for if I had pleaſed, the Emperour nor his men could not haue eſcaped, he hath falſely betrayed me, ſince vnder the colour of truce they come to ſet newly vpon me.
               Thus Huon ſayd by the Emperour without cauſe, for hée knew nothing thereof, nor that any ſuccour ſhould haue come to him. Sirs (quoth Huon) let vs reſt here, and tarrie till they come néerer to vs, then let vs ſet on them with ſuch haſte, that they ſhall not know what to doe. Sir (quoth his men) haue no doubt, wee ſhall not faile you for feare of any death, we truſt to ſlay ſo many, that the earth ſhall bee couered with the dead bodies of your enemies. Huon ordered his battaile, and the Prouoſt of Coleyne comforted his men, ſaying: Sirs, our Emperour is diſcomfited by Huon and his companie, who be yonder abiding before vs, they thinke to depart in ſauegard, but they haue no power to doe ſo, for the moſt part of them are ſore hurt, and their horſes ſore trauailed, wherefore they ſhall the ſooner be diſcomfited. Then the Prouoſt and his men ranne quickly vpon Huon and his men, there beganne a fierce battaile, wherein many a moſt valiaunt man lay on the earth dead, and at the verie firſt brunt there were ſo many ſlaine, that the whole fielde was couered with dead and maimed men: ſome were ouerthrowne without any hurt at all, and yet they could neuer riſe, becauſe of the great preaſe of the horſes that did runne ouer them. Huon who was very full of ire, becauſe hee had thought that vnder the colour of truce he was aſſayled, he ranne fiercely at a knight, who had doone verie great hurt among his men, it was he that went to Coleyne for that ſuccour, and Huon ſtrake him cleane through the body with his Speare, ſo that he fell downe dead to the earth.
               Then Huon cryed his crie to call his men together, hée layd on the right ſide and on the left, ſo that hee did cutte

of armes and legges, and raced their helmets from their heades, he ſéemed rather a man of the Fayrie then a mortall man. But he had much to doe, for his men who had fought all the day, were ſore trauayled and wearie, howbeit they defended them ſelues right valiantly, and ſlew ſo many of the Commons of Coleyn, that the bloud ran on the ground in great ſtreames, and the Emperour who iſſued out of the wood in his Lyttour, when he came into the field, he heard the brute and crie of the Battaile, wherewith he was ſo abaſhed. Then he demaunded what noiſe it might be. Sir (quoth a Knight) it is the good Prouoſt of Coleyn, who hath brought with him the Commons of the Citie of Coleyn to aid and ſuccour you. Sir, (quoth the Emperour) and he ſhall dearely buy it: howbeit, I thinke hee knoweth not of the Truce that we haue taken with Huon, for if I knew that he was aduertiſed therof, I ſhould cauſe him to die an il death. Goe to him and command him that incontinent he goe to Huon, to make amendes for his treſpaſſe, and if he will not doe it, I charge you incontinently to ſlay him. When the Emperour had giuen his commaundement to one of his knights, he rode as faſt as he might to ye Prouoſt, who was right ſorrowfull, for that he had loſt foure thouſand of his Commons, & the knight was ſlain that came to him. Then the Emperours knight ſayd. Sir Prouoſt, ye haue doone right ill, ſéeing ye haue broken the truce that was made betwéene him and Huon, if the Emperour may gette you, yée ſhall neuer ſée fayre day more, without incontinent ye goe to Huon, and deale ſo with him that he be content, ſo that no reproch be layd to the Emperor. When the Prouoſt and his companie heard the Emperors commandement, they were ſore abaſhed, & reculed back. And the Proueſt, who was in great feare for that hee had done, and deſiring to accompliſh the Emperours commandement, ſtrake his horſe with his ſpurres, and reſted not till he hrd found Duke Huon. Then he lighted a foote, and tooke his ſword and ſayd. Ah right noble and vertuous Prince, I deſire thée in the honour of Ieſus

Chriſt haue pitie on me, and pardon me the iniurie that I haue done againſt you, the which I haue done without the knowledge or licence of the Emperour, who will cauſe mee to die a ſhamefull death without yee pardon mee, for all I knew not of the truce betwéene you and the Emperour, for I thought he had beene dead: Sir that which I haue done, was to the intent to reſcue my rightfull Lord, and thereby I haue loſt this day more then foure thouſand Burgeſſes and commons of the Citie of Coleyn, and the moſt part of my beſt friends, and therfore Sir, I pray you haue pittie on me, elſe the Emperour will ſlay mee, or ſette me in perpetuall pryſon.
            
            
               Chap. LXXXVI.
               
                  ¶ How Huon arriued at Bourdeaux, and of the counſell of the fayre Eſcleremond his wife, the which he would not beleeue nor follow.
               
               
                  
                     WHen Huon vnderſtood the Prouoſt, he had great pitie, and though that he ought in reaſon to pardon him, ſéeing that that hee had done was in a iuſt cauſe, and that hee was not aduertiſed of the truce taken betweene the Emperour and him. Then Huon approched to the Prouoſt and ſayd: Friends ariſe vp, I pardon you this treſpaſſe that you haue done for your Lord, and it is but reaſonable, ſince ye knew nothing of the truce, ye haue done as a true ſubiect ought to doe to his Lord, and I cannot bee angry with you for the ſame.
               Then the Prouoſt tooke leaue of Huon, and returned to the Emperour, who was then néere to Coleyn, and Huon rode forth towards Bourdeaux, and ſo on a Wedneſday about dinner

he entred into Bourdeaux, wheras he was receiued with great ſolemnitie of the Bourgeſſes, and of all the Clergie of the Citie. Then he alighted at his Pallaice, wheras he was by the Ducheſſe Eſcleremod wel receiued with great ioy, and ſhe demaunded of him if hee were well and in good eſtate. Fayre Lady (quoth Huon) thanked bee our Lord God I am in good health. Sir (quoth ſhee) of your comming I am right ioyous, and I deſire you to ſhew me of your aduentures. Madam (quoth Huon) know for truth I haue béene at Mayens, whereas I found the Emperour, and with him Duke Raoull his nephew, who had proclaimed a tourney, and becauſe he was aduertiſed of my comming, his intention was that if he had found me there, hee had concluded with his men to haue ſlaine mee, but by the grace of God I haue done ſo much, that in the preſence of the Emperour his vncle, and all them that were there preſent, I ſtrake off his head, becauſe he made his auaunt, that as ſoone as he had ſlaine me, he would haue had you to his wife, and all mine heritage. And when I had ſlaine him, I departed in haſte to Mayens, and it was not long after, but that the Emperour followed me with all his men, mounted vpon the good horſe that yee haue ſéene, who is ſo good, that I beléeue ſurely there is not ſuch another in the world, and the Emperour who had great deſire to reuenge the death of his nephew Duke Raoull, vaunced himſelfe a bow ſhoote before his companie, and cryed after me with many iniurious words. And when I ſaw that he was farre off from his men, I turned toward him, and ranne and bare him to the earth, then I tooke the good horſe and mounted on him, and let mine owne go, and wh
                     •
                  n his men ſawe him lying on the earth, they feared leſt he had beene dead, they aſſembled about him, and tooke no héede to follow mee, becauſe they knew well it was but a folly to follow me, ſéeing I was mounted on the Emperors good horſe.
               Thus I departed from them, and went and lay all that night at Coleyne, whereas I found my men, whom I had left

there when I went to the Emperours Court all alone, the next day I departed, but I was not gone farre out of Coleyn, when the Emperour and tenne thouſand men mette me in the way, whereas they had lien in a little wood in waite for me. Then they ranne at me and at my men, there was a great battaile on both parts, and many ſlain and wounded: but I did ſo much by the grace of God & my good company, that I ouercame them, and I ſlew two of his nephews, and I bare the Emperour to the earth, and when he ſaw that the loſſe of the battaile ranne on his ſide, he ſent to mee then a meſſenger to haue truce for halfe a yeere, the which I granted, becauſe I thought I had doone him diſpleaſure inough, as in ſlaying of thrée of his nephewes. Thus we departed, & as he returned, I met the Prouoſt of Coleyn, who brought with him twentie thouſand men to haue reſcued the Emperour, and ſo we fought together. But as ſoone as the Emperour was aduertiſed thereof, hee ſent and commaunded that he ſhould no more fight with mee. Then the Prouoſt came to me and cryed me mercie for that which he had done, excuſing himſelfe that he knew nothing of the truce. Then wee made to ſound the retrayt on both parts: and thus wee departed without any more ſtrokes giuing, whereof I thanke God that I am thus ſcaped.
               Sir (quoth Eſcleremond) ye ought to thanke God that hee hath ſent you that grace, for I haue heard ſay, that the Emperour of whom you haue ſlain his two nephewes, is great, puiſſant, and a rich Prince, right ſage and expert in the wars, wherefore it is to be feared, that he will not lette the matter thus to reſt. Madam (quoth Huon) I know well this that you ſay is true, I thinke well he be diſpleaſed with mee for the death of his nephewes, and many other of his kin, thus as I haue ſaid I iuſted with him two times, and at the ſecond time I ſtrake him to the earth in ſuch wiſe that hee brake his thigh, ſo that hee was conſtrained to bee borne thence in a litter, and it hath beene told me ſince, that the loſſe of his good horſe gréeueth him more then the loſſe of

his men. Lady to ſhew you the perils and aduentures that I haue had ſince I departed from you, it would be too long to ſhew you. But ſurely I thinke as ſoone as the truce is expired, that then the Emperour with all his puiſſance wil come and beſiege me here in Bourdeaux, for it hath béene ſhewed me of troth, that then the Emperour hath ſo made his oath and promiſe, and hath ſworne by his crowne imperiall, that he will not depart hence till he haue taken and deſtroyed the Citie. Sir (quoth Eſcleremond) if you will beleeue me, ye ſhall reſiſt this, and I ſhall tell you how, ye know well I haue a brother called king Salybraunt, who is king of Bougye, the which extendeth on the one ſide néere to Mombraunt, and on the other ſide néere to Trypoley in Barbary, he may leade in battaile a hundred thouſand men, and Sir, ſurely hee is a good Chriſtian, howbeit there are but few that know it, verily he hath beleeued in Ieſus Chriſt, and Sir if you will goe to him and deſire his aide, by the ſame token, that when you were priſoner in Babylon, I diſcouered the ſecrets of my minde to him, and ſhewed him of the loue betwéene you and me, and how ye would leade me into Fraunce, whereof hee was ioyfull, and deſired me affectuouſly that I ſhould doe ſo much to you, that we might come and ſee him in his own Realme.
               But the aduenture fell ſo, that our departing fell otherwiſe then we had deuiſed, he was there, and ſaw howe my father was ſlaine, and all ſuch as were with him, then for feare he ranne away, and did hide him in a garden behinde the Pallayce, and there tarried till it was night, and then he ſtole away and went into his owne Realme, there ſhall yee finde him if you will goe thither, I know ſurely that hee will make you excéeding great good chéere, and will not refuſe for to ayde and ſuccour you, for hée will bee ſo excéeding puiſſaunt and mightie, that hee will bring with him more then a hundred thouſand Sarizens, and alſo Sir, I would counſaile and aduiſe you, for to take along wyth you ſome fiue or ſixe Prieſtes well furniſhed wyth Oyle

and creame, for aſſoone as hee hath his men out of his owne Countrey, hee will cauſe them to be chriſtened, and ſuch as will not, he will cauſe them to die an ill death. Sir, I require you beleeue my counſaile at this time, for you knowe well, that out of Fraunce you ſhall get no ſuccor, for if ſome would, yet they dare not for doubt of King Charlemaine, the hate that he hath to you is not yet quenched, for the death of his ſonne Charlot he will neuer forget, and Sir if yée goe not to my brother for ſuccour, yée may happen to repent it, and peraduenture it may be too late, and doe as he doth, that ſhutteth the ſtable dore when the horſe is ſtollen. Thus the faire Ladie Eſcleremond exhorted Duke Huon her huſband, whome ſhée loued entierly.
            
            
               Chap. LXXXVII.
               
                  ¶ How Huon had great ioy for the birth of Claryet his Daughter.
               
               
                  
                     WHen Huon had well heard his Wife, hée ſaid: My right deare Ladie and Companion, right well I know the great loue that you beare to mee, the which hath conſtrayned you to ſay thus, whereof I thanke you. But by the Lord that vpon the Croſſe died for to redeeme humane Lineage, I will goe to no place, nor ſend for any ſuccours, vntill I ſée them before my Citie, and that I haue cauſe to labour for ſuccours, nor vntill I feele the ſtroaks of Almaines and Bauiers, that they can giue when they be out of their owne Countrey, nor as longe as my ſheeld is hole and found, firſt I thinke they ſhall feele the ſharpneſſe of my Speares head and good Sword, and yet by Gods grace I ſhall not abandon you, nor leaue my City and good Burgeſſes, for it might

greatly bée layd to my reproach if I ſhould thus goe away. Alas Sir quoth Eſcleremond, yée may well know that this that I haue ſaid, is for the feare that I haue of you, for I haue béene well aduertiſed, that the Emperour ſore hateth you, and not without cauſe, for his Nephewes and Lords that yée haue ſlaine, and therefore Sir if ye will beléeue me, yée ſhall haue men to defend you brought hether by the king my brother, ſo that when the Emperour is come into your land, it ſhall lie in you either to make peace or warre at your will: reaſon it were, that you made him ſome amends for the hurts that yée haue done vnto him. And on the other part, if he will haue no peace, thē it ſhall lie in you to make him ſuch warre, ſo that he ſhall not depart without your agréement and to his great loſſe. Sir, the feare that I haue to looſe you, conſtrayneth me thus to ſay, I haue heard it often times ſaid, that the entrie into warre is large, but the iſſuing out therof is very ſtraight, nor there is no warre but it cauſeth pouertie. But ſéeing it is your pleaſure not to beléeue me, it is reaſon that I muſt be content that your pleaſure ſhalbe fulfilled: then they entred into other deuiſes, and great ioy & feaſts were made in the Pallaice at Bourdeaux between Huon and the Lordes of the Countrey.
               At laſt the faire Ladie Eſcleremond, who was great with child, fell vpon trauayling, and ſhée prayed to god for helpe, and ſuffered great paine, whereof Huon had great pitie whē he heard thereof, for the loue betwéene them was excéeding great, at laſt the Lady was brought to bed of a faire Daughter, whereof Huon thanked God: then entred into the Ladies chamber a great number of the Ladies of the Fairie, and came to Eſcleremonds bed-ſide and ſaid. Ladie, yée ought 
                     〈◊〉
                   to thanke God, for yée haue brought foorth the faireſt & beſt creature that as now is in the world, and to whome our Lord god hath graunted moſt graces at her birth, for a more faire, me deſt, wiſe, and courteous hath not béen borne this C. yéeres paſt, for ſhée ſhall haue ſuch deſtinie & fortune in this world, that of the Realme of Aragon ſhée ſhall bee

crowned Quéene, and ſhée ſhall ſo gouerne her ſelfe, that ſhée ſhalbe accounted of, as if ſhe were a Saint in Paradice. At Tortouſe there is the Church where ſhe is honoured, the which is founded in her name, and is named Saint Clare.
               
               
                  Eſcleremond was ioyfull of the wordes of theſe Ladies of the Fairie, and great ioy & feaſting was made euery where for the birth of this Child, who was greatly regarded of the Ladies of the Fayrie, and they ſaid each to other, that this Child was the faireſt creature in all the world, they tooke this Child each after other, and bleſſed it thrée times, & then they layd it downe and departed ſuddainly, ſo that no man wiſt not where they were become, whereof all the Ladies and other had great maruaile. This tidings was brought vnto Huon, he was right ioyfull and ſayd: A worthy King Oberon, I beleeue ſurely that as yet you haue not forgotten me: now I doubt nothing the Emperour nor all his puiſſance, ſéeing you haue remembraunce of mee. Then Huon came into the Hall, and thether his Daughter was brought vnto him to ſée, hée tooke her in his armes and ſhewed her to his Lords, who were very ioyfull to ſée her. Then ſhee was borne to the Church, and with great ſolemnitie chriſtened, and named Clariet, bicauſe ſhe was ſo faire and cleare to behold. Then ſhee was brought to the Ducheſſe, who had of her great ioy. When the Ducheſſe had kept her Chamber a Moneth, then ſhe was churched, whereof all the Court was ioyfull, and ſuch feaſting was made, that if I ſhould ſhewe you the riches and nobleneſſe that was there ſhewed, it ſhould be ouer-long to rehearſe. Therefore I wil leaue ſpeaking thereof at this time vntill another ſeaſon.
            
            
               
               Chap. LXXXVIII.
               
                  ¶ How the Emperour aſſembled a great hoaſt, and came vnto Bourdeaux.
                  
               
               
                  
                     YE haue at large heard here before, the manner and cauſe why this war was mooued, betweene the Emperour of Almaine and Huon Duke of Bourdeaux, the which after the Truce was expired, & that the Emperour was hole of his thigh that Huon had broken: he publiſhed the war againe, and ſent ouer all his Empire, that euerie Duke, Earle, Baron, Knight and Squier ſhould come to him, and Souldiers from all parts, and that within a Moneth they were to be at the Citie of Mayence, to the entent to make warre vppon Huon of Bourdeaux. This commaundement was publiſhed, and ſuch diligence was made, that by the day appointed, euerie man was come to the City of Mayence, and lodged in the Citie, and in Pauilions about the Citie: there were aſſembled more then fortie Thouſand, and all men well appointed for the warre. When this Emperour who was named Tirrey ſaw them, he was verie ioyfull, and ſore threatned Huon, and made promiſe to all his Barons that hee would neuer returne into his owne Countrey, vntill hee had firſt ſlaine Huon, who hadde doone him ſo great damage.
               Then hee commaunded his Conſtables and Marſhals to be readie to depart the next day, & to take the way towardes Coleyne with all his Artilerie and carriage, the which was done. The next day the Emperour entred into the feeld, & ſo road towards Coleyne, and when the Emperor was within a League, then there met with him the old Sauarie his Brother: who was Father to Duke Raoul ſlaine by Huon.
                  
when theſe two brethren met together, there was great ioy made betwéene them. But then Duke Sauary beganne to wéepe, and ſayd to his brother the Emperour. Sir of your comming I am right ioyfull: But when the pitious death of my deare beloued ſonne your nephew Raoull commeth to my minde, there is no member of me but for dolour and diſpleaſure trembleth, nor I can neuer haue perfect ioye at my heart, as long as he that hath done mee this diſpleaſure liueth.
               This Duke Sauary was a noble man, but betwéene him and his ſonne Raoull was great difference: for the Duke Raoull was the vntrueſt Traitor that euer liued: the which wickednes procéeded by the Ducheſſe his mother, who was daughter to Hurdowin of Fraunce, the moſt vntrueſt and falſeſt Traytour that as then liued in the world. When the Emperour heard his brother ſpeake, the teares fell from his eyes, and he embraced him & ſayd. My right deare brother, your dolour much diſpleaſeth mee, for your dolour is mine, and thereof I will haue a part, and if ye haue much ioy, my part ſhall likewiſe be therein. But it is not poſſible for vs to haue him againe for whom we make this ſorrow. God ayde Huon now frō his enemies, for they greatly deſire his death: yet oftentimes they that deſire another mans death, auaunceth their own. Thus as you haue heard, the Emperour and Duke Sauary entred into the Citie of Coleyne, whereas they were receiued with great ioy, and ſo rode to the Pallayce, and there they ſupped. I will make no long rehearſall of the good chéere that they made there. Then after Supper they went to their reſt, and the next morning roſe and heard ſeruice, and tooke a ſop in wine, & then departed out of Coleyne. It was a goodly hoaſt to behold, they and their carriage and their artillerie reached foure leagues of length. Thus they all had ſworne the death of Huon, they paſſed by high Borgoyn and by Dolphinne, and ſo paſſed the riuer of Roan, and ſo into the countrey of Bourdeaux. Now I will leaue ſpeaking of them till another ſeaſon.
            
            
               
               Chap. LXXXIX.
               
                  ¶ How the Emperour Tirrey of Almaine beſieged the Citie of Bourdeaux, and how Huon made him readie to fight with his enemies.
               
               
                  
                     THus you haue heard heere before, the deuiſes that the Ducheſſe Eſcleremond had made to her huſband Huon, who as ſoone as ſhe was churched, Huon ſent his commaundement through all his countrie, euery man to be readie in armes, and to come to Bourdeaux, becauſe he was aduertiſed of the comming of his en
                     •
                  mies. The meſſengers made ſuch diligence, that within fifteene dayes after euerie man was come to Bourdeaux, and there Duke Huon receiued them with great ioy. Then he repayred the Citie and the towres and walles, and it was well furniſhed with victuals and artillerie, as in ſuch a caſe it well appertained, for at that time the Citie of Bourdeaux was not ſo ſtrong as it is now, when Duke Huon ſaw the Citie ſo well garniſhed with men and victuales, he was right ioyfull, and then he called to him the old Gerames, and ſayd: my right deere friend, ye ſee wel this warre that is apparent betweene the Emperour and mee, and now we be wel aduertiſed of his comming, who is ready to come with all his 
                     〈◊〉
                  , to beſiege this our Citie, and therefore my heartie deere friend▪ who hath ayded me in ſo many buſineſſes, I pray you counſell and ayde me now, for in all the conduct of my warre, I will that ye haue the charge, and that you will comfort my men well, ſo that of vs there be no euill report ma
                     •
                  e, and that our enemies haue no cauſe to prayſe the warre that they haue againſt vs, nor that when they bee returned into their countries, that they make not their auaunts

among their wenthes and their louers.
               Sir quoth Gerames, I thanke you of the honour and great truſt that you haue in mee, howbeit, ye haue many other more ſage and hardie then I am; to whom this great charge ſhould better appertaine then to me. But Syr, as for me, I ſhall ſo acquite me, that I truſt I ſhall not be reprehended.
               Thus as you haue heard, Huon made his deuiſes among all his Barons, and made all his ordinances for the defence of the Citie, and the manner of their iſſuing, and appoynted men for their reſcue in reculing. And the Emperour was entred into the Countrey of Bourdeaux with a mightie armie, burning and deſtroying the Countrey, whereof the poore people were ſore abaſhed, becauſe they neuer had war before, and thus the Emperour neuer reſted waſting and deſtroying the Countrey, till they came before the Cittie of Bourdeaux, and there hee pitcht vp his tents and pauillions, and the Emperour lay on the way leading to Paris, on the other part Duke Sauary father to Raoull was lodged by the Emperours marſhalles, ſo that all the Cittie was cloſed round about. Huon who was within the Cittie, beheld their countenaunces and manner of their lodging: he commaunded that all his men ſhould be readie to iſſue out vpon their enemies, the which they did. Then Huon armed himſelfe verie richly, and mounted vpon his good horſe, the which was the Emperours, and ſware that ere he returned again, he would ſhew his enemies what they of Bourdeaux could doe. When hee was mounted on his good horſe, hee came into the Citie, and found the old Gerames readie apparelled with all his companie. Then he appoynted fiue thouſand men to keepe the Citie, and twentie thouſand men to goe with him. Thus Duke Huon made his ordinances. Yee may well imagine that the ſorrow was great that Eſcleremond made for the Duke her huſband, ſhe was right wiſe, ſhe feared to looſe him, becauſe ſhe knew him ſo aduenturous, and that his enemies were of ſo great number, but right

pitiouſly weeping, ſhee made her prayers to the Lord God deuoutly, that hee would keepe and defend Huon her huſband and all his men from danger and loſſe, and to ſend him peace with his enemies.
            
            
               Chap. LXXXX.
               
                  ¶ Of the great Battaile that was before Bourdeaux, whereas Huon had great loſſe, and the old Gerames taken.
               
               
                  
                     THus as you haue heard, Bourdeaux
                   was beſieged by the Emperour of the high Almaynes, and by his brother the Duke Sauary with a great number of men. Then Huon iſſued out, and when hee was paſt the port, hee made haſte, to the intent to ſurpriſe his enemies, for at that time the Emperour was ſet at dinner. Then Huon and his companie all at once daſht in among the tents and Pauillions, and beate them down to the earth, ſo that they that were within were much abaſhed, for they thought verily that Huon durſt neuer haue iſſued out of the Citie againſt him and the great number that hee was of. Huon layd on round about him, ſo that who ſoeuer met with him, had no néede of a leches craft. Alſo the old Gerames did maruailes, and ſo did the Bourdeloies, many a rich tent and Pauillion was beaten to the ground, and they within ſlaine and all to behewen, and Huon who was mounted on a good horſe, met a Knight of the Emperours houſe, and he gaue him ſuch a ſtroke with his ſword, that he cloue his head to the teeth, and then he ſtroke another, that his head, helme and all fell to the earth, they that ſawe that ſtroke were ſore abaſhed.
               The Emperours men aſſembled together by heapes, but by the mightie proweſſe of Huon, anon they were againe departed,

for he was ſo doubted and feared, that none was ſo hardie to approach néere him. The crie and voyce mounted ſo high, that the Emperour who was at dinner, when hee heard them crie, he roſe from the table and demaunded what noyſe it was? Sir (quoth a knight) who was fledde and ſore hurt, know for truth that your enemie Huon is iſſued out of Bourdeaux, and hath done ſo much hurt, that he hath ſlaine a quarter of your hoſte, and without that you doe reſcue your men verie ſhortly, your loſſe is like to be excéeding great, for I haue ſéene Huon your enemie mounted vppon your good horſe, whereon he doth great maruailes, for there is none that méeteth him but he is ſlaine, he is ſo cruell and hardie. When the Emperour heard the knight, he ſwet for diſpleaſure, and incontinent he armed him, and iſſued out of his tent, and mounted on his horſe, and found his men readie. Then he ſaw Huon mounted on his good horſe, whereon hee ſayd to his men. Sirs I require you at this time putte to your paines, that I may be reuenged on my enemie, who before my face yonder killeth my men, he is ſo valiant, that whomſoeuer he ſtriketh with a full ſtroke, is but dead, great domage it was when he ſlew my nephewes, whoſoeuer can deliuer him to me quicke or dead, ſhall be my friend for euer, and I will ſhew him that courteſie, that Eſcleremond who is ſo fayre, I ſhall giue her vnto him in marriage, and all the Court of Bourdeaux.
               
               Then ſuch as heard the promiſe, made them ready for the couetouſneſſe of that gift: But ſome haſted ſo much to accompliſh the Emperours will, that it was too late after for them to repent. It is an old ſaying, that an ill haſte is not good, ſome haſted ſo much, that afterwards bought it too déere, as you ſhall heare héere. After theſe wordes ſpoken by the Emperour, ſuch as deſired to accompliſh his will, ranne in altogether into the Battaile againſt the Burdeloyes, where was great ſlaughter made on both parts. Huon who had great deſire in his heart to ſlay his enemies, did ſo much by his proweſſe, that hee reculed his enemies to their tents,

and it had béene ill with them if Duke Sauary had not reſcued them, he with his great proweſſe made them to recouer againe the fielde, and there was a ſore battaile on both the parts. The old Gerames that day ſlew many a man, but hée aduentured himſelfe ſo farre forth among his enemies, that his horſe was ſlaine vnder him, ſo that hee was conſtrained to fall to the earth, and then hee was taken and led to the Emperours tent, and great fetters clapt vpon his legges: alas that Huon had not knowne thereof, if he had, he ſhould not haue béene ledde away without great loſſe. But he was in the Battaile doing maruailes in armes, he held his ſword in his hand, tainted with bloud and braines of men that hee had ſlaine, there was none ſo hardie that durſt approach néere vnto him, he cryed ſtill Bourdeaux, to draw his men together, and daſhed into the greateſt preaſe, and ſtrake on all parts, in ſuch wiſe, that his enemies ſtill gaue him place, for none durſt abide his ſtrokes.
               Now the preaſe was ſo great of the men of Duke Sauaries, that he had great paine to breake in among them, hée fought ſo, that hee ſéemed rather a man of the Fayrie, or a Spirit, then a mortall man, euerie man had great maruaile of the proweſſe that hee and his companie ſhewed. Then came againſt him the old Duke Sauary, with a burning deſire to be reuenged for the death of his ſonne Raoull. And Huon perceiued him well, and made ſuch haſte, that the Duke had no leyſure to giue the firſt ſtroke, for Huon gaue him ſuch a ſtroke with his ſword, that hee cutte a quarter of his ſhield cleane off, and the ſtroke glyded to the horſe necke by ſuch vertue, that it ſtrake off the horſe head cleane, ſo that thereby the Duke fell to the earth, and if he had not béene wel ſuccoured, he had béene ſlaine, but there came to him ſo many men, that whether Huon would or not he was ſuccoured, and mounted vpon a new horſe. When Huon ſawe that he was eſcaped, he called vpon our Lord God, and ſayd. Ah good Lord, if I tarrie héere long, I ſée well that my force ſhal but little profit me, for there be twentie againſt one.
               
                  Then hee called certaine of his Lordes that were about him, and ſayd. Sirs, I perceiue well our force cannot long endure, therefore it is better to depart betimes, then to tarrie too long. Sir (quoth they) as it ſhall pleaſe you, ſo then they turned them towardes Bourdeaux a ſoft pace, and Huon did as the ſhepheard doth goe behinde his ſhéepe, ſo went hée with his ſword in his hand, defending his companie from his enemies, right ſorrowfull and angrie for the loſſe that he had that day, for in the morning when he departed from Bourdeaux, hee had twentie thouſand of good fighting men, and at his returne he ſawe well that he had not aboue foure thouſand, wherewith he was ſore diſpleaſed, and oftentimes by the way turned and returned to his enemies. At laſt hee met with a Knight named Iozeram, and gaue him ſuch a ſtroke, that he fell downe dead to the earth, whereof the Emperour Tyrrey was ſore diſpleaſed: for hee was his coſin germaine, and after that he ſlew foure other Knights of Almaine. Then he returned againe after his men, and ſo ledde them forth ſtill as the ſhepheard doth his ſheepe, and oftentimes turned and returned vpon his enemies, ſo that there was none ſo hardie that durſt approach néere him.
               Therewith thither came the Emperour, richly armed with armes imperiall, and mounted vppon a puiſſant horſe. Then hee cryed, on forth my Barons, take héede that this traitour Huon ſcape not away, if I may haue him in my hands, all the gold in the world ſhall not redeeme him from hanging. Huon who heard the Emperour ſayd: Ah falſe olde dotard, thou lyeſt falſely, I was neuer traitour. Then the Emperour ranne at Huon, and ſtrake him on the ſhield, and ſtrake it cleane through, and the ſpeare brake all to péeces: but Huon with his ſword ſtrake the Emperour on the Helmet, ſo that the circle ſette with ſtone and pearle was beaten to the earth, and if the horſe had not ſwarued, the Emperour had not ſcaped aliue: neuertheleſſe the ſtroke light ſo on his ſhoulder, that the ſword pierced the maile, & gaue him a déep wound, & further the ſword deſcēded to the bow of the ſaddle,

ſo that the horſe was ſtroken nigh aſunder in two péeces, and ſo the Emperour and the horſe fell downe to the ground together, ſo that if he had not béene reſcued by the Almaines he had béene ſlaine. Huon was ſorie when he ſaw the Emperor ſo ſcaped with his life, then he turned and rode towards Bourdeaux after his men, who tarried ſtill for him, and Huon did ſo much by his proweſſe, that for all the Emperour and his men he entred into the Citie of Bourdeaux.
               
               But as then hee knew not that the olde Gerames was taken priſoner, ſo thus as you haue heard Duke Huon entred into Bourdeaux with foure thouſand men, of whom the moſt part were ſore hurt, then he rode to the Pallaice, and there alighted. Then he looked about him, and was ſore abaſhed when he ſaw not Gerames by him, then he demanded if any man knewe where hee was. Sir (quoth a Knight named Gallerance) know for truth that hee is taken priſoner, and is in the hands of your enemies, for to haue ayded him I was wounded in thrée places, and néere hand ſlaine, I employed my force to haue ſuccoured him, but I could finde no remedie. When Huon heard that, hee prayſed greatlie Gerames force and vertue, and greatly complained and ſaid. Alas that I had not knowne of his taking ere I returned, I would ſooner haue dyed, but that at the leaſt I would haue taken ſome man ſufficient to haue redéemed him againe out of danger. A lamentable thing it was to heare Duke Huon, what ſorrow hee made for his friend Gerames, but his complaints could not auaile him, his Lords ſayd, Sir by the grace of God you ſhall haue him againe ſafe and aliue. Sirs quoth Huon, it ſhall be a great aduenture without they put him to death.
               Then Huon mounted vp to the Pallaice, whereas he met Eſcleremond his wife, whom hee kiſſed and embraced manie times. Sir (quoth the Ladie) I pray you ſhew mee of your newes. Ladie (quoth Huon) they be but poore and dolorous, for of twentie thouſand men that I had with me out of this Citie, I haue brought home aliue but foure thouſand, and

yet the moſt part of them before wounded, and beſide, the old Gerames is taken priſoner, who hath ſuffered before this time ſo many paines and trauailes for my ſake. Alas Sir quoth the Ladie ſore wéeping, I had rather you had beléeued me, and that you had gone and ſought for ſuccour of my brother, who would not haue fayled you, but would haue come with you with ſo much people and puiſſance, that the Emperour ſhould not haue durſt to haue abiden you. Madame (quoth Huon) ſpeake no more thereof, for the loſſe of as much as tenne Cities be in value, I would not haue gone thither, nor to none other part for any ſuccour, nor yet will not, till that I ſée mée more oppreſſed then I am as yet, I might well be reputed for a coward and recreaunt, thus to abandon my Citie, I had rather be diſmembred into péeces, then for feare I ſhould leaue you, it would be greatlie to my reproch in the Courts of hie Princes, and when I come there, to be marked with the finger for that great default. Sir (quoth Eſcleremond) your pleaſure is mine, ſince that you wil haue it ſo, but I am right ſorrowful for the old Gerames, who is priſoner in the tents of your enemies, who hath ſuffered for your ſake many great pains and pouerties, I cannot be but ſory when I remember him. Madame (quoth Huon) as yet Gerames is not dead, I hope by the grace of our Lord God that we ſhall haue him againe aliue. Sir quoth ſhe, I pray to God that it may be ſo. Now let vs leaue ſpeaking of Huon, and ſpeake of the Emperour, who lay ſore hurt on the earth.
            
            
               Chap. LXXXXI.
               
                  ¶How the Emperour rayſed vp a paire of Gallowes, to hang vp the old Gerames, and all the Bourdeloyes that were taken priſoners.
               
               
                  
                  
                     YOu haue alredy heard here before recounted, howe Huon entred into Bourdeaux, after hee had beaten downe the Emperour Tirrey, whome he left lying vpō the earth, and had beene flaine, if his men had not quickly reſcued him: now his men were ſorrowfull, for they feared hee had been dead, and vnlaced his helmet, and was right ioyful when they found him aliue. Then they demaunded and ſaid: Sir, we deſire you ſhew vs in what caſe you feele your ſelfe? Sirs, (quoth he) I am ſore hurt, whereby I feele great paine, this enemie Huon hath brought me into this caſe, I was fooliſhly counſailed when I came hether to ſeeke for him, for if I had taried ſtill at Mayence, I beleeue to do me diſpleaſure he would haue come thether: ſirs, I pray you beare me into my Tent, that my wound may bee ſearched, then hee was borne into his Tent & vnarmed, and layd vpon his bed, and he ſwounded thrice for paine of his hurt. And when he came to himſelfe, and his woundes were ſearched by his Surgions, hee demaunded where ye Knightes of Bourdeaux were, they that were taken in the Battaile, and demaunded that they ſhould be brought to his preſence.
               
                  Gerames was brought before him, who was great & puiſſant, with a beard as white as ſnow, hee was a faire ould Knight to behould, his viſage plaine and ſmiling, he ſeemed to be a man of high affaires, when the Emperour ſaw him, he ſaid: Thou old Catiffe, ſhew me what thou art, beware and ſhew me the troth? Sir, (quoth Gerames) know well that for feare of any death I ſhall not ſpare to ſay the troth, 
                     •••
                  ing you will needs know what I am, I am named Gerames, and am Huons Seruant, whome I loue naturally, and alſo I am his kinſman, whereby I haue the more cauſe to loue him, and I haue ſlaine diuers of your men. Well, (quoth the Emperour) I repute thee for a Foole to giue mee

this knowledge, for by the grace of God, to morow early ere I eate or drinke, thou ſhalt be drawne & hanged, & xl. of thy company yt were taken with thée in the battaile. Sir quoth Gerames, of this that you ſhew me I giue you no thanke for it, but I hope by the aid of Ieſus chriſt, yt I ſhal do you more damage ere I die. Ah Villain quoth ye Emperor, great maruaile I haue of thée, that thus before me thou doeſt vſe theſe threatnings, & yet thou ſéeſt how thou art my priſoner, & that it lyeth in me to put thée to what death it pleaſeth me, know for troth, & if it were not ſo late of the day as it is, I wold not ſuffer thée to liue one houre. But ere I ſleepe I ſhall cauſe a Gallowes to be made, whereas thou and thy company ſhall be hanged, and I ſhall cauſe thée to be hanged ſo néere to the Citie, that if Huon be ſo néere kin to thée as thou ſayſt, he wil ſhew how well he loueth thée, he may haue great 
                     •
                  olor, whē before his eyes he ſhall ſée his coozen and his men hanged, & then afterward I wil aſſaile the citie, & take it perforce, ſo yt then Huon in any wiſe ſhall not eſcape out of my hands, & ſo to be hanged with other, & the faire Eſcleremond ſhalbe burnt or condemned to priſon, and then I will burne all the Citie and deſtroy it cleane. Sir quoth Gerames, you may ſay your pleaſure: but in the doing is all the matter, & when the Emperour ſaw that Gerames doubted not the death, he was ſore abaſhed. Then he commanded incontinent Gallows to bée raiſed vp, ſo great, to hang thereon the fortie priſoners, & to be ſet on a little rocke neere to the Citie of Bourdeaux, to the entent that Huon and his men might ſée them plaine, therby to abaſh them, the which was done, ſo the matter reſted vntill the next day in the morninge. And when it was day, Huon within the Citie roſe and came to his Pallaice, and regarded out at his windowes, to ſée and behold the hoaſt of his enemies, and as he ſtood, he eſpied the newe Gallowes ſtanding on the rocke: then hee called his Lordes and ſayd. Sirs, neuer beleeue, but yonder Gallowes that I ſee newe rayſed, is for none other entent, but for to hang thereupppon my men that bee taken and my good Freende old Gerames:

whereof I am verie ſorrowfull. Therefore Sirs, quickly make you readie, and mount vppon your horſes, for ere they be hanged, we will prooue our ſelues againſt them: looke toward the Hoaſt, and ſée when they bée comming toward the Gallowes, and when you ſée them, be readie on horſe-backe and open the gate, that we may iſſue out all at once, and let vs neuer thinke to returne vntill we haue reſcued our men, for I purpoſe neuer to returne into this Citie, vntill I haue deliuered them out of the hands of our enemies. Then they armed them about ſeauen Thouſand by tale, of good men of armes well horſed, readie at the gate to depart when time came. Now wée will leaue ſpeaking of Huon, and ſpeake of the Emperour.
            
            
               Chap. LXXXXII.
               
                  ¶How Huon yſſued out of Bourdeaux, and reſcued the ould Gerames and his companie, whom the Emperor would haue hanged.
               
               
                  
                     THe Emperour, who hadde great deſire that Gerames and his company were hanged, cauſed thē to be brought forth by couples, one faſt tyed to another, and Gerames was the formoſt, who then right tenderly began to weepe when he ſaw himſelfe in that caſe. Ah good Lord, (quoth he) I require thee haue mercie on our ſoules, & kéepe and defend my good Lord Duke Huon, who by the commandement of King Oberon, ſhould giue me his Duchy, and he to haue king Oberons dignitie of the Fayrie after foure yeares paſſed: I cannot ſay what fortune will fall, but I may well ſay, that I ſhall neuer come to greater honor, yet I am comforted in yt I am ſo old, it is good reaſon that I be content to haue liued ſo long, it is now time

that I depart out of this world. Then the Emperour called vnto him a Knight, and ſaid: Sir Othon, I will that incontinent you take three Thouſand men, and take theſe Priſoners, and hang them vp all vppon the Gallowes that were made yeſter-night late, and if it bee ſo that Huon yſſue out▪ looke that you quit your ſelfe valiantly, and if you haue néed of any ayd, take my horne and blow it, for I haue ready appointed ten Thouſand men to ſuccour you if need bée.
               When Othon heard the Emperour, hee was right ſorrie to haue that euill office, for in his youth hée was brought vp in the houſe of Duke Seuin Father to Huon, and ſomewhat he was of his kin, but as then hee had ſlaine a man, wherefore he fled from Bourdeaux, and came and ſerued the Emperor at Mayence, wherefore he was right ſorrowfull to haue that Commiſſion: then hee ſayd vnto the Emperour. Sir, mée thinkes you doe ill to cauſe them to die ſo haſtily, better it were to abide to ſée what end your warre will come vnto, and alſo if it fortune that any of your Lords to be taken hereafter, for one of them you might recouer him againe, and if you ſlay them, then if any of your Barons happen to bee taken, they ſhall die of like death: and therefore Sir, if you wil beléeue me, you ſhall forbeare ſlaying them at this time, and Sir, if you will giue me licence, I will doe ſo much to Duke Huon, that for the offence that he hath done vnto you, hee ſhall make you amends at your owne pleaſure, and hee ſhall goe vnto ſome holy Pilgrimage, to pray for the Soules of your Nephews, and other of your lords that he hath ſlain, and he to haue with him two Hundred men in their ſhirtes, and ſo to goe to the holy Sepulchre at his owne charge and coſte, and hee to hould of you all his Landes, and to doe you homage.
               Then the Lordes that were there preſent, all with one voice ſayd vnto the Emperour: Sir, the counſaile that ſir Othon hath giuen vnto you, is worthy to bee beleeued, wée all agree thereto, and deſire you ſo to doe, but when the Emperour heard them, he was ſorowfull and ſore diſpleaſed. Sir,

(quoth Othon) you may ſurely know, if you hang any of them that be taken, if Huon happen to take any of your men, hee ſhall neuer eſcape vnhanged and drawne. When the Emperour had heard Othon ſpeake, he was ſo troubled & angry, that it ſeemed by his face, that for verie anger he was neere hand in a rage, and ſaid. Behold ſirs this Foole, who would let mee to take vengeance on them that ſo ſore haue troubled me, he hath heard me ere this time ſweare and make ſolemn promiſe, that I would neuer returne into my Countrey, vntill I had hanged and drawne Huon of Bourdeaux, for by that Lord that made mée to his ſimilitude, I knowe no man this day, though he were neuer ſo neere a kin to me, except mine owne Brother, but I ſhall make him to be ſlaine, if he ſpeak any more to me for reſpiting of their liues, nor I ſhall neuer loue him, for I make a vow to our Lord God, that I will neuer returne into my Country, vntill I haue taken this Citie perfor
                     •
                  e. Sir, (quoth Othon) ſéeing it is your pleaſure I ſhal ſpeake no more thereof, but I beleeue it will bee longe hereafter before you finde any that will be glad to doe your pleaſure. Othon, (quoth the Emperour) diſpatch the matter, and reuenge me vpon the old Gerames and vpon all his companie. Sir, (quoth Othon) it is conuenient that I doe it ſéeing it is your pleaſure: then without any more words he departed, and tooke Gerames and the other Priſoners, and went with them towards the Gallowes.
               
                  Gerames went before with the haulter about his necke ſore weeping, and all his companie after him, ſo that at the laſte they came to the place of execution, where the Ladders were ſet vp, and then the hang-man came vnto Gerames and ſaid: Come on thou old Dotard, thou haſt liued long inough, thou ſhalt no more ſee him whome thou loueſt ſo well, and I hope ſhortly he ſhal beare thée company wauing in the wind. When Gerames heard him, he beheld him fiercely and ſayd: Ah thou vnhappie Villaine, if one of my handes were looſe, thou ſhouldeſt neuer ſée faire day more, how art thou ſo hardy, to ſay or to thinke ſo villainous a worde, of the beſt and

moſt valiantſt Knight now liuing? Then Othon came to them, and hearing the hangman how hee reuiled Gerames, he ſayd. Ah thou baſe ſlaue▪ thinkſt thou not that this knight hath not inough to ſuffer though thou doſt not reuile him? if thou thy ſelfe were in that caſe that they be in, and they in the citie of Bourdeaux, thou wouldeſt ſoone repent thy ſaucie words, and therewith hee lift vp a ſtaffe that he had in his hand, and ſtrake the hangman therewith, that he fell down to the earth: then hee ſayd. Ah thou falſe theefe, doe thine office and ſpeake no words: whereupon the hangman durſt ſpeake no more, but then he tooke Gerames by the halter that was about his necke, and ſo mounted vpon the ladder and Gerames after him, who made pittious complaints for Huon his good Lord.
               The ſame time that Gerames mounted vpon the firſt ſtep of the ladder, they within the Citie vpon the walles perceiued it, and ſaw euidently, that without the priſoners were ſpéedily reſcued, their liues were loſt, then they ſaid to Huon. Sir, if you tarrie any longer, your men ſhall be all hanged, for yonder wée ſée one of them is mounted on the ladder, who hath a beard as white as the ſnow. When Huon heard that, he was ſore diſpleaſed, and ſayd. Ah good Lord, I know ſurely that it is my true friend Gerames, whom they would firſt put to death, therefore Sirs, I require you quickly let vs iſſue out at the gate, for if Gerames bee not preſently ſuccoured, the Traitours will putte him to death, but if that I may come time inough, his perill ſhall bee dearely ſolde to them. Hereupon Huon with ſeuen thouſand fighting men, iſſued out at the gate ſo fiercely, that the earth ſeemed to groane vnder them, their horſes made ſuch a thundering, and ſo within a ſhort ſpare (by a ſecret way) they came to the place whereas the gallowes ſtood. Huon was the firſt that arriued there, and he marked well the hangman that ſhould haue hanged Gerames, and gaue him ſuch a ſtroke with his ſpeare, that he ranne him through, ſo that hee fell from the ladder dead, ſo was Gerames reuenged of ye iniury

that hee had done to him before: then Huon ſaide, Gerames come downe of the Ladder, and arme you in ſome armour of them that ſhall bée heere ſlaine. Gerames thanked our Lord God, and came downe the ladder, and then thether came Huons companie, who vntyed all the other Priſoners: then began a ſore Battaile, the Almaines would not fly, the which Huon ſéeing, cried to them and ſaid: Yée falſe Traytours, your deaths are iudged, deare ſhalbe ſould to you the offence that yée haue done vnto mee, when yée would ſlay thus my men with ſo villainous a death, better it had béen for you to haue been at Mayence, hidden in the laps of your Mothers and Louers.
               When they vnderſtood Huon, anon they knew him, wherof they were ſore abaſhed, then Huon met with a Knight of Almayne, and ran him cleane through, and ſo hée ſerued thrée other, then he drew his ſword wherewith he did great maruailes, for ere he ceaſed, he ſlew fourteene, and alſo his men did maruailes in armes, ſo that within a ſhort ſpace the Almaines were diſcomfited, ſo that none eſcaped away aliue, except Sir Othon, who valiantly defended himſelfe. But when he ſaw that his force would not helpe him, hée yéelded himſelfe to Huon, and gaue him his ſword, and cryed him mercie, and ſayd. Sir, I beſéech you ſlay me not, but haue pitie on me, and I promiſe you faithfully, that againſt my wil I came hither, but I was forced ſo to doe by the Emperour, and firſt I deſired reſpite. Inſomuch that the Emperor was ſore diſpleaſed with me, I intreated for a peace to haue been made betwéene you and him, but my words could not preuaile. Sir I am your kinſman, & was brought vp in Duke Seuin your fathers houſe, and there I ſerued a maiſter who did beate mee, and when I felt my ſelfe ſtrong and of age, I was diſpleaſed that he did beate me ſo without a cauſe, & I ſlew him & fled away, and came to Mayens, and euer ſince I haue ſerued the Emperour, who is come hither to beſiege you. Friend (quoth Huon) feare not your death, but I pray you from hence forth ayde and ſerue mee, as ye ought to doe

to your louing friend. Sir quoth Othon, God ſhame mee if I doe the contrarie, but I ſhall ſerue you truely as long as life is in my body.
               Then Huon came to the foote of the ladder, whereas hee found Gerames as then not vntied, Huon embraced and kiſſed him often times, and ſayd. Right déere friend, I am right glad at my heart when I ſee you whole of body, and then hee went to the other and loſed them, and vnbound their eyes, and ſayd. Sirs arme your ſelues with the harneſſe of them that bee dead, for a man that is armed hath the aduantage of others that bee not armed. It was néedfull for them to be armed, God defend them from euill, for anon after they had ſo maruailous a reencounter, that they had neuer the like before, for the other tenne thouſand men came to reuenge them that were dead, they hoped to haue come time inough, but they fayled, for they came too late, Huon had taken of al them their truage. When Huon ſaw that he had done that which he came for, he returned him towardes the Citie, but he was ſo purſued, that he was neere ſurpriſed and ſtopped from entring into the Citie. When Huon ſaw his enemies comming, he cryed aloude to his men, ſaying. Sirs, let vs turne vpon them that come toward vs, to the intent that they ſhall not make their auaunts, that they haue cauſed vs to flie away before them: then hee and all his men turned againſt their enemies with a moſt valiaunt courage, and at that méeting many ſpeares were broken on both parts, and many a knight borne to the earth, that had neuer the power after to reléeue themſelues, there was ſuch a ſlaughter on both parts, that it was pittie to ſée them. And great maruaile it was to ſee Huon, how he beate downe his enemies, & claue helmets, and raſed them from the heads of his enemies: hee dealt in ſuch wiſe, that no Almaine durſt abide his ſtrokes he was ſo doubted and feared, hee made the thicke preaſe to breake a ſunder, and flie away before him, and by him was Sir Othon, who that day did many a noble deed of armes, for next Huon (aboue all other that day) hee bore the price.
               
                  Finally, Huon and Othon and his other men did ſo much, that the Almaines were chaced to their Tentes, and many ſlaine in the chace and ſore hurt, ſo that they neuer road vppon horſe-backe after. Sometime it fortuneth, that it is folly to venture too much forward, and too late to repent afterward: I ſay this for Huon and his company, who were gone ſo much forward, that in great dau
                     •
                  ger they returned to the Citie, for the Almaines (who were thirtie Thouſand men ready before their Tents) when they ſaw Huon and his men chace their company, they ſet foorth againſte Huon: and when Huon ſaw them, hee ſayd vnto his men. Sirs, it is good that wee recoile into our Citie, for yonder I ſee comminge 
                     〈◊〉
                   then thirtie Thouſand Almaines as faſt as they can: ſo when Huons company ſaw them, they doubted greatly, and not without cauſe, for they had beene before at two great ſkirmiſhes, whereby they and their horſes were wearie and ſore trauailed, the which was no maruaile, ſo by the counſaile of Huon, they returned a falſe gallop toward their Citie, and the Almaines were at their backe, and chaced them ſo quickly, that more then fiue Hundred Almaines entred into the Citie with them of Bourdeaux. But they that kept the gates that day were wiſe and diſcreet, for as ſoone as they perceiued that Huon and his company were entred, and with them about fiue Hundred of their enemies: they woulde keepe their gates no longer open, for feare that their enemies ſhould haue entred with too great a number, ſo that for haſt they cut aſunder the cord yt held vp the Port
                  
                     ••
                  lloys, the which fell downe by ſuch force, that it fell vpon the horſe of an Almaine that was vnder it, the which horſe was cutte cleane aſſunder, ſo that the man and the fore part of the horſe fell within the gate, and the hinder part of the horſe fell without, whereat the Almaines that followed after were ſorrowfull and angrie, that they had not come thether ſooner.
               Then they returned to their Tents, complaining for the great loſſe and damage that they had ſuſtained that day, by

the high proweſſe of Huon and his men, and alſo they that were entred into the Citie were ſore abaſhed, when they ſawe themſelues encloaſed within the Citie. When Huon perceiued it, he had great maruaile, that they were ſo entred in among his men, for he knew not thereof, and yet he himſelfe was the laſte that entred, then hee ſayde. Ah yee falſe Traytours, yee ſhall all die an ill death: and then he ſayd to his men. Syrs, ſlay them all, then incontinent they alighted, and kneeled downe before Huon, and required him to haue mercie and pitie of them, and to ſaue their liues, and put vs in priſon (quoth they) we be all men of a noble lineage, and it may bee ſo, that by vs yee may haue peace with the Emperour. Then Gerames ſayd vnto Huon: Sir, I require you to haue pitie of them, and put them not to death, for ſo it may bee that by them you may haue peace with the Emperour. Freend, (quoth Huon) I am content to doe at your pleaſure, as you will haue me doe: then he commaunded that they ſhould all bée vnarmed, and they all made promiſe vnto Huon not to depart without licence. Gerames, (quoth Huon) I will that theſe Priſoners bee brought vp into the Borough, and there parted and ſet into diuers houſes that be ſure, and let them haue all things neceſſarie for their liuing: then Gerames deliuered them to the keeping of ſuch as hee truſted, and ſo each of them was kept in a courteous Priſon. Now let vs leaue to ſpeak of Huon and of his Priſoners, and returne to the Emperour.
            
            
               Chap. LXXXXIII.
               
                  ¶ Howe the Emperour aſſayled the Citie of Bourdeaux twoo times, whereas he loſt many of his men.
               
               
                  
                  
                     AS you haue heard here before, how Huon chaſed his enemies to their tents, and how it was time for him to returne to his Citie, and how hee was ſo purſued by the Almaynes, that more then fiue hundred of them entred into the Citie, and were cloſed within it, and the reſidue returned to their tents, ſorrowful and angrie for the great loſſe that they had. So when they were returned, the Emperour demaunded what tydings, and how they had ſpedde, and if they had not taken Huon quicke or dead. Sir (quoth a knight) it is follie for you to ſpeake thus, for Huon is no man ſo lightly to bee taken, for the fiftie men that you ſent to haue beene hanged, be reſcued by Huon, and the three thouſand men that you ſent with them are all ſlaine, and diuers other ſore hurt and in perill of death, and beſides that, fiue hundred men of the beſt of your friendes are entred into Bourdeaux: for wee ſo haſtily purſued Huon and his men, that entring into the Citie, fiue hundred of our men entred into the Citie, entermedled with Huons men, and there they be incloſed within: therfore Sir we aduiſe and counſell you, that you agrée with Huon, for if you doe not you ſhall looſe all your men, for Huon is ſo fell and cruell, that hee will hange vp your men, as ye had thought to haue done his, of whom one of them was his coſin, you may doe as it pleaſeth you.
               When the Emperour heard his Barons, what counſell they gaue him, he was verie ſorowfull and ſayd. Sirs ye do me great wrong, to require me to make any peace with Huon, ſince ye know wel what 
                     •
                  ath and promiſe I haue made, that I will neuer be at peace with him, & to the intent yt ye ſhall ſpeake no more therof, know for troth, that if X.M. of my néereſt friends were taken by Huon, I would rather ſuff
                     ••
                   them to die a ſhamefull death, then to agree to any peace with Huon till I haue ſlaine him, and his Citie be burnt

and deſtroyed. Sir (quoth they) ſéeing it is your pleaſure, yée may do as you thinke beſt. Sirs, (quoth the Emperour) I will that yée aſſemble all mine hoaſt, and ſend to my Brother that hée bring all his men, & then with all our puiſſance we will aſſaile the Citie, and that none be ſo hardie as to recule back vntill the Citie be taken: this was proclaymed through the Hoaſt, and euery man was readie to aſſaile the Citie, and the cheefe Captaine was Duke Sauary, who brought all his men in good order to the dikes, well fourniſhed with ladders and other neceſſarie things pertaining to aſſault.
               The ſame time Huon and his men were vnarmed and going to dinner, but when he heard the noiſe and crie without, he tooke a ſop in wine, and armed him & all his men, and euery man went to the walles to their defence, and Huon & old Gerames, Othon, and Barnard a valiant knight mounted on the towre ouer the gate, and the Almaines on euery part entred into the dikes, and rayſed vp many a ſcaling ladder to the walles, but they within caſt them downe, ſo that they had no power to riſe vp againe, for there was caſt downe vpon them earth, timber and ſtones. Fierce was the aſſault that the Almaines made, & they within made noble defence, for Huon and Gerames ſhot ſo with their croſbowes, thar at euery ſhoote they ſlew ſome man or ſore wounded him, and long endured this aſſault, ſo that finally the Almaines were conſtrained to recule backe a bow ſhoote, whereof they within were very ioyfull.
               Then the Emperour Tirrey being ſorrowfull and full of rage, came to his men, and rebuked them ſhamefully, commaunding them that incontinent they ſhould returne again to aſſaile ye Citie, ſaying that they ſhould not faile to winne it. Then the Almaines (to pleaſe their Lord) retourned in great haſt with their ladders & pikes, and came into ye dikes whereas then there was no water, & rayſed them vp to the walles: but they were no ſooner vp, but they within beat them downe againe, and put them in danger of their liues,

for they caſt downe Timber, ſtones, and faggots, with fire and hoat oyle and lead vppon them, ſo that the aſſailants were faine perforce to recoile backe, and they within ſhot arrowes ſo thicke, that it ſeemed like ſnowe. The Emperour was ſore diſpleaſed and Duke Sauary, when they ſaw none other remedie, many were ſlaine and ſore hurt, and the Emperor and Sauary his Brother ſeeing that they could nothing profite, ſounded the retrait, and ſo returned to their Tents, ſore diſpleaſed for their great loſſe that they had, for they loſt that day more then two Thouſand men, lyinge dead in the feeld and in the Dikes, and more then thrée Thouſand ſore hurt.
               Then Duke Sauary ſayd to the Emperor: Sir, me thinks it is but folly to aſſaile this Citie, it is ſtrong, and well furniſhed with men and good Knightes to defend it, wherefore we may well perceiue, that without great damage we cannot winne it, without it be by famine, for hee that is Lorde thereof is hardy and cruell, and to be feared and doubted, for he is expert in armes, wherefore it is impoſſible to take the Citie perforce. When the Emperour vnderſtoode him, hee was right ſorrowfull, and made againe newe promiſe, not to depart thence, vntill hee had Huon at his pleaſure. Huon, who little ſet by the threatnings of the Emperour, went into his Pallaice, and ſaid to his men: Sirs, we ought greatly to thanke God for the defence of our Citie, many Almains 
                  
                     •
                  ee ſlaine and hurt, I doubt them nothing, for our Citie is ſtrong, & before it be loſt, it will coſt many men their liues. I deſire you all take good héed that we be not beguiled. Sir, (quoth they) we ſhall take good héed thereof, as well for you, as for the ſauegard of our liues. Thus Huon and his men deuiſed together, howbeit, they were ſore greeued, for at the beginning they were about twentie Thouſand men, & then they were not aboue ſix Thouſand. Now let vs leaue ſpeaking of them, and ſpeake of the Emperour, who was right ſorrowfull for his loſſe.
            
            
               
               Chap. LXXXXIIII.
               
                  ¶ How Huon ſent Habourey his Meſſenger to the Emperour, to require peace, and of his anſweare.
               
               
                  
                     WHen the Emperor hadde heard Duke Sauary his Brother ſpeake, he made a ſolemne oath, that whatſoeuer fortune ſhould fall, hee would not depart thence Winter nor Summer till hee had wonne the Citie, and then he ſent for his Réerband, as farre as his Empire ſtretched, commaunding euerie man to come to him all excuſes layd apart, and ſo they did. Now of their comming by the way I make no mention, but ſo long they trauailed, that they came within a League of Bourdeaux, and when the Emperour knew thereof, he had great ioy, and mounted on his horſe with other Lords with him, and road & met them, and ſpake to them and made them good cheere. Thus his force encreaſed, & Huons diminiſhed daily, often times Huon iſſued out vpon his horſe called Amphage, & made daily many great Skirmiſhes, ſometime hée wan, and ſometime hee loſt, he ſlew many Almaines, ſo that they all feared him, for there was none that durſt abide him, his horſe was ſo cruell, that none durſt approach néere him without he were ſlaine, & Huons men quit them valiantly, ſo yt if they loſt at one time, they wan iij. times for it: but their force could not long endure, for their enemies were ſo many & they ſo few, & they had made ſo many iſſues, that they had loſt many of their company, for of xx.M. they were left but v.C. men, wherof Huon was ſorowfull. Now when he ſaw yt he had but v.C. men, he called to him Gerames, Othon, Barnard, & Richard, ſaying. Sirs, I ſee that euery day we diminiſh, wherfore we cannot long endure againſt the Emperors

force, therefore I thinke that it were good that wee ſent to the Emperor, to know if he wil heare ſpeaking of any peace. Sir, (quoth they) wee thinke your aduiſe right good, and it were good to knowe if hee will agrée thereto or not. Then Huon called Habourey his Meſſenger, and commaunded him that incontinent he ſhould goe to the Emperour, and ſay vnto him: that if it bee his pleaſure to heare ſpeaking of any peace, I ſhall (quoth he) condeſcend therto, and to make him amends at his pleaſure, for the wronge and damage that I haue done vnto him and his men. Alſo ſhew him, how that I will become his man, and doe him homage for all the Landes that I haue, the which I was woont to hould of the King of Fraunce: but ſéeing I haue no ſuccour from him, I am driuen perforce to purchaſe for my profit in ſome other place. And beſides that ſhewe him, that the fiue Hundred Priſoners that I haue of his men, I ſhall deliuer them quit without any raunſome paying, and alſo when Lent commeth, I and a Hundred knightes with me at my coſt & charges, ſhall paſſe the Sea and goe to the holy Sepulchre, to pray for the Soules of his Nephews that I haue ſlaine, and for all other that haue been ſlaine by occaſion of this warre. Sir, (quoth the Meſſenger) I am readie to fulfill your commaundement whatſoeuer fall thereof, and ſo hee departed & went to the Emperours Hoaſt, & entred into the riche Tent, and then hee kneeled downe before the Emperour and ſayd.
               The almightie God, who on the Croſſe dyed to ſaue all humane kinde, kéepe and defend from all ill the Emperour & all his Barony: Sir, Duke Huon of Bourdeaux ſendeth to you ſalutation and good amitie, requiring you in the honour of god, that he may haue peace with you, by that hee will become your liege-man, and doe you homage and hould his Landes of you, and will deliuer quite the fiue Hundred men of yours that he hath in priſon in the Citie, and moreouer, hee offereth himſelfe and a Hundred Knights to paſſe the Sea this next Lent, and to goe to the holy Sepulchre, to pray to our Lord God for the ſoules of your Nephewes that

be dead, and for other that by him and by his meanes haue beene ſlaine in this warre. Sir if it pleaſe you this to doe, ye ſhall doe a great almes deede, for life cannot bee had againe to them that bee dead. When the Emperour Tyrrey had wel heard Habourey the meſſenger, he became as red as a brand of fire, and regarded the meſſenger fiercely, and ſayd. Auoyd my ſight thou falſe varlet, but that I doubt to be reprooued, I ſhould cauſe thée to be hewen in peeces, but a meſſenger ought not to be touched for any words that hee can ſpeake, but ſay to thy Lord, that by him and by his meanes I haue loſt more then twentie thouſand men, beſide my thrée Nephewes & my yonger brother, but by the Lord that died on the Croſſe to redeeme vs all, I will neuer haue peace with him, till I haue him at my pleaſure, nor neuer returne thou againe hither to mee, nor none other, vpon any ſuch meſſage.
               When Habourey the meſſenger heard the Emperour, hee was in great feare, and would gladly haue béen in Bourdeaux, then he departed without any more ſpeaking, and reſted not till hee came to Bourdeaux, where hee went to the Pallaice, wheras he found Duke Huon, then he ſayd. Sir I haue béene with the Emperour, and ſhewed him at full all your meſſage, but his anſwere will not ſerue to your demaunde, for he ſayd to mee, that he will haue no peace with you, till he haue you at his pleaſure, to doe with you what hee will, and thus I departed from him, and left him ſitting at his table at dinner.
            
            
               Chap. LXXXXV.
               
                  ¶ How Huon iſſued out of Bourdeaux, and came to the tents and fought with the Emperour.
               
               
                  
                  
                     WHen Huon vnderſtood the Meſſenger, hee was full of anger and diſpleaſure, and ſaide. Sirs, I commaunde you all in haſt to goe and arme you, for ere euer the Almaines bee riſen from their dinners and armed, I ſhall make them ſo ſorrowfull, that they ſhall curſe the houre that euer they were borne, for I had rather die then to leaue them in this point, for I will goe ſerue them of their firſt meſſe. Then euery man armed him, and Huon leapt vpon his good horſe Amphage, and then he tooke his leaue of the faire Eſcleremond his wife, and ſo departed out of Bourdeaux with his company, and road towardes the Emperours Tents. The ſame time the Emperour was riſen from his Table, and he had ordained three hundred men on horſebacke to keepe the Tents whiles he was at dinner: then Huon and his company came ſo quickly, that hee was among them ere they perceiued any thing, and he cried Bourdeaux, and ſtrake a Knight with his Speare cleane through the body, ſo that he fell dead to the earth, then he ran at another, and ſerued him in likewiſe, and ſo he ſlew foure before his Speare brake. Then he drew his Sword, & beat down men and horſes, and brake the thickeſt preſſe, ſo that euerie man gaue him way, and Gerames, Othon, Barnard, and Rychard and all his company did maruels in armes, & ſo much they did, that within a ſhort ſpace the iij. hundred Almaines that were ſet to keepe the Tents, were all ſlayne. Then Huon and his company entred in among the Tents and Pauilions, where they bet downe the Tents, & ſuch as they met were ſlaine: then the Almaines on all parts armed them, and the Emperour ſounded his Trumpets & armed him: he was ſo ſorrowfull and angry, with the trauell & damage he was put too by Huon, that hee enraged and was néere out of his wit, for night and day he could take no reſt. When he was armed, hee mounted on his horſe, and xx.M. Almaines with

him, and they all ſware the death of Huon, whome God defend, for if he long taried there, he ſhould be in danger of his life. But he was wiſe and diſcréet in Feats of armes, & hée looked towards the Emperours Tent, and ſawe well twentie Thouſand men readie to come vpon him, then he ſaid to his men. Sirs, it is time that wee retire to our Citie, wee may well now goe without blame, for we may no longer tarie heere without great danger. Sir, (quoth Gerames) wée bee readie to doe your commaundement, then they tooke the way to returne to the Citie, but the Emperour who greatly deſired the death of Huon, he & his men purſued Huon as faſt as their horſes could goe, & when the Emperor was néere to Huon he ſaid. Ah thou falſe Traytour, ſo many times thou haſt troubled and angered mee, that longer I will not ſuffer thée to liue, turne toward me, for with thee I will iuſt, or elſe I ſhall ſlay thée flying: I had rather to die, then not to take of thée vengeance for the hurts that thou haſt done to mée.
               When Huon heard how the Emperor called him Traytor hee was ſore diſpleaſed, and turned his horſe towardes the Emperour and ſayd. Ah falſe old Churle, whereas thou ſayeſt I am a Traytor, I ſhall ſhew thee how thou lyeſt falſely: then they ran eache at other with their Speares in their reſtes, ſo that they met ſo rudely, & ſtrake each other on their ſheelds by ſuch force, that their ſheeldes burſt aſſunder, the Emperour was a puiſſant Prince, ſo that his Speare burſt all to péeces, but Huons Speare was ſtrong and held, wherewith he gaue the Emperour ſuch a ſtroake, that Sheeld nor Holberd coulde not warraunt him, but that the Speare entred into the Emperors ſide, ſo that if he had not ſwarued aſide, he had not eſcaped death, that ſtroake was ſo ſore, that the Emperour ſell to the earth in ſuch wiſe, that néere hand he had broken his neck with the fall, and ſo lay in a ſwound. Huon ſéeing the Emperour lying on the earth, in great rage and diſpleaſure, he deſired to haue ſlaine the Emperor, then he drew out his Sword, & turned to ſtrike off his head: the which he had don, if he had not ben reſcued: but ye 
                  Almains frō
                  
all parts came thither, ſo that they reſcued the Emperour from death, and ſette him on a horſe with much paine, then he thanked our Lord God that he was ſo well eſcaped, and made a vowe to God, that he would neuer more fight with Huon hand to hand, but hee would purſue him to the death if he could.
            
            
               Chap. LXXXXVI.
               
                  ¶ How Huon made another iſſue out of Bourdeaux, and tooke away all the beaſtes that were in the paſtures without the towne, pertaining to the Emperours hoaſt.
               
               
                  
                     WHen Huon ſawe that hee could doe no more at that time, and that the Almaines encreaſed in great number to haue aſſayled him, then he ſpurred his good horſe Amphage, who made ſuch leapes, that it ſéemed hee had flowne in the ayre, he had his ſword in his hand, and ſtroke therewith ſo great ſtrokes, that none durſt approach neere him. Thus he rode after his men, and led them towards the Citie as the ſhepheard doth his ſhéepe, for as ſoone as his enemies approached néere him, he ſhewed them his ſhield and his ſpeares poynt, and as hee rode, there came a yong knight named Gerard, right hardie and valiant in armes, hee was baſtard ſonne to the Emperour, who greatly deſired in his heart to winne honour and prayſe: hee ſawe Huon mounted on his good horſe, and ſawe likewiſe that no man durſt approach neere vnto him, hee came after him and cryed. Ah thou falſe Traitour, to flie away it ſhal not auaile thée, for I bring thy death in the point of my ſpeare, with the which I ſhal ſlay thee flying, without thou turne to mee, for ere thou ſcape me, I ſhall cauſe thée to be hanged in the ſight of them within Bourdeaux.
               
               
                  When Huon vnderſtood the Knight, and ſaw the great hate and rage that he was in, and hearing how he called him Traitour, he thought and ſayd to himſelfe, that he had rather die, then he that had ſayd theſe words ſhould haue departed without feeling the ſharpeneſſe of his ſpeare, the which hee couched in the reſt, and ſpurred his horſe, who ranne like the thunder, and he gaue the knight ſuch a horrible ſtroke, that neither his ſhield nor his armour could ſaue his life, for his ſpeare pierced through both his ſides, and hee was cleane borne ouer his horſe 
                     ••
                  upper ſtarke dead. Go thy way quoth Huon, thou ſhalt neuer haue power to doe any man diſpleaſure any more▪ and then he drew his ſword, wherewith hee dealt ſuch diſcipline among the Almaines, that all fledde before him. Gerames, Othon, and Bernarde, and Richard employed their forces and vertues right valiantly, but the Almaines did ſo much, that Huon loſt part of his men, and the reſt he ledde with him, oftentimes hee turned and returned againſt his enemies, but whatſoeuer force or proweſſe hee ſhewed, if he had not in haſte gone away, he nor neuer a one of his men had eſcaped without death, for more then thirtie thouſand Almaines were néere him, and all thoſe deſired his death, but God gaue him that grace, that hee and the ſmall number that he had left, entred with him into the Citie, and the gates were clo
                     •••
                  , and the Emperour in great diſpleaſure returned to his tent, and by the way hee found his baſtard ſonne dead, for whome he made ſuch ſorrow, that his Lords nor his brother could not appeaſe him, and ſo hee cauſed him to be borne to the tents, and was greatly complained of all the Barons, for hee was like to haue beene a verie noble man.
               And Huon went to his Pallaice, where he found the faire Eſcleremond, who demaunded how he did. Right well Lady, quoth Huon, thanked bee God I am returned in ſauegard, but I haue loſt many of my men, and therwith he wept, and the Ladie comforted him ſo much as ſhee might. Then the Emperour being in his hoaſt, knowing for truth that Huon
                  
                  
                     〈…〉
                   a ſmall companie in the Citie, and that he thought hee could do
                     •
                   him but ſmall damage from thence forth, 
                     〈◊〉
                   and came and lay neerer the Citie, and dreſſed vp his 
                     〈◊〉
                   and mountaines to breake the w
                     •
                  lles, and made euerie day b
                     •
                  ttering at the walles, and they within defended 
                     •
                  hem valiantly, for with their croſbowes many men both within and without were ſlaine. This ſiege endured from the beginning of Auguſt to the Eaſter after, whereof Huon was ſore diſpleaſed, and verie much complayned for the loſſe of his noble Barons, and other good men that hee had loſt. Alſo hee ſaw his towres and gates ſo beaten, and his enemies lying before the Citie, and looked for no ſuccor from any part, and that he had with him not aboue thrée hundred knights, and a hundred men to keepe the Citie withall, then he called Eſ
                        •
                     le
                        •
                     emond his wife, and ſayd. Madame, I know well you indure trouble and diſpleaſure inough, and therefore I pray you if you can giue me any good counſell, giue it me now, for the rage and diſpleaſure that I haue at my heart troubleth ſo mine vnderſtanding, that I cannot tell what to do
                     •
                  , now on the other part I ſee my Citie beſieged, and my men ſlaine, and I can get no agréement with the Emperour, for he is ſore diſpleaſed with mee, that I can neuer haue his loue, hee hath ſlaine my men, whereof I am ſo ſorrowfull, that my heart neere fayleth me.
               Sir (quoth Eſcleremond) yee doe great wrong to ſay theſe words before mee, or in this ſort to complaine your damages, if you would haue beleeued mee, then you had gone to my brother for ſuccour, who would haue come with you, and brought you ſuch a number of men, that the Emperour durſt not haue abidden you, and alſo to haue made therby my brother a Chriſtian man, for hee hath beléeued in our Lord God this ſeuen yeeres paſt. Madam quoth Huon, all that you ſay might haue beene done, but I hadde rather haue loſt three ſuch Cities as this, then to haue left you and my Lords and good Burgeſſes whome I loue ſo faythfully: if I had but a thouſand Knights to defend my Citie, with an ill will I

ſhould depart from you, for I am aſſured, that if I goe and ſeeke for ſuccour, both I ſhall haue paine inough, and yee that ſhall abide heere, are like to haue more, for I know well that the Emperour ſo hateth vs, as hee ſetteth all his intent to haue vs, and if hee take you, you ſhall be in great perill, and if I tar
                     •
                  ie here with you, and goe for no ſuccour, this Citie will bee taken or famiſhed, and both you and I be deſtroyed: the Emperour who loueth vs but a little, and not without a cauſe, i
                     •
                   he may take mee, I ſhall die a ſhamefull death. It is no maruaile if hee be diſpleaſed with mee, for I haue ſlaine his ſonnes and nephewes, and many of his beſt friendes, if he may take me, I ſhal haue no pitie ſhewed me, and I know well without I haue ſome ſuccour, my ende is at hand. Wherefore Madame, I thinke it beſt that I goe to your brother for ſuccour, for I ſée that I haue tarried ouerlong. Sir quoth Eſcleremond, ye ſpeake of this verie late, for now ye know well, that all our bread and wine, and fleſh, and fiſh begins to faile vs, and all our other victuals, wherefore it cannot be long after your departure, but that this Citie wil be taken and deſtroyed, and the men within ſlaine, and I ledde into great miſery, yet for all that I would not coūſel you to abide here, but I pray you make haſt to depart.
               When Huon heard her, he began to weep, & abaſhing his cheere to the earth, and ſtudying a little, hee ſayd▪ Madame I thinke vpon one thing, the which to you will be profitable, whereby you ſhall haue victuall inough to liue an whole yéere. Sir quoth ſhe, of that I thanke God if it may ſo come to paſſe. Madam quoth Huon, I ſhall tell you how this City may be reuitayled without any great loſſe of any men, true it is, that here without in the medow, there are two hundred men ſet there by the Emperor, to keep the beaſts pertaining to his hoſt, the which are without number, what in beefes, kine, & hogs, and more the
                     •
                   ten thouſand ſhéep, which beaſts ere I ſléep, I will bring into this Citie, and then ye may ſlay them and po
                     •
                  der them in ſalt, ſo that ye ſhall haue no famine for a whole yeere.
               
                  Sir, (quoth ſhe) I pray vnto God you may bring it well to paſſe: thus they taried vntill ſupper time, and after when it was night, and that they thought that they of the hoaſt were a ſleepe, and ſaw that the weather was troubleous, euen as they would deſire it, he armed him and all his men, and ſet men at the gate to defende him at his recoiling. Then hee mounted vppon his good horſe, and he opened the gate, and yſſued out as priuily as hée might, and tooke the way to the meadow and came thether: and Huon then cried and ſayde. Ah ye Villaines this paſturage is mine, I come to challeng it, in an euill houre yee put your beaſts heere to paſture, yee ſhall make me amends, for all the beaſts that I find héere in my paſture, I will goe and pound them, and if the Emperor will haue them, hee muſt buy them and make amendes for their forfaite, and yee that bee the Keepers ſhall dearely abide it.
               When the kéepers heard Huon ſpeake, they had great feare, and they thought to haue gone and taken their horſes, and ſo to haue defended themſelues: but Huon and his companie gaue them no leyſure ſo to doe, for Huon with his ſpeare ſtrake one ſtarke dead, and after he ſlew the ſecond, then the third, and fourth, and ſo ſlew very many as long as his Speare held: then hée ſet his hand on his ſword, wherewith he claue aſunder healmets and ſheelds, and beat down men on euerie ſide, and Gerames, Othon, & Richard did verie valiantly, and ſo much did Huon and his men within a ſhort ſpace, that the twoo Hundred men that kept the beaſts were all ſlaine, except one who eſcaped, and ranne to the Emperours hoaſt, where he ſhewed the Emperour, how Huon and his men were iſſued out of the Citie and that all the kéepers of the beaſtes were ſlaine, and the beaſts taken and driuen into the Citie.
               When the Emperour heard theſe tidings, he was right ſorrowfull, and armed him and his men, and leapt on their horſes and ranne towards the Citie, to ſtoppe Huon from entring into the Citie: but before they came thether, all

the beaſtes were entred into the Citie. Nowe when Huon ſaw the Emperour comming, he ſaid vnto his men: Sirs, I require you let vs turne vpon our enemies who commeth after vs, for I would faine ſhew them, how men that commeth from foraging can runne with their Speares. Then they turned againſt the Almaines, ſo that each of them 
                     ••
                  re a man to the earth, and they drewe their Swords, and ſtewe men round about them, and Huon vpon his good horſe Amphage held his Swoord in his hand, all to be ſprinkled w
                     •
                  th the bloud of his enemies, wherewith he cut off armes, legs, and hands, he was more doubted then the Deuill, for by his proweſſe hee did ſo mu
                     •
                  h, that his enemies fledde before him and made him way, ſo that in deſpite of all the Almaines, after that he and his men had ſlaine foure Thouſand of his enemies, he entred into the City with al yt pray of his beaſts, wherewith the Emperour and his men that followed, were ſore diſpleaſed for the loſſe that they had receiued, & for that Huon was ſo eſcaped from their hands, and that he had taken away their beaſtes and ſlaine his men. Thus as yee haue heard, Huon entred into the Citie of Bourdeaux with all his pray.
            
            
               Chap. LXXXXVII.
               
                  ¶ How Huon of Bourdeaux made him readie to go to ſeeke for ſome ſuccour: And of the ſorrow that the Ducheſſe his wife made.
               
               
                  
                     AFter that Huon was entred into the Citie, he went to his Pallaice, and there found the Ducheſſe Eſcleremond, who vnlaced his helmet, and clipped and kiſſed him, and ſaide. Sir, I pray you howe haue you done? Faire Ladie, (quoth he)

we haue ſlaine many an Almaine, and haue brought away the pray, for in all the Emperours hoſte we haue not left neither Porke, Kine, nor Mutton: we haue brought all into this Citie thanked bee God, ſo now I ſhall leaue you in more ſuertie in mine abſence, for you haue nowe victuall inough for a whole yeare. Nowe I will goe to your Brother, and if I find that hee will bee chriſtened, I ſhall bring him with me: if not, I ſhall defie him and ſlay him, without he will beleeue on Ieſus Chriſt whatſoeuer fortune fall. Sir, (quoth Eſcleremond ſore wéeping) haue no doubt of that, for it is more then ſeauen yeres ſince he deſired to be chriſtened: wherefore Sir, I require you loue my Brother. Madame, (quoth Huon) I ſhall doe your pleaſure: then he called to him his priuie friends, and ſaide.
               Sirs, yée knowe well what danger and perill we be in: and becauſe in all thinges néedefull, there ought to be made prouiſion with diligence, this Citie is now well prouided of victualles, wherefore yée ſhall not néede to make any iſſuing out, without yée ſée great aduantage: & as for aſſault, if yée defend it well, it is impregnable for our enemies to win it, but if yée be to yéeld it vp, beware what yée doe, for the great hate that the Emperour hath againſt vs, peraduenture will conſtraine him to breake his promiſe, if yée be taken by force or by this meanes, yée ſhall all die miſerably, and my wife bee murdered in priſon, or elſe miſerably to finiſh her dayes, and my little Daughter Clariet, whome I loue ſo dearely, ſhee ſhalbe loſt, and my Citie deſtroyed and brought to vtter ruine: wherefore I commend vnto you my wife and my Daughter, and all the reſt vntill I returne againe: the which ſhalbe ſhortly if I may, and I ſhall bring with mee ſuch ſuccour, that yee ſhall all bee ioyfull thereof. Sir, (quoth Gerames) God giue grace to ſend you againe in ſauegard, you knowe well that you leaue vs in great pouertie and feare: wherefore wee all deſire you not to forget vs, and therewith they all wept. Then Huon ſayd, I pray yee▪ make no ſuch ſorrow 
                     •
                  or my departing, for yee know the

buſineſſe that cauſeth mee to depart: for without I goe for ſome ſuccour, yee know well we are but dead, and Gerames I giue you the keeping of my wife and Child, ye are bound to ſerue me truely, for in you I haue my perfect truſt. Sir, (quoth Gerames) haue you no doubt, but that as longe as I haue life in my bodie, I ſhall not faile them in life nor death.
               When Huon heard Gerames ſay ſo, he began ſore to wéepe, and the faire Ladie Eſcleremond began to make ſuch ſorrow, that great pitie it was to ſee her: ſhe wrang her hands and tore her haire, and made ſuch out-cries, that euerie man had pitie of her, yet they comforted her as much as they might. But ſhee had great cauſe to weepe and to be ſorrowfull, 
                     •
                  or before Huon returned to Bourdeaux, ſhee and all they that were with her ſuffered ſo much pain and pouerty, that to ſhew it would cauſe a hard heart to weepe for pitie. And after that Huon had thus ſpoken to his companie: hee entred into his Chappell, and was confeſſed of the Biſhops of the Citie, and receiued the Sacrament. Then the Biſhop gaue to Huon a ſtoale that was hallowed and of great vertue, and ſaide. Sir, I require you for the loue of our Lord Ieſus Chriſt, keepe well this ſtoale, for ſuch an houre may fall that it will ſtand you in good ſtead. Huon right humbly tooke it, and thanked the Biſhop: it did him good ſeruice afterward, for on a day as hee paſſed, he had thereof ſo great neede, that he would not haue forborne it for fourtéene good Cities, as yee ſhall heare more heereafter.
            
            
               Chap. LXXXXVIII.
               
                  ¶ Howe Huon departed from the Citie of Bourdeaux, and ſayled vntill hee came into the hye Sea, and hadde many great fortunes.
               
               
                  
                  
                     WHen Huon had taken the the halowed ſto
                     •
                  le, hee deliuered it to his Chaplain, who was a wiſe man, & of a holy life, and commaunded 
                     〈◊〉
                   to keepe it well. Then he to
                     •
                  ke fiue knights to haue with him, and his Chaplayne and a clack to ſerue him▪ Then Huon went to his wife, and kiſſed her at his departing, and ſhe fell in a ſwound in his armes, and Huon 
                  
                     〈…〉
                  , releaued he
                     •
                   and ſayd. Fa
                     •
                  re Lady▪ I require 
                     〈…〉
                   making of this ſorrow. Ah good ſir (quoth ſhe) 
                     〈…〉
                   ought to bee ſorrowfull, ſince ye leaue mee beſieged with them that deſire your death. Madam, (quoth Huon) 
                     〈…〉
                   you not, for by the grace of God I ſhall make a ſhort returne. Then he clipped and kiſſed her, recom
                  
                     •••
                  ding her to our Lord Ieſus Chriſt. Then Huon and ſuch as were appoynted to goe with him, departed out of the Pallaice, and went to a backe poſ
                     •
                  er
                     •
                  e vpon the riuer of G
                        •
                     round, where there was a ſhippe ready, and richly garniſhed with all things conuenient, there Huon being armed and his men, entred into the ſhippe, and had no horſe with them▪
               
               When Huon departed, hee deliuered his good horſe to the 
                     •
                  éeping of ſir Bernarde his coſen, and tooke his leaue of Ger
                        •
                     mes and of all his other companie, & ſo hoyſed vp ſayle, and 
                     〈◊〉
                   was day in the morning, hee was more then two 
                     〈◊〉
                   from Bourdeaux. Then Huon regarded the Citie, and 
                     ••
                  re weeping, did recommend it to our Lord Ieſus Chriſt, humbly requiring him to haue in his ſauegard, his 
                     〈◊〉
                  , wife and child, and all other that were within it. Thus 
                     〈◊〉
                   
                  Huon ſailed along the riuer of Geround, pitiouſly complayning for his wife the fayre Eſcleremond, and for hi
                     •
                   
                  
                     •
                  ayre daughter Claryet, whom he could not forget, for he had ſo great doubt to looſe them, that when hee remembred them hee wept. They ſayled ſo long, that they entred into

the high Sea, and hee had good cauſe to weepe and 
                     〈◊〉
                   great ſorrowe: for hee 
                     〈…〉
                   till the 
                     〈◊〉
                   had taken it: 
                     〈…〉
                  , Huon 
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   in his Shippe, 
                     〈…〉
                   his heart gaue him, that before hee 
                     〈…〉
                   Citie of Bourdeaux, the Citie ſhould bee taken and his 
                     〈…〉
                   
                  Eſcleremond 
                  
                     〈…〉
                   therefore he 
                     〈…〉
                  , that if it ſo 
                     〈◊〉
                  , and if euer he returned 
                     〈…〉
                   end 
                     〈◊〉
                   thereof, he would 
                     〈◊〉
                   the Emperour 
                     〈◊〉
                  : and that Caſtle nor Towne ſhould no
                     •
                   ſaue him.
               There was a notable knight with Huon, who ſaid 
                     〈◊〉
                   him: Sir, leaue your muſing, and put your truſt in God, hee ſhall ayd you and ſuccour you in all your 
                     〈…〉
                   your Wi
                     •
                  e, and keepe your Citie 
                     〈…〉
                   fort your ſelfe no further, 
                     〈◊〉
                   th
                     •
                  nke of God, and 
                     〈◊〉
                   vnto him to giue you the grace to accompliſh your Voyage, the 
                     〈◊〉
                   I hope you ſhall not faile of, if you thus d
                     •
                  e. When Huon heard him, hee was much comforted, and thanked the Knights and ſo ſayled 
                     •
                  oorth, vntill they were 
                     〈…〉
                   the Sea, and loſt their right way, for the 
                     •
                  hippe turned 
                     •
                  n the right hand, and loſſe the way that they ſhould haue ſa
                     •
                  led, and 
                     〈◊〉
                   vnto places not knowne to any of the 
                     〈◊〉
                  , whereof the Patron was ſore abaſhed in himſelfe, without making any knowledge thereof, and ſo long they ſayled with winde and weather, that they arriued at a Port whereas they found many boats, there they caſ
                     •
                   their anchor, and went a 
                     〈…〉
                   themſelues. Then Huon called to him the 
                     〈…〉
                  , and demaunded of him if he could ſayle 
                     〈…〉
                  . Sir, (quoth the Maiſter) I was 
                     〈…〉
                   no winde to goe thether, it were a 
                     〈…〉
                   me to ſayle thether, 
                     〈…〉
                   by that ſtraunge Sea. But I 
                     〈…〉
                   heere in this Port whereas you are nowe, to 
                     〈…〉
                   Patrone that can bring you 
                     〈…〉
                   (quoth Huon) I pray you to doe ſo much as to get me 
                     〈◊〉
                  . Sir, (quoth 
                     〈…〉
                   doe what I can: then h
                     ••
                   and Huon 
                  
                     〈…〉
                   Shippe, and from boat to boat to get a Pilot, 
                     〈…〉
                  
                  
to an auncient man, who ſayde that he could well bring them thither, and ſayde how that hee had beene there before that time. Friend quoth Huon, if hee will bring me to the Realme of Aufamie, I ſhall giue you gold and ſiluer plentie. Sir quoth the old Patron, I ſhall doe your pleaſure, but Sir, one thing I ſay to you, know for troth the voyage is very daungerous for to paſſe, and a verie long voyage, for it will be halfe a yeere 
                     •
                  re you can come thither, and beſide that, wee muſt paſſe by a perilous Gulfe, the which is reputed to be one of the mouthes of hell, and if by aduenture or fortune of the winde, that wee bee blowen neere vnto it, wee ſhall neuer depart, but be loſt foreuer.
               When Huon heard the Pilate, hee beganne to weepe and complaine for his wife and his deere daughter, whome he had left in the citie of Bourdeaux in great daunger to be taken. For he ſaw well then, that hee could not returne for the ſpace of a whole yeere with any ſuccour: howbeit, hee left not his voyage, then hee commaunded his ſeruaunts to diſcharge all his baggage and victualles out of the one ſhippe into the other, and when the newe ſhippe with the newe Patron was readye in all things, Huon entred into it. Then the new Patron demanded of the old marriner, the cauſe why they came thither, and from whence they came. Sir, quoth hee, true it is, wee came from the citie of Bourdeaux, the which ſtandeth vpon a notable riuer, and when we were entred into the ſea, a ſore winde roſe vpon vs, in ſuch wiſe, that wee were conſtrained to abandon our ſhippe to the winde and weather, and fortune of the ſea, the which hath brought vs hither. Friend quoth the newe Patron, as ſoone as yee were out of the riuer of Gerone, if yee had turned your ſterne towards the ſea roade, yee had neuer come hither, and within a moneth yee ſhould haue come to the realme of Aufamie, whereas now ye be verie farre off. When Huon vnderſtood the cauſe of their comming thither, he was right ſorrowfull, and ſore diſpleaſed if he could haue amended it. But his diſpleaſure could not helpe him, but rather hinder him▪ therefore he lette it paſſe, and ſo tooke leaue of his firſt Patron, and lift vp their anthors and ſayles, and when they

were in the ſea, the winde aroſe, and increaſed more and more for the ſpace of ſixe weekes that the wind changed not, ſo that if God had ſuffered the winde to haue continued one moneth or ſixe weekes longer, they had come to the place whereas they would haue beene.
               But ere that they came there, they ſuffered much paine, for there aroſe vppon them ſuch a winde and tempeſt, that they were forced to auayle their ſayles. The heauens waxed darke, the moone was couered, the torment was great and daungerous, the waues of the ſea were of a great height, & terrible to beholde, whereby, whether they would or not, they were conſtrained to goe as the winde would leade them, theyr fortune was ſo great and terrible, that there was neuer ſeene ſuch a mightie ſtorme before, whereof Huon and his men, and his Patron were greatly afraide, & ſpecially the Patron more then Huon was, hee was ſore diſcomforted, and pittiouſly he called on our Lord Ieſus Chriſt, requiring him to bring them to a good Port, there was neither marriner nor Patron, but all were ſore afraide, nor they wiſt not where they were. They were in this torment for the ſpace of ten dayes, in all the which time they neuer ſawe the cleereneſſe of the ſunne, for the great darkeneſſe that was there as then, the which did verie greatly annoy them. And when it came to the eleuenth day, and that the torment and winde beganne to abate, and the ſea waxed peaceable and ſtill, therewith Huon and his companie wer
                     •
                   well comforted: the heauen cleered by, and the glorious ſunne caſt out his rayes along vpon the ſea. When the maſter of the ſhippe ſaw the fortune of the Sea, and that the great torment beganne to ceaſe, hee cauſed one of the marriners to mount vppe into the toppe, to ſee if hee might diſcrie any lande, but hee could ſee none, whereof the Patron was greatly abaſhed, and ſayde howe that hee knewe not in what Countrey hee was, for hee neuer ſayled in thoſe parts, and ſayde to Huon. Sir, it is fiftie yéeres ſince that I firſt vſed the ſea▪ but yet I neuer ſayled in theſe parts, whereof I haue great maruaile. When Huon heard that, he was ſore diſpleaſed and ſayde. Sir lette vs take the aduantage of the wind,

and let our Shippe driue vnder the conduct of our Lord Ieſus Chriſt, I hope that our Lord God will not ſuffer vs to bee periſhed in this Sea. Sir, (quoth the Patrone) I doe agree well to your ſaying, and ſo let vs doe: then they turned their hel
                  
                     •••
                  , and tooke the winde into their full ſayle, the winde was 
                     •
                  ood and freſh, and the Sea very meeke and peaceable, ſo that within a ſhort ſpace they had ſayled a great iourney.
               When Huon called vppon our Lorde God, and helde vp his handes towards heauen and ſaid. Thou verie God, who in 
                     〈…〉
                   tranſit
                     •
                  rie world diddeſt vouchſafe to be borne in the 
                     〈◊〉
                   of a maide, and afterwards diddeſt raigne héere vpon earth xxxi
                     •
                  . ye
                     •
                  res, and then didſt ſuffer death and paſſion vppon a Friday, and after that didſt riſe from death to life, and wentſt into hell, & dreweſt out ſoules out of paines infernall: Euen ſo as I beleeue that this is true, I require thée to haue pitie and compaſſion vpon vs, and giue vs grace that wée may ſafely eſcape out of this perillous Sea, and to kéepe and ſaue my déere and louing wife Eſcleremond and my Childe, and my noble Lords whome I left in the citie of Bourdeaux in great perill of their liues, and giue mee the grace, that I may bring with me ſuch ſuccour and aide, that thereby I may bring them out of the danger that they he in.
            
            
               Chap. LXXXXIX.
               
                  ¶ 
                        •
                     owe Huon arriued on the perillous Gulfe, where as hee ſpake with 
                        
                           ••
                        das, and howe hee arriued at the Port of the 
                        〈◊〉
                     .
               
               
                  
                     WHen Huon had made his praiers to God, he beheld into the Sea, and ſawe a farre off like a great péece of Canuaſſe, and there by he heard as great a noyſe, as though there had beene a Thouſand Smithes, and a Thouſand
                     •
                   Carpenters, and a Thouſande

great running Riuers together, all beating and labouring together. Huon who heard this great noiſe, had great feare thereof, ſo that hee wi
                     •
                  te not what to doe, and ſo were all thoſe that were in his companie, the Patrone commaunded a Marriner to mount vp into the top of the Ma
                     ••
                  , to ſee what 
                     〈◊〉
                   it was that made all that noyſe, and ſo hee did, and 
                     〈◊〉
                   round about him and beheld that way, and at 
                     〈…〉
                   the daungerous Gulfe, whereof hee hadde heard often times ſpoken, and thereof hee had ſuch great feare, that neere hand hee had fallen downe into the Sea, hee came downe and ſaide vnto the Patrone. Sir, wee bee all in the way to bee loſt, for wee bee neere one of the Gulfes of hell, whereof Huon and the Patrone and all other had ſuch great feare, that they all trembled. Sir, (quoth the Patrone) knowe for troth, that it is impoſſible to eſcape out of this perilous Gulfe, for all the Seas, and waters and Riuers there aſſembleth together, and perforce wee muſte paſſe that way, which when Huon heard: then hee beganne pitiouſly to complaine, and ſayd. Ah ſweete and loouing wife Eſcleremond, I ſee nowe clearely that our loues muſte depart, the beautie and the bountie that is in you I cannot forget. Alas I ſhall neuer ſee you more, I pray to our Lord Ieſus Chriſt to giue you that grace, as to bee agreed with the Emperour Tirrey, to the entent that in peace and reſt you may vſe the reſidue of your life: for as for mee, I ſhall neuer bring you any ſuccour or ayd.
               Then hee ſtudied a long ſeaſon, and then ſayd againe. Good Lord I thanke thee, and ſince it pleaſeth thee that I ſhall paſſe out of this world: I humbly require thee to receiue my S
                     ••
                  le into thine handes, as for my bodie and life I care little for, ſeeing it pleaſeth thee that I ſhall thus end my dayes, and depart this life.
               Then Huon lefte his weeping, and the winde ceaſed and the ſayle abated: yet neuertheleſſe the ſhippe ſtill went foorth alone in ſuch wiſe, as though it had flowne vppon the Sea. Sir, (quoth the Maiſter of the Shippe) you may ſee euidently, that wee neede not to trauaile our ſelues to guide our Ship, for the Gulfe that is ſo neere vs, draweth the Shippe vnto

him in ſuch haſte as yee may ſee, and anone yee ſhall ſee that we ſhall tumble therein. Maiſter quoth Huon, it is conuenient now that wee abide the aduenture and fortune of the ſea, ſuch as our Lord God will ſende, lette vs truſt in him, and deſire him that his pleaſure be fulfilled, and more I cannot ſtriue. Then Huon Chaplaine confeſſed them one after another, and then incontinent the great noyſe ceaſed. But they came thither at a good poynt, for the verie ſame time, (as theyr good fortune was,) the Gulfe was full and plaine, ſo that a ſhippe might paſſe ouer it without daunger, as well as in another place of the ſea, and when the Patron ſawe that, hee ſayd to Huon. Sir, wee ought greatly to thanke our Lord God, for wee are now come at ſuch a time, that the Gulfe is full and plaine, ſo that wee may paſſe ouer ſurely without any danger. When Huon heard that hee was right ioyfull, and all weeping he kneeled downe, and ſo did all the companie, and de
                     •
                  outly they thanked our Lord God, that hee had ſent them that good grace.
               Then Huon roſe vp, and ſawe beſide him a great peece of Canuaſſe, and the waues of the ſea beating againſt it with great violence, whereof he had great maruaile. For the waues of the ſea bea
                     •
                  e ſo ſore againſt the cloath, and with ſo great violence, that they reculed backe, and for all the beating of the ſea againſt the canuaſſe, yet it brake not. Then Huon hearde a voyce crying an hie, and pittifully complayning, ſaying. O verie God, in an ill howre I was borne, when I ſold the puiſſant God▪ who did mee that fauour, as to take me as one of his diſciples and Apoſtles, and for the goodneſſe that hee did mee, I rendered him an euill reward: for the diuell, the enemie of all humane linage, entred into my body, the which was full of ſinne, and exhorted me to ſell my God & good Lord, for thirtie pence of money, that was then currant in the country of Iude, and vnhappie that I was, if I had truſted in his great mercy, all the treſpaſſe that I had doone had beene forgiuen mee. But pride and miſbeleefe, and falſe hope that was in mee with the 
                     •
                  iuell, who blinded mine vnderſtanding, and would not ſuffer me to haue any hope of grace, or pardon for my treſpaſſe, for of

my ſinne I neuer had repentance. And the Diuell doubting to haue loſt mee, put mee into deſpiration, whereby I loſte the grace of God: for if I would haue aſked mercie of my Lord God, hee would haue pardoned mee of all the treſpaſſe that I had committed againſt him: Alas poore Caytiffe that I am, from hence ſhall I neuer depart, but alwaies to remaine in this torment and paine.
               When the Maiſter of the Shippe heard this voyce, hee demaunded of him and ſayde. What art thou that thus pityouſly complaineth? I commaund thee to ſhewe mee, and whether there bee any man liuing in this world that can ayde and ſuccour th
                     •
                  e, and caſt thee out of the torment and paine that thou art in. When the voyce heard him, hee ſpake no more woordes, nor made no anſweare at all: then Huon aduaunced himſelfe to the board of the Shippe, beeing deſirous to know what thing it was that made that pitifull complaint, and ſaide. Thou that ſo ſore doeſt complaine and mourne, I coniure thee in the name of our Lord Ieſus Chriſt, and by all his power, and by the bleſſed Virgin Saint Marie his Mother, and by all the Saints and holy Angels and Archangels, that are in the Realme of Paradice, and by all that euer God hath made and created in Heauen and in earth, that thou aunſweare and ſhewe mee what man thou art, and who hath put thee heere in this miſerie? and wherefore thou art heere? and whether thou maiſt come to vs or not? and what is thy name? and why that this Canuaſſe is heere ſet, wherefore it ſerueth? and alſo ſhew me if euer thou ſhalt depart from hence or not?
               When this voyce had heard Huon coniure him in ſuch wiſe it aunſwered him ſhortly, and ſayd. O thou mortall man that haſt coniured mee ſo ſore: and alſo haſt deſired for to knowe my name, I ſhall ſhewe vnto thee for certaintie, that my name is Iudas, and I am the ſelfe ſame man that ſould our Lord Ieſus Chriſt to the Iewes for thirtie pence, then being currant money in the countrey of Iude, and deliuered into their hands my right deere Lorde and Maiſter, who ſo much honoured me, as to account me as one of his Apoſtles, and by a falſe and a fained loue, I kiſſed him on the mouth, for to

                  
                     〈…〉
                   which was he. And after I ſaw him beaten 
                     〈…〉
                   as yee may read in the holy 
                     〈◊〉
                   and 
                     〈…〉
                  , who therein haue made 
                     〈…〉
                   paſſion, 
                     〈…〉
                   I had betrayed my 
                     〈…〉
                   
                  
                     〈…〉
                   my 
                     〈…〉
                   ſore diſpleaſe
                     •
                  , 
                     〈…〉
                   crie 
                     〈…〉
                   I did commit 
                     〈◊〉
                   
                  
                     •
                  olly, for he was ſo 
                     〈…〉
                  , that if I had cried him mercie, hee 
                     〈…〉
                  . But the Diuell 
                     〈◊〉
                   is enemie to 
                     〈…〉
                  , would not ſuffer me to do it▪ for I went 
                     〈…〉
                   and hanged my ſelfe on a tree, and when I was 
                     〈…〉
                   in the place whereas yee ſée 
                     〈…〉
                   I ſhall remaine 
                     〈…〉
                   & paine, 
                     〈…〉
                   from hence, for now it is too late to 
                     〈…〉
                   grace, for iudgement is giuen vpon me. 
                     〈…〉
                   ſuffer this torment and paine continually, 
                     〈…〉
                   and 
                     •
                  euers of the world doe aſſemble together 
                     〈◊〉
                  , euen heere as I am in this Gulfe, where I am ſore 
                     〈◊〉
                   and greatly tormented, by the great 
                     〈◊〉
                   and courſe 
                     〈…〉
                   I am tormented, and cannot by 
                     〈…〉
                   ſhall come out of this great torment nor 
                     〈◊〉
                  
                  ▪
               
               
                  
                     〈…〉
                   that yee demaunde whereto it ſerueth, and 
                     〈…〉
                  , knowe for a troth, that on a day I 
                     〈…〉
                   of God, nor I 
                     〈◊〉
                   gaue after any thing 
                     〈…〉
                   as long as I liued, and therefore when I was 
                     〈…〉
                   God would, that the good deede that I 
                     〈…〉
                   this 
                     〈◊〉
                   for his ſake, ſhould not bee 
                     〈…〉
                   our Lorde God would that this 
                     〈…〉
                   right ſide, to the intent for to 
                     〈…〉
                  , and from the great waues of the ſea, 
                     〈…〉
                   againſt mee, as you haue 
                     〈…〉
                   againſt this C
                     •••
                  as, I had no grace for 
                     〈…〉
                   God for my treſpaſſe the deuill was 
                     〈…〉
                  , wherefore let euerie man take example by 
                     〈…〉
                   he hath ſpace: and thus I haue ſhewed 
                     〈…〉
                   quo
                     •
                  h Huon, I beléeue if thou wilt yet cry 
                     〈…〉
                  , he will haue mercie and pitie on thee.
               
                  Nay, nay quoth Iudas, to pray now cannot auayle me, for I am damned for euer, and if yee will beleeue mee, beware, and tarrie not here too long, for if ye doe, ye ſhall neuer depart hence, for the G
                     •
                  lfe which is now full and plaine, it will not continue long, but that the ſea will iſſue out, and al the riuers within it: yee were happie that yee came at the howre that you did, for anon the waters will iſſue out with ſuch aboundance, that the waues that will riſe ſhall ſeeme like high mountaines. It is more then two hundred yeeres ſince there paſſed any ſhip this way, but that men, ſhip and all were ſwallowed into the Gulfe: wherefore Huon I counſayle thee, that inc
                     •
                  ntinently thou depart hence, without thou wilt bee loſt foreuer, it is time that thou depa
                     •
                  t hence whilſt the Gulfe is full, for it will not long reſt, but that the waters will iſſue out with ſuch a brute and noyſe, that if ye be fi
                     •
                  teene leagues off, ye ſhall well heare the torment that it will make. If ye had come but halfe an houre ſooner then yee did, ye had neuer eſcaped the great daunger thereof.
               When Huon vnderſtood Iudas, he had great maruaile, & ioyned his hands toward the heauen, thanking God of the grace that hee had ſent him. Then Huon deſired the Patron that they might depart from thence in haſte: Sir (quoth he) it ſhall bee done. Then they drew vp theyr ſayles and departed, and they had not ſailed a league, but that the ſaw a farre off great brands of fire burning, iſſuing out of the Gulfe ſo long and ſo high, that they had neere hand come to the
                     •
                  r ſhip: and the waues that iſſued out of the Gulfe, were as high as mountaines, and they approched ſo nere vnto their ſhippe, that they had like to haue per
                     ••
                  hes, for there 
                     〈◊〉
                   was neere hand full of water, ſo that they had 
                     〈◊〉
                   to 
                     〈◊〉
                   to lade out the water and were fayne to abate theyr ſayle, and the water that 
                     •
                  ſſed out of the Gulfe dra
                     •
                  e them ſo 
                     ••
                  orftly, that a bird could not die no faſter then they went. In that caſe they we
                     •
                  e a moneth, and durſt neuer hoyſe vppe ſayle, but thus they draue a great ſeaſon without ſeeing of any land,

then Huon called vppon God, and ſaide. Ah verie God, I hadde rather haue tarried ſtill in mine owne Countrey, and haue taken ſuch fortune as it ſhould haue pleaſed thée to ſend mee: then heere to bée loſt in this ſtrange Sea. Deare La
                  
                     •
                  ie Eſcleremond, I pray vnto God to keepe you and Clariet my Daughter, for I thinke that I ſhall neuer ſee you more. Thus Huon complained, ſayling in the Sea in feare of his life, and thus they were in the daunger of this Gulfe fiue weekes, and neuer coulde ſee lande, whereof they were in great feare, often times they prayed to our Lord to haue pity of them.
               Then Huon deſired the Patrone to mount vp to the Maſt, to ſee if he might ſee any land, and the Patrone who greatly deſired ſo to doe, anone hee mounted vp, and regarded on all parts, to ſee if hee might eſpy any land. At laſt he ſaw a farre off an hye rocke, and on the height thereof they ſawe a thicke wood, and at the entrie of the wood hee ſawe a little houſe, whereof hee thanked God, and deſcended downe and ſhewed Huon what hee had ſeene, and ſayd. Sir, yonder a farre off I haue ſeen a great Rocke, and on the height thereof a great thicke wood, and therein I haue ſéene a little houſe or hermitage, the houſe is white, I cannot tell what it is, but by the grace of God ere it be night, wee ſhall land there and refreſh our ſelues. When Huon heard that, hee was right ioyfull and thanked God: then they drew to that Port, and had good wind and a freſh, wéening to haue come thether the ſame night: but they ſayled foure daies and foure nights, and could come no neerer to the wood then they were before, whereof they had maruaile, for it ſeemed to them euer, that the wood and the houſe roaſe vp higher and higher, and then they could not tell whether they went, for if they had known, they would not haue gone thether for al the gold in the world, for if God had not had pitie of them, they were all likely to haue beene loſt, for the place that they ſawe a farre of was a Caſtle, and therein cloaſed the Rocke of the Adamant: the which Caſtle was dangerous to approach, for if any Ship

come neere it, and haue any yron nayles within it, and that a ſhippe come but within the ſight thereof, the Adamant will draw the Shippe vnto him. And therefore in thoſe parts the Shippes that ſayleth by that Sea, are made and pinned with woodden nayles, and without any manner of yron, otherwiſe they be loſt and periſhed, for the propertie of the Adamant is to draw yron to him.
               Thus Huon and his company were there the ſpace of ſixe dayes, going and ſayling about the Rocke of the Caſtle of the Adamant: But if they had had a good wind the firſt day, they had arriued euen at the white houſe that they ſaw firſt in the wood, the which was the faireſt and moſt richeſt houſe in the world, within the which was ſo much gould and riches, that no man liuing could eſteeme the value thereof, for the Pillars within that h
                     •
                  uſe were of Caſſedony, and the wals and Towers of white Alablaſter. There was neuer deſcribed in Scripture nor Hiſtorie, the beautie of ſuch a Caſtle as this was, for when the Sun caſt his rayes on it, it ſeemed a farre of to be of fine chriſtall, it was ſo cleare ſhining. In this Caſtle was neither man nor woman, but dead mens bones lying at the gate of this Caſtle, and at the Port there lay many Shippes, ſo that their Maſtes ſeemed a farre off to bee a great Forreſt.
            
            
               Chap. C.
               
                  ¶ How Huon deuiſed with his Patrone, in regarding of the Caſtle of the Adamant.
                  
               
               
                  
                  
                     THis caſtle was ſet on a rock of the Adamant 
                  
                     •
                  one, from the Eaſt to the weſt was not ſo ſtrong a Caſtle, for if all the world had come before it and men within to defend it, could neuer be wonne by any mortall men. The forreſt that ſo ſeemed to them a farre off, were the 
                     •
                  a
                     ••
                  s of ſhippes that had beene there arriued by conſtraint of the Adamant, but for all the ſhippes that were there, there was no man liuing therein, yet there lay bones of men that had died by famine & rage. Huon and his c
                     •
                  m
                     •
                  a
                     •
                  te had great maruaile, for when they approached 
                     〈◊〉
                   to the Caſtle, they 
                     〈◊〉
                   forced to ſtrike ſayle, for the 
                     
                        •
                     da
                        •
                     ant drew the ſhippe ſo ſore, that if they had not quickly ſtriken their ſayle, their ſhippe had broken all to péeces, and they all béen drowned in the ſea. The ſhip went ſo faſt, that it was maruailous to conſider it, and then the Patron of the ſhippe, who was wiſe and diſcreet, knew anon how they were néere to the Caſtle of the Adamant, becauſe their ſhippe went ſo faſt without ſayle thetherward, faſter than if they had had a full winde in all their ſailes, and they could not turne their ſhip any way from that part, for they would gladly haue returned, but it would not bee, becauſe the Adamant drew the yron ſo ſore to him by nature. When the Patron ſaw that néedes they muſt arriue there, he began pitiouſly to lament, and ſaide to Huon. Sir, our Lord God hath created vs in this world to liue and to die, and there is none but muſt paſſe the paſſage of this, and becauſe wee knowe ſurely that no creature can eſcape that, therefore we ought to be content with that which can be none otherwiſe: Sir I ſay this, that we muſt all dye.
               When Huon heard the Patron, he had great maruaile and ſaid: Patron, I pray you ſhew me the cauſe why yée ſay thus? in this Caſtle that we see before vs, are there any Sarazins within it, or ſpirits of hell that haue ſworne our

death? ſurely I doubt them not, make good cheere, and bee nothing abaſhed, take good courage and ioy, 
                     •
                  or by the ayd of our Lord Ieſus Chriſt, and by the force of my armes, and good Swoorde, if there bee any man within the Caſtle that will reſiſte againſte vs, I aſſure you I ſhall ſoone deliue
                     •
                   you from him. Anone you ſhall ſee what I can doe, I neuer 
                     〈◊〉
                   in all my life ſo faire a Caſtle, I cannot tell whether they within will defend vs the entrie into the Port or not: if they will haue any Tribute of me, I ſhall gladly pay it, ſo they demaund nothing elſe, and if I ſee that they will demaund any thinge elſe of mee, I ſhall ſhewe them howe my Sword can anſweare it, for I had rather to die, then in any Princes Court it ſhould bee layd to my reproach and ſhame, that for any man I ſhould retire backe one 
                     •
                  oote for feare or doubt of any death, for I will neuer bee taken aliue, thereby to dye in priſon. Sir, (quoth the Patrone) your force and great proweſſe can nothinge auaile you, for if wee were as ſtronge and as great as euer was Sampſon, it ſhould nothing aduantage you, I ſhall ſhewe you the cauſe why. The Caſtle that you ſee yonder before you, is the moſt faireſt and ſtrongeſt Caſtle in all the world, it is ſet and compaſſed round about with a Rocke of Adamant ſtones, the which naturally doth drawe vnto it all manner of yron, as you may well ſee by our ſhippe that goeth ſo faſt without any ſayle: the Adamant doth drawe it, becauſe of the anchors and nayles that bee in our Shippe, the wood that ſeemeth to bee a Forreſt, are the Maſtes of ſuch Shippes as hath there arriued, and are drawne thether by the Adamant.
               
               When Huon vnderſtood the Patrone, hee was right ſorowfull, and no maruaile, then pitiouſly hee complayned for his wife and for his Childe, for hee ſawe well that hee could not eſcape the death, nor neuer depart from thence: then hee wept pitiouſly and ſayd. Ah good Lord, who in this world hath formed me, I require thy grace, that thus (poore ſinner that I am) enclined to all miſfortune, that it may pleaſe thée to receiue my ſoule into Paradice, as for my life I make none account thereof. But I pray thee good Lorde to ſaue my Wife and Childe, whome I haue lefte in daunger of death, or elſe in ſhamefull

impriſonment. And with thoſe woordes the Shippe entred into the Port with ſuch a force and puiſſance, that it ranne in amongeſt the other Shippes, ſo that if the ſhippe had not been ſtronge, and the other ſhippes rotten, Huons ſhippe had béene broken all to peeces, for it ranne vnder the water thrée or foure of the other olde ſhippes, and was not broken thanked be almightie God. Then hee looked into the Hauen, and ſawe ſo many ſhippes, that hee had great maruaile thereof, and hée was ſore diſmayed and abaſhed, in that hee ſawe neither man woman nor Child ſtirring abroad. Alſo hee looked about him and behelde the Caſtle, the which was ſo faire and rich, that there was none ſuch throughout all the world. Then hee thought to ſend thether one of his companie, for to know what people were within the Caſtle, but hee ſawe well that there was no way to enter, but by a ſtraight way of thrée Hundred and fourſcore gréeces of height, the way was ſo ſtraight and narrow, that no man but one at once coulde mount vp the degrées, he had great maruell & was ſore troubled in mind, when hee ſawe no man comming from the Caſtle. Then hee called one of his Knights and ſayd: Sir Arnold, I will and command that you goe vp into this Caſtle, to ſee what people bee within it, either Sarazins or Paynims: knowe who is Lord thereof, and ſay how that I greatly deſire to be acquainted with him: if you can doe ſo much that I may bee acquainted with him, then I and my men will mount vp together vntill ſome good aduenture fall, for I hope in our Lord God that wee ſhall eſcape this daunger. Sir, (quoth Arnold) I ſhall doe as you haue commaunded mee. Then he departed, and went from one ſhippe to another vntill hee came to the land, and then hee went to the 
                     〈◊〉
                  , and 
                     •
                  ound the degrees and mounted vp: but before hée came to the Caſtle gate, hee reſted himſelfe thrée times, and when he came to the gate, hee reſted him he was ſo wearie, and beheld the gate, the which ſéemed vnto him maruailouſly faire and rich: then hee beganne to crie and call, to the entent that ſome man ſhould come and to ſpeake with him, and when hee ſawe that none did ſpeake, hee ſto
                     •
                  de and hearkened if any perſon were comming to open the gate: but none appeared, and

then hee knocked and called againe, and ſayd: Porter that art within, come and open the gate, or elſe curſed be thou of God: this Arnolde hadde a good occupation to knocke, crie, and call, for within was neither man woman nor Childe that would open the gate, when hee ſawe that, hee was neere angrie with diſpleaſure, and looked downe vnder the gate to knowe if hee might eſpie either man or woman to ſpeake vnto, then hee turned him round about and looked on the right hande of the Hall dore, and there hee ſawe an horrible Serpent, the which kept the Caſtle and Pallaice, it was a maruailous great Serpent, higher then any horſe, his eyes like twoo Torches burning: when Arnold ſawe him, hee was right ſorrowfull and ſore diſpleaſed, and when the Serpent heard the knocking and great noyſe at the gate, braying and crying he came toward the gate: and when Arnold ſawe the Serpent with great furie approaching to the gate, hee fledde away in ſo great haſt, that he néere hande (with verie feare) fell downe the ſtaires, hee reſted not vntill hee came to the ſhippe whereas Huon was, and ſaide. Sir, I haue beene aboue at the gate of the Caſtle, and called and knocked thereat more then the ſpace of an houre: but there was neither man, woman, nor Childe that did appeare, and when I ſawe that, I layde mee downe and looked vnder the gate, to knowe if I might ſee either man or woman to ſpeake vnto, but I could neuer ſée any creature, but a great and a horrible Serpent higher then a great horſe, with eyes redder then fire, with maruailous great tallons and and taile, there was neuer man ſawe a fowler figure of a beaſt. Alas, (quoth Huon) nowe I ſée we be all but dead, for wee haue nothing to eat nor drinke, wherefore wee ſhall die for famine and rage. But if I may enter into the Caſtle, I ſhall giue that Serpent ſuch a ſtroake, that hee ſhall neuer hurt any man liuing. Alas what haue I ſaid, my hardineſſe nor my proweſſe cannot helpe me, for I ſee well that I and all you muſt die, for it is impoſſible for vs to depart from hence.
               Then the Patron ſayd to Huon ſore weeping. Sir, it behooueth vs to part our victuall, if you will ſuſtaine the right & cuſtome of the ſea, whē men come to ſuch a caſe, yt there is no remedie

to get any freſh victuall, then it is reaſon that the Lord and Captaine to haue the one halfe to his part, and the other part 
                     〈◊〉
                   to bee deuided amongeſt his men. Maiſter, quoth 
                     〈◊〉
                  ) you may doe your pleaſure, doe as you ſhall thinke 
                     〈◊〉
                  
                  ▪
               
               
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   the Patrone cauſed all their victuals to bee brought 
                     〈…〉
                   was deuided, the Patrone was a wiſe man. 
                     〈…〉
                   that, hee began to weepe, hee did eate but 
                     〈…〉
                  , becauſe his victuall ſhould endure the 
                     〈…〉
                  , all that but little auailed, for before fifteene 
                     〈…〉
                  
                  ▪ all their victuals were ſpent, except Huons 
                  
                     〈…〉
                   man part, and kept for 
                     〈…〉
                   other men had. And as they were in this 
                     〈…〉
                   a Galley wherein were Thirtie men 
                     〈…〉
                   and Pirats of the Sea, they came and arriued 
                     •
                  eere 
                     ••
                   the Shippe whereas Huon was in, not knowing what place they were in: when they arriued it was in a darke night, they had great maruaile of Huons Shippe wherein they ſawe great light, and then they ſayd one to another, it is happie for 
                     〈◊〉
                   that wee haue found heere this faire Shippe, it can 
                     •
                  ot 
                     •
                  ee but it is rich and full of goods: they ſhall not eſcape vs, 
                     〈◊〉
                   ſhal
                     •
                   bee ours, for ther
                     •
                  in are 
                     •
                  ut fewe men to defend the Shippe.
            
            
               Chap. CX.
               
                  ¶ Howe a Galley with Sarazins came and 
                        •
                     ff
                        •
                     yled Huon, who 
                        〈…〉
                     , and alſo all Huons men, and how Huon went to 
                        〈…〉
                      of the Adamant and ſlewe the great Serpent, and of 
                        〈…〉
                      that hee found there,
               
               
                  
                     WHen Huon ſaw the Galley ariue and going to his Shippe, hee hadde great maruaile what men they were, then he alighted a torch, and to
                     •
                  ke it in his hand▪ and came 
                     〈…〉
                   on the Shippe and ſayd. Sirs of this 
                     〈…〉
                   well arriued heere, wee haue great ioy of your

companie, whē the Saraſins heard Huon, they perceiued by his language, that he and his companie were Chriſtian men: then each of them beheld other, ſmiling for ioy, one of them turned his ſpéech, and ſpake good Spaniſh, and ſayde to Huon: Fellow it is no néede for vs to hide what wee bée: all wee that thou ſéeſt héere bee Saraſins, and ye be Chriſtned, wherefore we will haue al the riches that is in your ſhip, and beſide that, all your heads ſhall be ſtriken off, and your bodyes caſt into the ſea. Paynim, quoth Huon, ere thou haſt our ſhippe at thy commandement, firſt thou ſhalt buye it déerely. Then Huon cryed to his men that they ſhould arme themſelues to defende them from the Paynims, the which they did diligently. And Huon who was readie armed, and by that time the Saraſins were entred into the ſhippe. Huon was readie before them, with his ſword in his hand, wherewith he ſtrake the firſt that he mette with all, in ſuch wiſe, that his head flew from his ſhoulders. Then he ſtrake another, and claue him to the throat, and ſo the third and the fourth were ſhortly ſlaine, he layd on ſo rounde about him, that his enemies were afrayde to behold him. Then the cheefe maiſter of the theeues came and rebuked his men, becauſe they had ſuffered Huon to doe them ſo much hurt and domage, he approached to Huon to haue ſtriken him, but Huon, who was light and expert in déedes of armes, auoyded his ſtroke, and ſtrake the Saraſin with a reuerſe, that his head flew from his body a great way off. Then Huon cryed Bourdeaux, to reioyce his men, and to giue them courage. Alſo Arnolde who had ſeene the Serpent in the Caſtle, did maruailes, and beate downe his enemies, whereof Huon had great ioy. And there was a great mightie Saraſin, who came behinde this knight Arnold, as he fought with another Saraſin, and he gaue Arnold with an axe ſuch a great ſtroke, that hee claue his head to the téeth, whereof Huon was right ſorrowfull, and ſayd, hee had rather die then the death of Arnold ſhould not be reuenged. Then hee approached neere vnto the ſame Paynim, and lifting vppe his Sworde with both his handes, hee ſtrooke the Saraſin on the ſhoulder, that the ſword entred into the breaſt. And the Patron of Huons Shippe, vnarmed came into the battaile

with a great ſtaffe in his handes, wherewith hee laid vppon the Sarazins in ſuch wiſe, that ſuch as hee ſtrake needed after no Surgion. Then a Sarazin aduiſed him, and came and gaue the Patrone ſuch a ſtroake with a Swoord vppon the head, that his head was clouen to the braine, wherewith Huon was right ſorrowfull and ſore diſpleaſed. But it was not long before he reuenged his death, for hee ſtrake the Sarazin ſuch a ſtroake, that hee claue him to the breaſt, and when the Patrones Seruaunts ſawe that their Maiſter was ſlayne, they all made great ſorrowe, and diſarmed as they were, they came and entred into the Battaile with great ſtaues in their handes, and fought with them fiercely.
               But the Sarazins who were all armed, had anone ſlayne them all, whereof Huon was right ſorrowfull and angry, for hee hadde then with him leſt aliue no moe but foure men of defence. And the Sarazins, who in the beginning were Thirtie, were all ſlayne except ſeauen perſons, they greatly feared Huon, for they ſawe well that none coulde endure againſt his ſtroake
                     •
                  , and then they fledde out of Huons ſhippe and entred into their owne Galley. But Huon and his thrée Knightes that were with him, followed them ſo faſt that they ſlew them all, and caſte them into the Sea. Then Huon and the thrée Knightes that were with him, tooke all the fleſh, bread, and wine that was in the Galley, and bare it into their ſhippe, whereby they liued more then ſeauen Monethes. And then when their victuals begann to fayle, then they were right ſorrowfull, they had no victuall to liue by longe, and yet they did 
                     •
                  a
                     •
                  e but little, ſo they beganne to be pale and leane through famine, pitiouſly Huon complayned and ſayd. Oh yee my déere and true Freends, who for my loue haue left your Lands, your Wiues and Children, n
                     •
                  we I pe
                     •
                  ceiue yée muſt néedes die for th
                     •
                   
                  
                     •
                  ag
                     •
                   of famine: 
                     •
                  las poore Cayliffe that I am, I ſhall not longe liue after you, great pitie it was to heare the complaints that Huon made, who ſaw that he muſt folow the ſame daunce. Then hee ſayd: Ah faire Ladie Eſcleremond, I ſhall neuer ſee you more, I pray vnto our Lord God that hee will comfort you in all your affaires, as for mee poore ſoule, it is impoſſible to

liue foure dayes longer. After that hee had made this pitifull complaint, hee beheld the thrée Knights, who rendred vp their ſoules and died through hunger. The pitifull complaints that then he made was pitie to heare, he had no hope to be aided by any mortall man, wherefore he knew ſurely that hee could not liue aboue twoo dayes longer. Then all weeping, hee went from his Knightes that lay there dead, and went to the board of his ſhippe, and looked into the Sea to ſee if hee might eſpie any manner of Shippe comming thether. For hee thought that if any ſhippe came thether of the Sarazins, hee woulde haue ſome victuals or elſe to dye in the quarrell. Thus Huon was there alone without any company, ſore weeping and almoſt dead through famine.
               When Huon ſawe that no manner of ſhippe was comming thether, hee was right ſorrowfull. Then hee turned him and regarded the Caſtle, the which ſeemed vnto him maruailouſly faire and great, and ſayd. Ah good Lord, how can it be that this faire and rich Caſtle ſhould bee voyd without man or woman? I haue great maruaile of that ſir Arnold ſhewed mee, for he ſhewed me that within the Caſtle there was neither man nor woman, and howe that there ſhould bee a great Serpent, I cannot tell whether it be true or not, or whether hee ſpake it for feare, but by the grace of God (though I ſhall die in the quarell) I will knowe the troth, for I were as good to die by the horrible Serpent, as to die for hunger. Then hee tooke his good Sword, and put on his helmet, and tooke his ſheeld, and did ſo much with going from ſhippe to ſhippe, vntill hee came to the gate of the land. And then with much paine hee mounted vp the degrees, and ſo came to the Caſtle, and then he ſat downe and reſted him, and beheld the faire Caſtle, he thought that he neuer ſaw none ſuch before, for the wals and Towers were of fine Alablaſter cleare ſhining, and the Towers richly couered with fine goulde of Arabia: when the Sunne caſt his rayes and ſpheares thereuppon, it caſt ſo great a light, that it gaue light a farre off, and when hee had longe beheld it at his pleaſure, hee ſawe the gate the which was faire and rich, that great beautie was to beholde it: for the twoo leaues of the gate

were couered with fine goulde, intermedled with other rich ouerages.
               And on his right ſide he ſaw by the gate a window, and ouer the ſame there was written in Letters of gould, ſaying: Let any man beware how he entreth into this Caſtle, without hee bee the worthyeſt Knight of all other, or elſe it were folly to aſſay it. For he ſhall find there ſuch aduentures, as if his bodie were harder then a ſtethye of ſteele, yet hee ſhould be but dead and loſt, without hee bee of that puiſſance, to reſiſte againſte the great Serpent and vanquiſhe him, many men haue aſſayled, that neuer coulde ſpeed, and he that will enter into the Caſtle, behold a little purſe that hangeth on the right hand of the gate, where he ſhall find the key for to open the gate. When Huon had read the writing, hee began ſore to muſe in himſelfe, and ſaid: Good Lord, ſince thou haſt ſaued mee from ſo many perils in time paſt, I humbly require thee at this time to ayde and ſuccour mee: and to giue me that grace, that I may vanquiſh this horrible Serpent and bring him to the death, for I had rather die in fighting like a valiant knight, then to die for famine. Then Huon aroſe vp, and went to the purſe, and tooke out the key, and opened the gate and entred, and cloſed the gate againe after him.
            
            
               Chap. CII.
               
                  ¶ How Huon of Bourdeaux fought with the horrible Serpent, and ſlew him within the Caſtle of the Adamant.
                  
               
               
                  
                     WHen Huon was entred into the Caſtle, hee ſawe before the Hall dore the horrible Serpent, who was riſen vp: his ſkin was of diuers colours, and it was ſo hard, that no yron nor ſteele could enter into it. When Huon ſawe the beaſt ſo great, hee doubted himſelfe, and called vppon Ieſus Chriſt, requiring him to haue pity vppon him, and to giue him the grace to ſlay that dreadfull

beaſt: when the beaſt ſawe Huon, hee had great maruaile, for hee had beene there a long ſpace that neuer man came there, he ſtretched out his clawes, and caſt his tayle round about him, and came haſtily againſt Huon, who when he ſawe the beaſt approach neere to him, hee made the ſigne of the Croſſe vppon his forehead, recommending himſelfe to God, with his Sword in his hand and his ſheeld before him, and hee fiercely marched towards the Serpent, he was ſo hideous and fearful to behold, that the beaſt ſeemed rather an enemie of Hell, then any other beaſte, his bodie was maruailous great with an ougly head, with twoo eyes bigger then twoo baſons full of burning fire, and when hee came neere vnto Huon, hée lifted vp one of his pawes, thinkinge to haue drawne downe Huon to the earth, hee ſtrake vpon Huons Sheeld with ſuch force, that hee pulled it from his ſhoulder, leather nor buckle could not reſiſte it, and then with his teeth and nayles hee tare the Sheeld all to peeces: Huon who was legier and light, leapt by the ſide of the Serpent, and gaue him a great ſtroake with his Sword vppon the eare, that he thought to haue clouen aſunder his head. But hee coulde doe it no more hurt, then if hee had ſtriken vppon a ſtethy, ſo that his Sword rebounded againe, whereof Huon was right ſorrowfull, and ſaid: Ah good Lord, nowe I ſée well that my dayes are at an end. Ah faire Ladie Eſcleremond, I pray our Lord God to ſaue you and my Daughter Clariet, for this day you ſhall looſe mée.
               Then hee aduaunced him to the Serpent, and gaue him a great ſtroake vppon the haunch behinde, and if hée did but little with his firſt ſtroake, hee did leſſe hurt with that ſtroake, for hee could in no wiſe cut through the Serpents ſkinne, wherefore hee was in great feare: and the Serpent when he felt himſelfe ſtriken caſt his tayle rounde about Huon with ſuch force, that hee ouerthrew Huon to the earth, yet hee quickly releeued againe. Then he ſaw by the gate a great ſquare Speare with a ſharpe broad head, and then hee put vp his Sword, and tooke the Speare in both his handes, and came with all his force and ſtrength againſt the Serpent, who came and encountred him with open mouth to haue ſwallowed Huon
                  ▪ but Huon
                  
who was ſtrong and light, tooke the ſpeare and layd it on his arme, and ſaw the Serpent with his mouth open, hee ſtrake the Speare into the mouth of the Serpent ſo deepe, that with the head of the Speare, he cutte his heart aſunder, when the Serpent felt himſelfe hurt to the death, hee caſt out a terrible crye, ſo that all the place ſounded, and ſo that the noyſe might be heard a league off. Thus the horible Serpent was ſlaine. When Huon ſaw that hee was dead, hee kneeled downe and lift vp his hands to heauen, thanking our Lord God for his grace. Then he aroſe, and went to the Serpent and behelde him, for hee was hidious and fearefull to behold, he was eighteene foote long. When Huon had well beheld him, he went and ſate downe by the hall doore for to reſt him for he was ſo wearie and faynt with the bloud that hee had loſt, and with ſweat, that he had much paine to draw his breath, the which was no maruaile, for hee had neither eate nor drunke of all that day.
               When he had well reſted him, then he aroſe vp, as deſirous to know whether any man or woman were within the Caſtle or not, to ſpeake vnto them, he entred into the hall, the which he maruailouſly regarded, it was ſo fayre and ritch to beholde, that there is no Clarke in the world can diſcribe the beautie and richeſſe thereof: the rich Chambers that were on the ſide of the hall, were all compoſed and made of whi
                     •
                  e marble poli
                  
                     ••
                  ed, the poſts were couered with fine golde, at the ende of the hall there was a chimney, whereof the two pillars that ſuſtained the Mantle trée were of fine Iaſper, and the Mantle was of a rich Calſedony, and the Lintell was made of fine Emera
                  
                     •
                  is, 
                     •
                  rayled with a wing of fine gold, and the Grapis of fine Saphers. This chimney was ſo rich, that none ſuch could bée 
                     •
                  ound, and all the Pillars in the hall were of red Calſedonie, and the pauement was of fine Amber.
               When Huon had well beheld this Hall, hee looked towards the Chambers, & ouer the doore of euerie Chamber was written in letters of gold, the which ſhewed where the keyes were of euerie chamber: Huon who could well reade the letters, and vnderſtood it, he found a purſe, wherein were the keyes of euerie chamber, all of fine golde: he tooke one of the keyes, and

opened one of the Chamber doores, and entred into the Chamber. Then he looked all about the Chamber, and ſawe it garniſhed and hanged with the moſt richeſt cloathes that euer were ſéene, the benches and bedſteads were all of white Iuorie, ſo richly entrayled, and wrought and garniſhed with precious ſtones, that no mans tongue could deſcribe the beautie and richeſſe thereof, all was made by enchauntment. This Pallaice was exceeding great and large, and well garniſhed with chambers.
               When Huon had well beheld this chamber, hee was greatly abaſhed, that hee could neyther ſee man nor woman. Then he looked ouer another Chamber doore, where there was alſo written in letters of gold, according as it was written ouer the firſt doore. Then Huon tooke the key, and opened another doore, and entred into that Chamber alſo, and there he found a great quantitie of gold and riches, and rich Iewelles, with other moſt precious ſtones, that great beautie it was for to behold. Ah good Lord (quoth Huon) I would neuer haue beléeued that in all the world there had beene ſo much riches, as I ſée héere preſent before mée: then anone he ſawe another chamber, and tooke the key and entred therein, and for all the riches that he ſawe before, there hee found much more, there were Preſſes made of fine Iuorie, very richly wrought and entrayled, ſo that there was no beaſt nor birde, but there it was moſt cunningly wrought, in the which Preſſe were gownes and roabes of moſt fine gold: and moſt rich mantles furred with Sabyles, and all other things the which were appertayning vnto the apparell of man-kinde, and the beds ſo richly couered, that it was impoſſible to be deſcribed by anie mortall man, this chamber was ſo fayre and rich, that Huon could neuer bee ſatiſfied with beholding and viewing thereof, there were windowes verie richly glazed, opening vppon a Garden ſide, the which Garden was ſo fayre, and ſo well garniſhed with flowers of moſt precious ſwéete ſmelling, and of all manner of trees charged with fruits, ſo good and ſo delicious to eate, that the verie ſmell of them would haue ſatiſfied a mans appetite.
               
                  
                  Huon who ſaw this fayre garden, deſired greatly to enter into it, to gather ſome of that fruit, hee looked ouer the doore and found the purſe with the key therin, and then he opened the doore and went into the garden, and gathered of the fruite at his pleaſure, and did eate thereof, for hee had a great deſire to eate, hee thought the fruit maruailous good. If I ſhould ſhewe or diſcribe the beautie of this garden, it would be ouerlong to reſite, there were ſo many ſundrie fruits, ſo fayre and ſo ſweete of ſmelling, that a ſicke man of any infirmitie, would ſoone haue recouered his health. Alſo there were herbs and flowres ſo ſweet and delightfull, that all the garden ſeemed to be full of balme. When Huon had beene there a good ſpace, and had well eaten of the fruite at his pleaſure, hee returned backe into the chamber that hee came from, and then hee vnarmed him, and putte off all his cloathes, and tooke out of the Preſſe a fine ſhirt, and doublet, hoſen, and ſhooes, gowne, coate, and cappe, ſuch as he would chooſe, for there was no man to ſay him nay, when hee was thus newly arriued, there could not bee founde a more goodlier man, according as the Chronicle ſayth, I beléeue hee was borne by the Fairie, as then there could not bee found ſo goodly a man liuing. When he was thus apparelled, he went from chamber to chamber, alwayes hearkening whether he could heare the voyces either of men or women, but as long as hee continued there, he could heare nothing, whereof hee was right ſorrowfull. There hée continued eight dayes, without eating of any thing, ſauing of the fruits of the Gardine, whereby hee waxed féeble and 
                     •
                  aint, the which was no maruaile, for hee had béene there eight dayes without eating either bread or fleſh, he was ſo féeble, that hee thought he could not long indure there without death. Then he prayed vnto our Lord God for to comfort and ſtrengthen him out of that great daunger: moſt pittiouſly hee complayned for his wife and childe, ſaying: Ah my deere Wife, God ayde and ſuccour you in all your affayres, for ye ſhall neuer haue any ſuccour and ayde of me more, for I tarrie but for the howre of my death, the which is nowe neere at hand approaching vnto mee, for I am ſo ſore and grieuouſly bitten

with famine, that I haue much paine to ſuſtaine my ſelfe. Thus Huon was eight dayes in the Ca
                     ••
                  le of the Adamant, euerie day eating of the fruits of the gardine, and at night hee lay euer in the 
                     〈◊〉
                   bed in the chamber. Now let vs leaue ſpeaking of him, and let vs turne to the Ducheſſe Eſcleremond, who was beſieged within the Citie of Bourdeaux, whereas ſhe was in great diſpleaſure, and not without a cauſe, for ſhee ſuffered much paine and trouble.
            
            
               Chap. CXII.
               
                  ¶ How after that Huon was departed from Bourdeaux, the Emperour made diuers aſſaults to the Cittie, but hee could not win it, for the defence of the good chiualrie that was within it, and of the ambuſhment that was layd by the counſell of Duke Sauary, whereby the Citie was taken and wonne.
               
               
                  
                     YE haue heard before, howe Duke Huon departed from his Citie of Bourdeaux, wheras hee left the Ducheſſe his wife, who was in great diſpleaſure when ſhe ſawe the departing of her huſband, ſhe greatly complayned, and ſayd: Ah my right 
                     •
                  eere Lord, your departure ought g
                     •
                  eatly to greeue mee, I feare you ſhall not come in time to ſuccour, and to bring me out of the danger that I am in, for it is impoſſible for vs long to endure againſt this Emperour. A
                     •
                  as I haue more ſo
                     •
                  ro
                     •
                   for my daughter▪ thē for my ſelfe: and I am ſorrowfull for my Lords and 
                     〈◊〉
                  
                  ▪ who for the loue of you and mee are in pe
                     ••
                  ll of th
                     •
                  ir 
                     〈…〉
                  
                  ▪ had beene better for vs to haue tarryed ſtill in 
                     〈…〉
                   come hither to 
                     •
                  uffer all theſe to
                     •
                  men
                     •
                  s, p
                     •
                  ines, and 
                     〈…〉
                  , and at laſt painefull dea
                     •
                  h: with ſaying of theſe 
                     〈…〉
                   Ducheſſe fell in a tr
                     •••
                  ce among her Lords. 
                     〈…〉
                   relee
                     •
                  ed 
                     〈◊〉
                  
                  ▪ & ſayde diſcomfort you 
                     〈◊〉
                   but take good 
                     〈◊〉
                   and 
                     〈…〉
                   your men, who haue great deſire to defend 
                     〈◊〉
                  
                  
Citie, for the ſauegard of their owne bodyes and liues, thus to make ſorrow, ye can winne nothing thereby, but looſe more to more: haue no doubt that Huon your huſbande will leaue you at this poynt, hee is gone to your brother for ſuccour, hee will not long tarrie, and he will bring you ſuch ſuccour, that the Emperour nor the Almaines ſhall haue no leyſure to grant him the victorie.
               Thus Gerames comforted the Ducheſſe, who was glad for to heare Gerames, and thus as they deuiſed together, the Emperour who was aduertiſed of Huons departing, and how he was gone for ſuccour, he aſſembled his Councell into his tent, and there hee ſhewed and declared the great loſſes that he had ſuffered, as well of the death of his nephewes, as of other of his friends and kynne, and the great domage that by Huon he had ſuffered, and ſayde. Sirs, all this ye know well, his acquaintance hath coſt vs déerely, ye haue all heard how he is departed to ſéeke for ſuccour, but I cannot tell to what part hee is gone. As for the Realme of Fraunce, I know right well hee ſhall haue no ſuccour there, for as it hath béene ſhewed mée of 
                     •
                  ate, that the right Noble and victorious Prince Charlemaine is dead, who loued Huon but little, becauſe of his ſonne Charlot, whome Huon ſlew, and Charlemaine hath left behinde him but one ſonne named Lewes, who is but of a yong age: and I beléeue if hee were of full age, that he would rather come for to ſuccour me then Huon, who ſlewe Charlot his brother, therfore it can be no otherwiſe, but that he is gone into ſome far countrey for ſuccour, therefore I thinke it beſt that in the meane time ere he returne, that on all ſides let vs continually aſſaile the Citie, and let euerie one doe their part, to bee reuenged for the death of their friendes, which are héere ſlaine by them within the Citie.
               When the Lordes heard the Emperour, all with one voyce aunſwered and ſayd. Syr, the reaſon which you haue ſhewed vnto vs, is to bee kept and done, and wee ſhall goe arme vs and make vs all readye, to the intent to come to your intention, the which is verie good and reaſonable. Then they ſounded al their hornes and buſins, and euerie man ſpeedily

armed himſelfe, and came with Enſigne diſplayde to aſſayle the Cittie, and they that were within, as well as they could they defended the Citie: they which were without, reared vppe ladders againſt the walles with mightie ſtrength, but they which were within did beate them down into the Dikes, and then they did caſt downe vppon them hote leade and boyling Dyle, and quicke Lyme, and great ſtones, and fagots burning, ſo that they which were down in the Dikes, had no power for to reléeue themſelues againe, but there moſt miſerably dyed vnder the ladders. There was on both parts exceeding great ſhooting wyth Croſbowes, and ſlinging of ſtones ſo thicke, that they ſeemed like vnto ſnow flying in the ayre, maruailous it was to beholde the olde Gerames, howe hee exhorted his companie for to doe well, and alſo the Ducheſſe Eſcleremond, with her daughter in her armes, crying vnto her men, and ſayde: Yee my deere Lords and Knights, fight luſtily, but to your paynes, for to defende your bodyes and your liues, your wiues, and your children, to the intent that the Almaynes make not their bragges and vaunts of theyr winning of this moſt noble Citie by theyr aſſaults, the which is ſo goodly and rich, for Sirs, I knowe right well yee ſhall not abide this trouble for no long ſeaſon, for Duke Huon your rightfull Lorde will ſhortly ayde and ſuccour vs all. Then all the noble Barons, Knights, and Burgeſſes, hearing the excéeding great comfort of the Noble and vertuous Lady the Ducheſſe Eſcleremond, with a maruaylous great courage and valour they came to theyr defences, and behaued themſelues ſo valiantly, that theyr enemies were forced to retyre backe with great loſſe and domage, whereof the Emperour and his Lords were right ſorrowfull, and they within the Citie right ioyfull of the great victorye the which God had giuen them that day. Then euery man went vnto his lodging, and made great ioy, and the Emperour and his men withdrew themſelues in great diſpleaſure for his loſſe.
               When the Emperour was vnarmed, and had well refreſhed himſelfe, then hee ſayde vnto his Lordes, Sirs, wee haue beene a long ſeaſon before this Citie, and haue ſuſtained many

loſſes, therefore ſirs I require you to counſell mee what is 
                     〈…〉
                   do, this Citie is ſtrong, and wel furniſhed with knights and men to defend it, by vs it will neuer be wonne: without vic
                     •
                  ualles 
                     •
                  aile them, but I thinke they haue but ſmall ſtore of 
                     〈◊〉
                  , therefore I deſire you to ſhew me your abuiſes, whether 
                     〈◊〉
                   ſhall depart from this Citie without more doing, or 
                     〈◊〉
                   here vpon ſuch fortune as God will ſend vs. When the Emperour had ſayd as much as hee pleaſed, then the Duke Sau
                        ••
                     y his brother roſe vp and ſayd. Sir, me thinkes if it may 
                     〈◊〉
                   beleeued, that this Citie cannot long endure, and the cauſe 
                     〈◊〉
                   I ſhall ſhew you: ye knowe well that Huon their Lord is 
                     〈◊〉
                   to ſeeke for ſuccour, on the other ſide, they within the Citie haue but fewe men, and but ill furniſhed of victualles, within the Citie there is an old knight, who is a valiant and a hardie knight, and therefore it were profitable to ſtudie howe he might bee taken or elſe ſlaine, this ſhould greatly aduaunce your enterpriſe, of the which ye cannot fayle, if you wil beléeue my counſell as I ſhall ſhewe you. True it is that this day wee haue had great loſſe, and receiued great domage, whereof they within are ioyfull, wherefore it were good to ſend certain mut
                  
                     •
                  ons and beaſts in the night time, with a few keepers: ſende them into the medow neere vnto the Citie, and I am ſure that when the olde knight knowes thereof, the which he ſhall know by the watch men on the towres and walles, then incontinent he 
                     〈◊〉
                   out 
                     〈◊〉
                   ſuch power as hee hath, to take the beaſts 
                     〈◊〉
                   bring them into the Citie. And to the intent that they 
                     ••
                  all neuer returne againe into the Citie, incontinent ere the 
                     〈…〉
                   a good number of Béefs and Muttons. Then 
                     〈…〉
                   armed tenne thouſand men, and ſend them to a 
                     〈…〉
                   whereas the gallowes is rayſed, and when they 
                     〈◊〉
                   that they within the Citie bee iſſued out to fetch the 
                     〈…〉
                   the tenne Thouſand men drawe neere to the gate 
                     〈…〉
                  
                  ▪ to the e
                     •
                  tent that they without ſhall not enter 
                     〈…〉
                   to their great loſſe. And if you will thus doe, I put 
                     〈…〉
                   that before it be midnight they ſhall bee all taken 
                     〈◊〉
                  , and the matter may ſo come to paſſe, that you ſhall enter into the Citie at your pleaſure.
               
                  Thus I haue ſhewed you as I thinke beſt, if any man know any better way, let him ſpeake. Then euerie man regarded the Emperour, and ſayde, Sir the counſaile that Duke Sauary hath giuen you, wee thinke that a better counſayle cannot bée giuen to any Prince. When the Emperour vnderſtod the counſaile of his brother Duke Sauary, and that all his Lordes did allow the ſame, hee was right ioyfull, and ſayde that it ſhould bee ſo done. Then he called his marſhall, and commanded that it ſhould be done according as his Brother had deuiſed it before, the which was done verie diligently, and ſent with him fiftie men, with ſixe hundred muttons, and two hundred beaſts néere vnto the Citie, and then layd theyr ambuſhment of tenne thouſande men by the little mountaine: it was darke night, and the Moone was not riſen, whereby they within could not perceiue them, the which turned to theyr great loſſe and damage, for all thoſe that iſſued out of the Citie of Bourdeaux were ſlaine and taken priſoners, as ye ſhal heare hereafter.
            
            
               Chap. CIIII.
               
                  ¶ Of the death of the olde Gerames, and of the taking of the Citie of Bourdeaux, and of the comming of the Ducheſſe with the Emperour, and of the deliuering vp of the Caſtle to the Emperour.
               
               
                  
                     YE haue heard before, howe the Emperour aſſayled the Citie of Bourdeaux, and of the great loſſe that he ſuſtained, wherof Gerames and they within the Citie were right ioyfull, and made great feaſts, and thanked our Lord God. Then after Supper Gerames called all the knights and other together, and ſayde. Sirs, ye haue ſéene this day the great aſſault that the Emperour and his men haue made to this Citie, but thanked be God the loſſe

is returned to them, for there are dead and wounded a great number of them, and many of them are ſore wearyed with trauaile, and thinke now for to reſt themſelues, and now is their howre that they be ſette at Supper, and cuſtomably they ſitte euer long at their Table, farre longer then French men doe: wherefore I thinke beſt, that incontinent without delay we ſhould arme our ſelues, and iſſue out of the Citie, and goe to their tents and rayſe them, and then lette vs doe there as good Knights ought to doe, to the intent that good ſongs may bee made of vs, and that the Almaines haue no cauſe to ſay, but that wee bee as good men as they bee. Sir (quoth Othon and Barnard) we be readie thus to doe. Sirs (quoth Gerames) let vs make haſte, that we may returne againe ere the Moone riſeth. Then they armed themſelues. Alas what an il aduenture came to them at night, for the moſt part of thoſe that iſſued out, were taken and ſlaine. Ah good Lord, what a loſſe fell to the Citie of Bourdeaux. Ah noble Lady Eſcleremond, yee may well weepe and complaine all your dayes, for ſorow, paine, and dolour approacheth néere, whereby ye are like to beare ſuch diſeaſes and pouertie, that no man liuing can recount it, nor yee ſhall neuer bee out of that daunger and trouble, till yee be deliuered by the good Duke Huon your huſband.
               When Gerames and his companie were readie, they mounted on their horſes, and iſſued out at the gate as priuily as they could, ſo that they were not perceiued by them that were ſet to watch for them, nor they heard not when they were in the field, they rode a falſe gallop to the tents, the which they might well 
                     •
                  e cleerely by the lights that were in the tents: when they came neere, they daſhed their ſpurres to their horſes, and cryed Bourdeaux, and ſ
                     •
                  rake and cut aſunder the cordes and ſtayes, ſo that many tents fell to the earth, and ſuch as came out were ſlaine, a great noyſe and crie beganne to riſe in the hoaſt, and euerie man ranne to their armour, and Gerames and his companie ſlew many of their enemies, and made them for to flie before them, it was dreadfull for to beholde the damage that they did there. But finally the loſſe fell vpon them, for the Emperour and all his men were readie, when Gerames ſawe howe

all the hoaſt was mooued, then he ſayd to his companie. Sirs, it is time for vs to retyre backe, for we may tarrie héere too long, yonder commeth the Emperour with a mightie armie to cloſe vs in, it is needfull for vs to make haſte, that wee may goe away in ſafetie. Then altogether in one companie they returned, and went the way towards Bourdeaux. But they had not gone farre, ere that they were ouertaken by the Almaynes, & they layd on on all parts with their ſwords & ſpeares. Then Gerames turned him to an Almaine, and with his ſpeare ran him cleane through, and in drawing out his ſpeare, hee fell downe dead to the earth, and then he ſtrake another, whome alſo he ſlew. He did ſuch déedes of armes, that ere his ſpeare brake, hee ſlewe fiue of his enemies, whereof the Almaynes were ſore abaſhed. He brake the preaſe in ſuch wiſe, that none durſt approach néere vnto him, right well did Othon and Bernard, and ſuch as were with him. But when the Duke Sauary, who with tenne thouſand men lay in ambuſhment néere vnto the Citie, had heard the greate noyſe and crie, hee ſuppoſed that they within the Citie were iſſued out. When Gerames and his companie ſawe howe they were incloſed both before and behinde, they were ſore abaſhed.
               When Gerames ſawe that their force and powers could not auayle them, but that either they muſt bee taken or ſlaine, then earneſtly he called vpon our Lord Ieſus Chriſt, requiring him to ſaue and defend his good Lord Huon of Bourdeaux, and the Ducheſſe Eſcleremond his wife. And he cryed to his companie & ſayd. Sirs, I pray you hartily at this time ſhew forth your Proweſſe, and behaue your ſelues ſo valiantly, that this Emperour & Almaines haue no cauſe to make their auaunts, that they haue found vs as men amazed, but let vs ſhew them how our ſwords can cut. Then all together they aſſayled their enemies in ſuch wiſe, that at ye firſt brunt the Almaines were conſtrayned to retyre backe, and Gerames did ſuch déeds, that none durſt approach néere vnto him. Then the Duke Sauary with ten thouſand men came vpon them ſodainely, the which was no equall part, and alſo the Emperour with his great battaile came alſo vpon old Gerames and his companie, who

had gotten themſelues into the ſubburbs of the Citie, and a mightie wall behind them at theyr backes, whereas they did ſtand at a bay againſt the Almaines. Gerames was in the middeſt of them, and vnderneath his helmet appeared his long white beard, and the Emperour who had great ſhame, that ſo few men in number ſhould kéepe a baye againſt his highneſſe, and doe vnto his men ſo great damage, he perceiued where the old Gerames was, who had oftentimes ſlaine many of his men, and done him ſo mightie damages, that hee thought hee could neuer be reuenged thereof ſufficiently, and thought that if hee ſhould haue ſcaped then aliue, that hee would doe him much more hurt and damage after, and ſayd to himſelfe, that hee had rather die incontinent, then he ſhould not as then bee reuenged on him, and therewith incontinent he couched his Speare and ran at old Gerames on the one ſide ere he was aware, ſo that the Emperour ranne him cleane through the bodie, ſo that the gentle knight Gerames fell to the earth, and died incontinent: great damage fell that day to Huon of Bourdeaux, for he loſt the trueſt and beſt friend that he had. Alas for that pitious iourney that fell that day to them of Bourdeaux. They had good cauſe for to wéepe, alas good Ducheſſe Eſcleremond, what loſſe haue yee receiued, to looſe him, who was your cheefe comfort and refuge, ye might haue called him more then father. Ah right noble Ladie, there neuer came to you a greater miſchiefe, then ye haue by the death of Gerames, who lieth dead euen now among the enemies.
               When the Almaines ſawe that Gerames was dead, then they fought ſo, that within a ſhort ſpace all them of Bourdeaux were ſlaine, and not one ſcaped aliue, except Barnard, who was on the puiſſant horſe Amphage: for the gambaudes and worke that he made, not an Almaine durſt approach neere him, for Bernard next vnto Huon, was the moſt valiaunt knight of his body, that was as then liuing, for when the Almaines ſawe him vpon that horſe, they chaſed him no further, but they went to theyr tents, and Bernard ceaſed not till hee came vnto the gate of the Citie, the which was opened, when hee was entred, and the gate cloſed againe, the Burgeſſes and comunaltie ſaw

how Bernard came in all alone, they demaunded of him, and ſayd. Sir, where is your captaine and the old Gerames. Then ſore wéeping, he ſhewed them at length the pittious and dolorous aduenture, the which when they heard, they made ſuch cries and wéeping, that pittie it was for to heare and to ſée them, the bruite and noyſe was ſo great and loud, that the Ladie Eſcleremond heard it, whereat ſhe maruailed, and ſtood in a great feare. Therewith Syr Bernard entred in at the Caſtle gate, and ſo mounted into the hall, whereas hee found the Ducheſſe Eſcleremond, who was ſore abaſhed when ſhe ſawe Syr Bernard come alone, who ſhewed her the great loſſe that he had ſuſtained that day, wherwith for inward ſorrow ſhe fell down in a ſwound, and ſo lay a long ſpace as though ſhe had beene dead. Then the Ladyes and Damſels ſore wéeping reléeued her, and then ſhee caſt out a great crie, wringing her handes, and tearing her hayre, and ſayde. Ah Huon my right déere Lord, this day yée haue loſt your moſt ſorrowfull and dolorous wife and well beloued daughter.
               Then the Ladies, & Damſelles, and other wiues, who had loſt their huſbands, fathers, and brethren, came into the Caſtle, and made ſuch cryes and ſorrow, that the noyſe thereof was heard into the Emperours hoaſt without, and it was ſhewed the Emperour, that the noyſe and brute that was made within the Citie and Caſtle, was for the loſſe they hadde receiued that day. And then they ſayde, that it ſhould be good that the next morning euerie man ſhould be readie to goe and aſſayle the Citie, and ſayd, that if euer they would winne it, the howre then was come. When the Emperour had heard that reaſon, he ſayd that the aduiſe was very good, and that he would that it ſhould ſo be done, hee gaue the charge thereof to his Conſtable and Marſhalles: & ſo the next morninge his hoaſt was readie, and the Emperour commanded to ſet forward, and then they came before the Citie garniſhed with all things néedfull and neceſſarie for aſſault: and they marched forward, and approached the Citie, and when they came there, they gaue a great crie, and entred into the Dykes, and reared vp their ladders to the walles in diuers places, ſo that they

that were within were ſore afrayd. For within were but Burgeſſes and Marchants, who could but little ſkil of warre, howbeit, they mounted vpon the walles, and defended their Cittie. But the Citie was ſo ſore aſſayled on all parts, that the defendants wiſt not where to make reſiſtance, the ſhotte of them without ſlew ſo thicke, that none within durſt appeare vppon the walles: whereby they entred perforce into the Citie, and ſlew as many as they mette withall in their entring. And then they went vnto the gate, and opened it, ſo that the Emperour and all his Lords entred into the Citie. Then euerie man went abroade in the ſtréetes, to take priſoners, and to ſpoyle mens houſes.
               When the Emperour ſaw hee was Lord of the Citie, hee cauſed it to be proclaimed in euerie ſtreete, that no man on paine of death ſhould wrong any woman, or deflowre anie mayde, nor to breake any Church, nor to ſet any houſe on fire, and alſo ſuch as were in any Church for ſauegard, that they ſhould goe at their pleaſure, without any trouble or danger either of body or goods, for the Emperour, who was a wiſe Prince, thought in himſelfe, that great damage and pittie it would bee, to deſtroy and putte to ruine ſuch a famous Citie, ſo ſtrong and well furniſhed with Burgeſſes and Marchants. When ſuch as were fledde into ſtrong places for refuge, vnderſtood the Emperours commaundement, euerie man and woman returned to their owne houſes, ſo that there was but little damage done, and that was done by them that entred firſt. When the Lady Eſcleremond ſaw how the Citie was taken, ye may bee ſure ſhe was right ſorrowfull. For firſt ſhee ſaw her Citie taken by the enemie, and her ſelfe cloſed within the Caſtle ill furniſhed with victualles, and much people with her, whereby ſhe ſaw cleerely (without God did ayde her) that her death approched neere. Then pitiouſly ſhe complayned to God and ſayd. Verie God on whome I beléeue firmely, and for whoſe ſake I haue left my firſt miſbeleefe, and forſooke my parents and friends to take to my huſband a Chriſtian man, to the intēt to receiue thy law, O God I require thee of thy grace to haue pittie vpon mee poore deſolate creature, and to keepe

and defend my deere children from all ill incombrances, for if it be thy pleaſure to ſaue my childe, I am content to abide what fortune it ſhall pleaſe thee to ſend mee, and beſide that, I require thy grace to ſaue and keepe Huon my deere Lord and huſband.
               Then all wéeping ſhe called vnto her ſir Bernard, and ſaid▪ Right deare Fréend, I can take no counſaile nowe but of you, you ſée well howe our deathes approache, and that it is impoſſible for vs to kéepe and defend this Caſtle againſt the Emperour, who hath wonne the Citie, and I doubt if he enter into this Caſtle perforce, wée ſhall bee the firſt that ſhall receiue death, and becauſe I ſée well that I cannot eſcape from hence, I require you my deare Fréend, and by the troth that you beare vnto Huon my Lord and yours, that incontinent you take my deare Daughter Clariet whome I hold héere in mine armes, and finde ſome meanes that you may depart out of this Citie, and beare her ſtraight to the Abbey of Cluny, the which is in Burgoyne, and deliuer her into the kéeping of the Abbot there: and recommend me vnto him, hée is Vncle to my Huſband Huon, and great Vncle to my Childe. Lady, (quoth Bernard) I know well that if I be taken here, I ſhalbe vtterly ſlaine: howbeit, if I could ſée or knowe that my abiding héere could aid or ſuccour you, both for mine honour and for the loue of my good Lord and Maiſter Huon, I woulde neuer depart hence from you, but my reſiſtance and force is but of ſmall value, and becauſe I woulde ſerue you as I am bounde to doe, I am readie ſourniſhed to take vppon mee that aduenture, as to beare your Child away, and to ſet her in ſauegard by the grace of our Lord and Sauiour Ieſus Chriſt.
               When the Ducheſſe vnderſtood Barnard, ſhe was well comforted, and as for her ſelfe ſhee regarded neither her life nor death, when ſhee knewe that her Child ſhould be ſaued. Then ſhée deliuered her Childe vnto Barnard, to the entent that in the night time hée ſhould yſſue out. Then the Emperour and his Lordes came before the Caſtle: and when the Ducheſſe knewe that, ſhee came to the gate, and at a windowe ſhee deſired to ſpeake with the Emperour, who was there readie preſent and

ſaid. Madame, ſay what you will to mée at your pleaſure: and when ſhée ſawe the Emperour, ſhee ſayd. Sir, I knowe well that you are the head and cheefeſt of all the chriſtened and nobleſt, whereby you are bound to defend and to kéepe from ill all noble men and women, I that am the Daughter of an high and mightie Emperour, and that for the loue of my good Lord and Sauiour Ieſus Chriſt, haue forſaken mine owne falſe béeléefe, to beléeue vppon the Chriſtian faith: Sir, I require you (for his ſake that made and created you) to haue pitie and compaſſion of mée, and of all thoſe that be héere with mée, & to reſpite our liues, and to put from you all rancour and malice, and pardon them that nothing had to doe with the beginning of this warre.
               When the Emperour hadde heard the reaſonable requeſt of this faire Ladie, hee caſt from him all the mortall hate that hée had vnto her, and vnto them that were within the Caſtle with her. Then hée mooued with pitie and compaſſion of the noble Ladie, aunſweared and ſayde: Madame, for the loue of our Lord Ieſus Chriſte, I repell from mée all my diſpleaſure, ſo that you render vnto mee this Caſtle, and to put it vnder mine obeyſance to vſe it at my pleaſure, and to yéelde your bodie as my Priſoner, and all thoſe that be within, and thus you ſhall haue all your liues ſaued. Sir, (quoth the Ducheſſe) laude and praiſe bee giuen to our Lord Ieſus Chriſt, for this grace that you ſhewe vnto mée and to my companie. Then the Emperour went backe, and made expreſſe commandement throuhout the Citie, that no man ſhould bée ſo hardy, as to doe any hurt or iniurie to any manner of perſon within the Citie, but to ſuffer euerie man to abide in their owne houſes peaceably without killinge, whereof the Burgeſſes and communaltie of the Citie, were right ioyfull. Thus as yée haue heard the Citie of Bourdeaux was taken by the Emperour, who was choſen in Almaine: and committed by the Emperour Charlemaine vntill his Sonne Lewis ſhoulde bée of full age, and able to rule the Empire.
            
            
               
               Chap. CV.
               
                  ¶ How the Ducheſſe Eſcleremond deliuered her Daughter Clariet to Barnard, to beare vnto the Abbot of Cluny, of whome the Abbot was right ioyfull.
               
               
                  
                     YEE haue heard the pitiful taking of the Citie of Bourdeaux, and of the treatie and appointment that the Ducheſſe Eſcleremond had made with the Emperour, & when ſhee had made her appointment, ſhee went vnto her companie pitiouſly weeping, and ſhewed them all the manner of her treatie, whereof euerie perſon was glad that their liues ſhould bée ſaued, but they made great ſorrowe, for that the Ducheſſe ſhould become a Priſoner, and then ſhe called Barnard, and ſayd. Sir, when it is night, yſſue out by the Poſterne with my Daughter Clariet, and beare her vnto the good Abbot of Cluny, who is her great Vncle. Madame, (quoth hée) bée of good cheere, and by the grace of our Lord and Sauiour Ieſus Chriſt, I ſhall not reſt twoo nights in one place, vntill I haue deliuered your daughter vnto the good Abbot of Cluny her great Vncle. Then Barnard tooke leaue of the Ducheſſe, who kiſſed her Daughter at her departing, ſore wéeping and pitifully complayning.
               There was a Poſterne that opened into the féeldes, and it was ſo ſmall that Barnard was faine to leade his horſe in his hand, the night was dark, but he knew well the waies, & afterwards he mounted on his horſe with the Childe in his armes, and ſo road foorth and paſſed the Landes of Bourdeaux, and was neuer ſéene by any mortall man vntill the next day, he road ſo all the night that his horſe was wearie. And when hee ſawe that hee was paſt all daungers and eſcaped all perils, then hee road at his eaſe for loue of the Child, and he complained greatly for the good horſe Amphage, that Huon had left in his kéeping

vntill his returne, but hee durſt not take that Horſe with him, for feare that hée ſhould haue dealt the worſe with the Ladie Eſcleremond, the which had béene true, for the Emperour loued the horſe ſo well, that he deſired more to haue the horſe againe, then for to winne the Citie, and therefore Barnard durſt not take the Horſe with him. So long Barnard road, that hée arriued at Monglew, the which is called Lyon on the Riuer of Roane, and from thence hée road to Maſcon, and from thence he reſted not vntill he came to the Abbey of Cluny, and then hée alighted, and deſired to ſpeake with the Abbot: and when the Abbot ſawe Barnard with a Child in his armes, hee had great maruaile thereof: and when Barnard ſawe the Abbot, all wéeping hee ſaluted him and ſaid. Sir, the right deſolate Duches of Bourdeaux, your Néece and wiſe vnto the Duke Huon of Bourdeaux your Nephew, hath ſent héere vnto you her Daughter Clariet. Then the good Abbot embraced him, and tooke the child and kiſſed it more then twentie times, and demaunded why hée brought the Child vnto him. Sir, (quoth Barnard) the Citie of Bourdeaux hath beene beſieged by the Emperour of Almaine, and ſo ſtraightly kept, that it was néere hand famiſhed, many Knightes that were within are ſlaine, ſo that Huon your Nephewe, by the counſaile of the Ducheſſe his wife, and conſent of all his companie, is departed out of Bourdeaux to ſéeke ſuccour of the King of Auphamie brother vnto Eſcleremond Huons
                   Wife, and ſo it is a longe time ſince hee departed, and wée neuer could heare word of him, and thus hée left vs in Bourdeaux, and our chéefe Captaine was the old Gerames your Coozen, who was Brother to the good Prouoſt Guyer, and ſo it was that vppon a night wée yſſued out and roade to the Emperours Tents, and ſlewe many of our enemies, and when wée ſawe our time wee returned towardes our Citie, but by ſome ſpie wée were perceiued when wée yſſued out, whereby the Emperour knowing thereof, ſent Duke Sauary his Brother with tenne Thouſand men to lye in ambuſhment néere to the Citie, ſo that when wee hadde thought to haue entred into the Citie, Duke Sauary was before vs with tenne Thouſand men, there wée fought a long ſpace, but finally the old Gerames and

his companie were all ſlaine, none eſcaped but my ſelfe, and that was by reaſon of my horſe, ſo I entred into the Citie, whereas there was made great ſorrow, and the next day the Emperour with great aſſault wanne the Citie, and came to the Caſtle whereas the Ducheſſe was, who ſaw well that ſhée could not long hold the Caſtle, ſhée made her treatie to ſaue her bodie and her companie, and ſo they are all Priſoners: before ſhe deliuered vppe the Caſtle, ſhee deliuered me her daughter, and ſo I iſſued out at a Poſterne priuily, and was not perceiued, therefore Syr your Néece hath ſent you her daughter, to the intent that for the loue of her father, and of her yee would kéepe and nouriſh her, till her father Duke Huon were returned.
               When the abbot vnderſtood Bernard, he beganne to weepe, and tooke the childe in his armes, and kiſſed her oftentimes, and ſayd. My deere childe, if it pleaſe our Lord God I ſhall bee to you both father and mother, and ſhall nouriſh you vntill yee be great, and then marrie you vnto ſome mightie Prince, in whome it ſhall lie to conquers your heritage, lands, and ſignories, for I haue here in my houſe ſuch treaſure, that it is ſufficient to conquer a whole Empire. Then the Abbot ſent for a noble Ladie of the countrey, and a nurſe, and deliuered vnto them the child for to keepe and to nouriſh, for a fayrer creature of her age was neuer ſeene. Then the Abbot ſayd to Barnard, Sir yee ſhall abide heere ſtill with mee, vntill the childe bee of age, or elſe till her father bee returned. Now lette vs leaue to ſpeake of this young child Clariet, and of the Abbot, and returne to ſpeake of the dolorous companie that were in the Caſtle of the noble Citie of Bourdeaux.
               
            
            
               Chap. CVI.
               
                  ¶ How the Ducheſſe Eſcleremond yeelded vp the Caſtle to the Emperor, and how ſhe and her companie were priſoners in the Citie of Mayence.
                  
               
               
                  
                  
                     YE haue well heard heere before, that after the departing of Barnard from the Caſtle of Bourdeaux, with Claret Huons daughter, how the Emperour had made a treatie with the Ducheſſe Eſcleremond, for the deliuerance of the Caſtle, the which paſſed: and on the next morning the Ducheſſe ſpake with the Emperour, who with all his men was there readie before the place, abiding to haue the deliuerance of the Caſtle. And when hee ſaw the Ducheſſe at a window ouer the gate, he ſayd. Madame, I will that the promiſe that yee made mee yeſterday ye performe, or elſe I will do according as I thinke beſt. Syr, (quoth the Ducheſſe) I am readie to fulfill my promiſe, ſo that ye promiſe me againe, that my body, and all Ladyes and Damſelles and other ſhall be ſaued, and not touched by no villaine, nor no ill done vnto our bodyes. Madame (quoth the Emperour) all this that you require heere, I promiſe to performe: but you, and all ſuch as be with you ſhall bee my priſoners. Sir (quoth the Ducheſſe) my life and my bodie, and all ſuch as be here with mee, I put them in the ſauegard of God and of you.
               Then ſhe deſcended downe, and came into the hall, whereas ſhe found her company making great ſorow each to other, for they knew not where euer they ſhould méet againe or not. Then the Ducheſſe commaunded to open the gate, the which was doone immediatly. Then the Emperour and all his Lords entred into the Caſtle, but hee would not goe into the hall, till he had all the Ladyes and other brought out, to the intent that they ſhould make no requeſt to him, and he ordained a thouſand Knights of the moſt auncient men of his hoaſt, and then be deliuered the Ducheſſe, and ſixe Ladyes with her, and al the other priſoners, as well they that were within the Caſtle, as other that hadde beene taken before at diuers ſkirmiſhes, & ſent them ſtraight to the Citie of Mayence, and ſette them all in priſon in Towres and other places, but the ducheſſe was putte all alone in a ſtrong towre, within the which there was a déep

dungeon, and therein ſhée was ſet, out of the which ſhee neuer yſſued vntill ſhee was deliuered by Huon her Huſband. Then the Emperour being in the Caſtle of Bourdeaux ſent ouer all the Countrey, that all ſuch as were aliue ſhould come and do their homage vnto him, and take their Landes of him, the which they did according to his commaundement. Then hée made his Prouoſts and Officers to doe iuſtice both in the Citie and Countrey: and after that the Emperour had béene there eight dayes, he went out of the Citie, and road and tooke poſſeſſion of Blames and Gerone, and ſet there his Officers, and when hee hadde full poſſeſſion of al the Countrey, hee left Keepers in the Countrey, and ſo returned to the Citie of Mayence, whereas hee was receiued with great ioy and triumph. Nowe lette vs leaue to ſpeake of the Emperor Tirrey, and ſpeake of Duke Huon of Bourdeaux, being in the Caſtle of the Adamant, in great pouertie and famine.
            
            
               Chap. CVII.
               
                  ¶ How there arriued at the Caſtle of the Adamant a Shippe full of Sanazins, wherein was the Biſhop of M
                           •
                        llaine, and how Huon cauſed them to bee chriſtened, and then hee brought them into the Caſtle, whereas they found great ſtore and plentie of victuals.
               
               
                  
                     YEE haue heard here before, howe Huon was in the Caſtle of the Adamant in great pouertie and famine, whereas he had beene tenne dayes without meat and drinke, except Apples and fruit that grew in the Garden, whereby he became ſo féeble and weake, that he had ſcarre power to ſuſtaine himſelfe vppon his feete, hee found there riches inough gould and ſiluer, apparell and Iewels, and riche bedding, ſo that he wanted nothing except victuall, and as hee walked in the chamber whereas the treaſure lay, he beheld an

Arch vaulted richly, painted with gould and azure, vnder the which ſtoode a riche chayre, and therein a couſhin of cloath of gould, bordered with pearles and precious ſtones. Huon who was wearie of walking, ſat downe in the chaire to reſte him. Then he beganne ſore to muze, caſting downe his lookes to the earth, and by reaſon that his long Mantle had ſwept the powder away from the pauement, there appeared letters of gould written vpon the pauement, & he red them, and the tennour of them was: Whoſoeuer reads this Letter, ſhall find that vnder this pauement, there is a Celler with victuall both bread, fleſh, and wine, and of all ſundry meats for man or woman to eate of. But the Letters ſayd, that whoſoeuer ſhould enter into this Celler, except he be without deadly ſinne: as ſoone as he toucheth any of the meat, ſuddainly he ſhall die. When Huon had read all the Letters, hee hadde great maruaile and feare, and thought within himſelfe, that when hée departed from Bourdeaux, hee was confeſſed before his Prieſt died, and ſince that time hee could not remember any thinge that hee had committed that ſhould bee deadly ſinne: and then hee made his prayers to our Lord God deuoutly ſore weeping, and when hee had ended his prayers, as hee kneeled vppon his knees before the chaire, hee ſawe hanging vppon the ſide of the chaire a little key of gould, he tooke it vp in his hand, and beganne to muze on the writing that ſayd: Whoſoeuer enters into this Caſtle, though they be valiaunt and wiſe or noble Knightes, yet they ſhall not knowe well what to doe. Then he ſaid vnto himſelfe, rather then I ſhould die for famine, it were better to die ſhortly then longe to endure in this hunger and thirſt.
               Then Huon recommended himſelfe to the ayd and helpe of almightie God, and tooke the key and opened a little wicket and drew the dore vnto him. Then he looked downe into the Celler, the which was as cleare, as though the Sunne in the middeſt of the day hadde entred in at the windowes, and ſo hee went downe about Seauen-ſcore greeces: then hee regarded on the right hand, and ſaw a great Ouen with twoo mouthes, the which caſt out a great cleareneſſe, then he ſaw néere thereunto Ten faire young men, they were all of the Fayrie, foure

of them made the Paſt for bread, and two deliuered the loaues to other twoo, and they did ſette them downe vppon a rich cloath of ſilke: then the other twoo men tooke the loaues and deliuered them vnto one man by twoo loaues at once, and hee did ſette them into the Ouen to bake, and at the other mouth of the Ouen, there was a man that drewe out the white loaues and Paſtes, and before him there was another young man that receiued them, and put them into Baſketts which were richly painted.
               When Huon had well aduiſed them, he had great maruaile, and came and ſaluted them, ſaying: Sir, I pray to our Lord God to ſaue you and all your companie, and when they heard Huon ſpeake, they gaue vnto him no manner of anſweare, but beheld each other, and when Huon ſaw that none of them wold make him any anſwere, he was ſore abaſhed and greatly troubled in his mind: howbeit he ſayd. Sirs, you that be héere, I coniure you in the name of the Father, and of the Sonne, and of the holy Ghoſt, and of the Angels and Archangels, and of all the Court celeſtiall, that yée anſweare mee to that I doe demaund of you.
               Then they all ceaſed from their labour and buſineſſe, and beheld Huon, and rubbed off the paſte & meale from off their hands and fingers, and the Maiſter of them beheld Huon and ſaide. Fréend you do vs great wrong to coniure vs, we will that you well know, if you were either Sarazin or Paynim, you ſhould neuer depart from hence without death: your troth and nobleneſſe hath preſerued you, you ought greatly to thanke God, I knowe well that you haue great hunger, for it is Tenne dayes ſince you did either 
                     •
                  ate or drinke any thinge, except all onely of the fruit that you founde in the Garden, the which as yet is not ripe nor readie to eate. Therefore Huon faire Sir, I know well that you haue great hunger, and therefore if that you will drinke or eate, enter into yonder rich Chamber the which you ſée open, where you ſhall finde the Table readie ſet, and the cloth layd, and the pots of ſiluer, and the veſſell of gould bordered with precious ſtones and pearle, and the Baſons of gould and Ewers with water to waſh your hands, and there ſit you

downe at the Table, and there you ſhall find meats and drinks ſuch as you will with for, and as long as you will tarie here in this Caſtle, you ſhall haue euerie day like ſeruice or better if you liſt, for any meat that you will wiſh for, you ſhall haue it at your pleaſure, and of wine in likewiſe twoo times of the day without you will faſt. But ſir, I require you of one thing, that from henceforth you do not coniure me nor any of my companie, and then you ſhall haue euerie thinge at your deſire. Sir, (quoth Huon) from henceforth I ſhall not ſpeake vnto you, ſo that by the coniuration that I haue coniured you, you will ſhewe mee what people you bee that abide heere in this Caſtle: and what you call this Caſtle, and who is Lord thereof, and by whome all the riches that is heere within is kept: I will goe eate ſome meat, and then I pray you for to ſhewe it vnto mée?
               Then they anſweared Huon right fiercely and ſaid: Ah thou falſe and vntrue Knight, for to demaund any ſuch thing of vs, at this time I ſhall ſhewe you, but afterward, by mee nor by none other of my company, you ſhall neuer heare word ſpoken. Sir, (quoth Huon) the requeſte I am ſorrie of: and I heartily deſire you yet, if heereafter I ſpeake vnto you alone, that you will anſweare mee. Nay ſurely, (quoth hee) that will I neuer doe, but I ſhall ſhew you that I haue promiſed, ſeeing you are ſo deſirous to know it.
               Sir, knowe for troth, that Iulius Caeſar Father to the good and noble King Oberon, cauſed this Caſtle to be made by craft of the Fayrie, the which Caſtle cannot bee gréeued nor taken perforce: ſo it fortuned vppon a day that Iulius Caeſar, after hee had vanquiſhed the great Pompey, he came into Alexandria to 
                     
                        ••
                     olomeus King of Egipt, and diſcomfited him and tooke from him all his Landes, to giue it vnto his Siſter the faire Cle
                     
                        •••
                     tra, who was Quéene of that Land, and after ſhee maried Marcus Antonius, and after that Iulius Caeſar had this done, to refreſh him, he came hether with the Queene of the priuie Iſle, and brought her the ſame night into this Caſtle, and there were thrée Kinges of the lineage of Tholomeus, who when they knewe that Caeſar was in this Caſtle, they made an armie,

and with many Shippes and Galleys, they came and layde ſeege before this Caſtle, and lay at the ſeege a long ſpace, and could not hurt it the value of one pennie, ſo long they lay héere, that they were ſore diſpleaſed therewith, and ſo they thought to depart home into their owne countreys, but by reaſon that their ſhippes were nayled with yron nayles, they could not depart from hence, for the Adamant ſtone that by nature draweth the yron vnto him, and ſo they lay heere ſo longe, that they al died miſerably for famine and rage, for no ſhippe can depart from hence without it be pinned with nayles of wood, and not of yron. And whereas you demaund, from whence commeth the Treaſure that is heere within this Caſtle? Knowe for a troth, that it was the riches that theſe thrée Kinges lefte in their ſhippes when they dyed, the which Treaſure after that they were dead, Caeſar cauſed it to be brought into this Caſtle, and before hée dyed, hee deliuered vnto mee the kéeping of this Caſtle and Treaſure. And I and Fortie other of my fellowes, are heere condemned by the Fayrie to abide heere vnto the end of the world. Nowe when that tidinges came to the knowledge of the noble Kinge Oberon, that his Father Iulius Caeſar was ſlaine, and murdered within the Senate of Rome by them whome hee truſted well, King Oberon tooke ſuch diſpleaſure, that he made promiſe and aſſurement, that hée would neuer come heere more, and no more he hath done: for he thought if he ſhould haue come hether againe, that hee ſhould haue dyed for ſorrow, for the great loue that he had vnto his Father Iulius Caeſar. And ſince you will knowe my name, I am called Gloriadas, and this Caſtle is called the Adamant. Nowe I haue ſhewed you the troth of your demaund, and one thing I ſay vnto you, you ſhall neuer depart from hence as long as you liue, without you flye in the ayre as a bird doth flye: nowe I haue ſhewed you your deſire.
               When Huon vnderſtood him, he was right ſorrowfull: and ſo after hee had well eaten and drunken at his owne pleaſure, hee tooke his leaue and departed, and came vnto a dore of a chamber, and ſawe Letters of goulde written ouer the dore, whereby hee had knowledge where the key was, hee tooked it

and opened the dore and entred into the Chamber, and ſawe how that all the Chamber was made of Chriſtall, and painted richly with gould and Aſure, and there was the protraiture of all the Battailes of Troy, and all the déedes of Alexander: and vppon the pauement was ſpread abroad, Roſes, flowers, and hearbes ſwéete ſmelling aboue all other ſauours in the worlde, and in the Chamber there were diuers birdes flyinge about, ſinging ſo maruailous ſweetly, that great ioye and melodie it was to heare them: the riches and great beauty of that chamber could not bee deſcribed. Huon had maruailous great pleaſure to behould it, and there hee ſawe a Table ſet full of meate, and there by ſtood great pots of gould garniſhed with precious ſtones full of wine, there was no meat in the world but that there it was readie: Huon had good appetite to eate, for he had eaten but little before, by reaſon of the talking that he had with Gloriadas: and then two young men brought him a Baſon of gould broadered with pearles to waſh his hands, and another brought him a Towell to wipe his handes. Then Huon ſat downe at a rich Table, the which was bordered with precious ſtones, the cloath that lay vpon the Table was of ſilke richly wrought, Huon did eate his meate, for hee hadde good appetite thereto, a goodly young man carued for him, and another bare his Cuppe, many folkes there was, to haue done ſeruice vnto any creature liuing in the world, and hée ſpake vnto them, but none would anſweare him one word, wherewith hee was angrie and ſore diſpleaſed: but when he ſaw that there was none other reamedie, hee did let it paſſe and forgat it, becauſe of the ſwéete melodie that the bird
                     •
                  s made: often times he wiſhed for his Wife the faire Eſcleremond, and for his Daughter Clariet, and for Gerames, Barnard, and Richard, and his other company that hee left at Bourdeaux.
               
               Thus Huon was ſerued in the Caſtle of the Adamant, and when hee hadde dined, the Seruants tooke vp the Table, and brought him water and a Towell for to waſh his handes, and 
                     ••
                  en he roſe vp from the Table, and went downe into the Seller, whereas he ſawe euerie thing as he had ſeene before, he ſa
                  
                     ••••
                   them in paſſing by, but they made none anſweare, ſo hee

came vnto greeces and mounted vp, and then went and ſported him from chamber to chamber, and then into the Garden, wherein hée tooke great pleaſure: and when the time came for to eate, hee returned into the Seller, and ſo into the Chamber, whereas hee found euerie thing readie as hee had done before: but hee was ſore and greatly diſpleaſed, that they that ſerued him would not ſpeake no word.
               Thus Huon was there a whole Moneth, and tooke ſuch pleaſure there, that hee recouered his heath, and ſtrength, and beautie, greatly hée was annoyed that there was no man there that would ſpeake one word vnto him: oftentimes hee wiſhed himſelfe at Bourdeaux with a hundred Thouſand men at armes to giue battaile vnto the Emperour who had done him ſo much dammage. And vppon a day as Huon walked in the Hall ſaying of his prayers, he looked out at a window into the Sea, and hee ſawe a farre off a Shippe comming with full ſayle to arriue at the Port, and they were about Foure-ſcore Marchants all of Spaine, and they knew not what Port they did arriue at.
            
            
               Chap. CVIII.
               
                  ¶ Howe Huon ſawe a Shippe arriue at the Port of the Caſtle of the Adamant.
                  
               
               
                  
                     WHen Huon ſaw this Shippe arriue at the Port, hee greatly complayned for them, and ſayd: Ah good Lord, what a ſorte of good Marchants haue heere beene loſt, if they of yonder Shippe knewe thereof, they would not ariue here by their wils, and ſo then hée ſawe the Shippe come in with ſuch a force, and it daſhed in ſo ſore amongeſt the other olde Shippes, that the Shippe was neere hande periſhed. But the other Shippes were ſo old that they were rotten, ſo that thereby the new Ship

was ſaued, who hadde beene twentie dayes in torment on the the Sea, ſo that the men that were within it were ſore trauayled and faint for famine, that they were ſcarce able to ſuſtaine themſelues vppon their féete.
               When Huon ſaw them arriue, all wéeping hee complayned for them, for he ſaw well that they were all loſt, and that they ſhoulde neuer depart from thence, when the Shippe was arriued, the Marchants within it called vppon Mahound to ayde and to ſuccour them, and the Maiſter of the Ship ſtood vp and went a ſhoare, and looked towards the Caſtle, and ſawe Huon where hee ſtood leaning in a window: whereof they had great ioy, thinking that they were arriued at a good Port, ſuppoſing that he that they ſawe there before them, had beene the Lord of the Caſtle, becauſe he was ſo maruailous richly aparelled, and then they ſaluted Huon in the name of Mahounde their God. When Huon heard that, hee knew ſurely that they were Sarazins, and he that could very wel ſpeake the Spaniſh language, anſweared to the Maiſter and ſayd. Freends, you that be here arriued, ſhew mée (I pray you) the troth from whence you are come? and what you be? for be you ſure that as longe as you liue you ſhall neuer depart from hence, and without you haue victuals brought with you, you are all arriued at an vnfortunate place.
               Then the Maiſter trembling ſaid, Sir know for troth, that I am of the countrey of Spaine, and dwelling in the Citie of Luyſarne, and they that are come hether with me, are all Marchants of Portugall, and are come from the citie of Acre, and there wée charged our ſhippe with Marchandize, and we had a maruaylous good wind vntill wée were paſſed the ſtraites of Morrocco, and that wée were néere to our owne countrey, and then ſuddenly a great tempeſt aroſe and tooke vs, and draue vs off from the coaſt of our owne Countrey a great diſtance, and this tempeſt hath continewed theſe twentie daies paſt ſo extreamely, that wée were faine perforce to abandon our ſhippe to the raging of the Sea and winde, euen as the ſhippe would goe at aduenture, but at the laſt by good fortune wée chaunced to arriue by a great rocke and there wee caſt anchor: and preſently

after that we were arriued there, we went vp into the Rocke, and there we found the Biſhop of Liſhborne and one of his Chaplaines with him, who came thether driuing vpon a maſt of a ſhippe that had béene periſhed, but all the reſt of his company were drowned by miſfortune at ſea. Then the Biſhop and his Chaplaine humbly prayed me to haue pitie vpon them and to ſaue their liues, and to take them into my ſhippe: whereuppon I had compaſſion on thē, and (as one verie glad and willing to deliuer them from that danger) I tooke them into my ſhippe, and gaue them meate and drinke & other thinges ſuch as I had, for they had béen almoſt dead by famine if I had not ſuccoured them, and yet I thinke that they will not liue vntill to morrow at night, for truly I haue no more victualles, neyther for my ſelfe nor for ſuch as be within my ſhippe: thus Sir I haue anſwered to your demaund, and therefore I deſire you in the honoure of God and of Mahound, to ſhew me to whome this Caſtle doth appertaine, and who is Lord thereof? and what is the name thereof, and of this Port whereas wée be arriued? Friend quoth Huon, know for troth that this Caſtle and Port is the place in the world moſt hated and doubted of Paynims and Sarazins, and I ſhall ſhewe you the cauſe why this Caſtle is ſet on a Rocke of Adamant ſtones, ſo that if any ſhippe chaunce to come hether by aduenture, it can neuer depart from hence againe. For the Adamant is of that nature, that it draweth alwaies vnto him the yron: and therefore any ſhippe that is nayled or haue in it any yron, and by chaunce come neere this Port, by force it ſhal be conſtrained héere to arriue.
               When the Marchant heard Huon, hee beganne ſore to wéepe and lament, and ſo did all the other and ſayd. Sir, wee are ſore diſmayed and abaſhed, of theſe words that you haue ſaid. Freend, (quoth Huon) all that I haue ſayd is of troth: but ſirs, if you will beleeue mée, and take vppon you chriſtendome, and beléeue vppon the faith of Ieſus Chriſt, and beléeue firmely in him: you and all ſuch as be in your ſhippe, I ſhall bringe you into ſuch a place whereas you ſhall haue meat and drinke at your pleaſure, and apparell as rich as you ſhall demaund,

and then I ſhall ſhewe you ſo much gould and riches, that you ſhalbee ſatiſfied with the beholding thereof. Therefore if you will beleeue vppon God, and of his Sonne Ieſus Chriſt, you ſhall haue all this that I haue ſaid before, or elſe you ſhall al die of rage and of famine miſerably.
               When the Patrone had well heard Huon, hee ſayde: Sir, knowe for troth, it is about Seauen yeares paſt ſince I beléeued vpon the faith of our Lord and Sauiour Ieſus Chriſt, and Sir, I thanke you of the courteſie that you haue ſhewed vnto mee, and from hencefoorth I ſubmit my ſelfe to the ſauegard of almightie God, and of his Sonne Ieſus Chriſt. When Huon heard that, he was right ioyfull, and ſayd. Fréend, goe to thy Shippe, and remooue all thy companie to beleeue vppon Ieſus Chriſt, and ſhewe them what per
                     •
                  ll and daunger they be in now, and what wealth they ſhall haue if they beleeue vppon almightie God, and of his Sonne Ieſus Chriſt, and alſo ſhew them what pleaſure they ſhall finde in this place, and if they will not, thou mayeſt well ſay that they are come to their laſte and ſhortly, and the twoo men that thou haſt ſaued, cauſe them to come hether vnto mée. Sir, (quoth the Patron) I ſhall ſend them vnto you, and then he departed and entred into his Ship, and there he ſhewed his companie all that he had heard of Huon, and what he was commaunded to ſay vnto them. When the Marchaunts who were all Paynims had heard their Patron declare in what caſe and perrill they were in, they all anſwered, how that they were all readie to doe his pleaſure and to receiue chriſtendome, whereof the Patron was right ioyfull to heare them ſay ſo.
               Then the Patron ſent for the Biſhop and his Nephew who was his Chaplaine, and ſaide, Sirs, in the Caſtle there is a Lord, who prayeth you that incontinent yée will come a land and goe to ſpeake with him. When the Biſhoppe heard the Patrone, he aroſe vp with much paine for faintneſſe by reaſon of famine, and ſaid, how that hee would gladly fulfill his commaundement. Then he and his Chaplaine departed out of the Shippe, and came to the ſtaires and mounted vp to the Caſtle, but they were faine to reſt them by the way diuers times, and

when they came vnto the gate, they maruailed greatly of the great beautie and rich worke that they ſawe there, and ſo they came vnto Huon, who taried for them at the Hall dore. When they came neere vnto him, they humbly ſaluted him. Sirs, (quoth Huon) God ſaue you, and I pray you ſhewe mee the troth what Countrey you be of? Sir, (quoth the Biſhop) ſeeing it is your pleaſure to knowe, I ſhall ſhewe you the troth. Sir, I was borne in the Cite of Bourdeaux, and am Biſhoppe thereof, and haue beene this Twentie yeares, and a deuo
                     •
                  ion tooke me to goe a Pilgrimage to the holy Sepulchre, but God would not ſuffer vs ſo to doe: for when we were departed from Liſhborne, a great wind and torment aroſe vppon our Ship, the which was faire and rich and wel furniſhed with Marchants, and ſo by fortune our Shippe ranne againſt a Rocke, ſo that our Shippe burſt all to péeces, and there all our company were drowned, except my ſelfe and my Chaplaine, who is my Nephew, and wee twoo ſaued our ſelues vppon the Maſte of our Shippe floating vppon the Sea, ſo that by the grace of God, the Ship that is heere beneath arriued by fortune at the Port neere vnto the Rocke, and I prayed him in the honour of God and of his Sonne Ieſus Chriſte to ſaue our liues, and the Patrone had pitie & compaſſion of vs, and tooke vs into his Ship, and did ſo much for vs as though we had beene his Brethren. Sir, thus I haue ſhewed you our aduenture: and Sir, I require you to pardon mée in that I ſo ſtearnly behold you, but I ſhall ſhew you (quoth he) the cauſe why I doe it, mée thinks I ſee before me the good Duke Seuin of Bourdeaux, who ſwéetly nouriſhed mee in my youth, you greatly reſemble vnto him, and hee ſet me to ſchoole at Paris, and then hee ſent mee to Rome vnto our holy Father the Pope of Rome, to whom I was a ki
                     •
                  , and hee did mée much good, and hee gaue mee the Biſhopric
                     •
                  e of Millaine: Duke Seuin is dead, God bee with him, and hee had twoo Sonnes the eldeſt called Huon and the other Gerard, Huon was ſent for to Paris by Kinge Charlemaine, and by the way there fell vnto him a maruailous aduenture, for hee ſhewe the Kinges Sonne Charlot in his owne defence, not knowing that it was the Kinges Sonne: wherefore the King baniſhed

him out of the Realme of Fraunce, and ſent him to the Admirall Gaudiſe in Babilon to doe his Meſſuage, and afterward hee returned into Fraunce: and ſince hee hath hadde great warre with the Emperour of Almaine, more I cannot ſay, and I am right ſorrie that I knowe not where he is become, for my Father who was Brother to the good Abbot of Cluny, longe agoe nouriſhed Huon vp in his youth, before his Father Duke Seuin died, my Father did teach him: wherefore I haue great ſorrow and gréefe at my heart that I knowe not where hee is become, ſince the peace was made and concluded betweene him and the King of Fraunce.
               When Huon hadde well heard the Biſhoppe and vnderſtood him, his bloud changed, and embracing him ſweetely, he ſaid: Sir, you are my Coozen, & I am Huon, who paſſed the ſea and went to the Admirall Gaudiſe, and ſlewe him, and ledde away with me his Daughter the faire Eſcleremond, who was married vnto me by our holy Father the Pope, and I haue left her in the Citie of Bourdeaux in great pouertie and miſerie, beſieged by the Emperour of Almaine, I beleeue ſurely that ſhe is taken by this time. When the Biſhop heard Huon, hee began ſore to weepe, and Huon embraced and kiſſed him, and ſayd. Coozen you are happie to find me heere, or elſe ſhortly you had béen dead. Sir, (quoth he) I ought greatly to thanke God thereof. But Sir, I require you to giue mée ſome meat, for I am ſo ſore puniſhed with hunger and thirſt, that I am néere hande famiſhed, and can ſcarce ſuſtaine my ſelfe vppon my féete. Coozen, (quoth Huon) by the grace of God I ſhall bring you to ſuch a place, whereas you ſhall haue meat and drinke at your pleaſure, and ſuch as you will with for.
               Then Huon tooke him by the hand, and brought him into the Pallaice and through the Chambers, the Biſhoppe was greatly abaſhed to ſée the riches that he ſaw there. Then they went downe into the Seller, the Biſhop beheld the manner of euerie thing, and had great maruaile that none of them that hee ſawe there would not ſpeake any word, hee paſſed by them with Huon and ſaluted them, and then he entred into the rich Chamber, whereas the Table was readie and Seruants to giue them

water, and they all thrée ſat downe: and then Huon ſayd vnto the Biſhoppe. Coozen, I coniure you by the Sacrament that you haue receiued, that you nor your Chaplaine be ſo hardy as to eat one morſell of meat, if any of you bee in any deadly ſin, if you be, incontinent confeſſe you to your Chaplain, and hee vnto you: for if you doe otherwiſe, you ſhall no ſooner eate one morſell, but incontinent you ſhall die.
               When the Biſhop had well heard and vnderſtood Huon, hée hadde great maruaile and ſaid: Coozen, by the grace of God I féele my ſelfe in good eſtate not to abide death, for when I departed from Rome, both I and my Nephewe were confeſſed of the Pope, and aſſoyled of all our ſinnes, and ſince wée entred into the Sea wee haue committed no ſinne. Then Huon ſayd: Cozen, ſeeing that you be both in this caſe, you may eate and drinke at your pleaſure, and ſo they did, for they had great néed thereof, they all thrée were richly ſerued, they had euerie thing as they wiſhed for, the Biſhoppe and his Nephew did eat and drinke, and they were greatly abaſhed of the great riches that they ſaw there, and they were rauiſhed at the ſwéet ſinging of the birds, and the hearbes and flowers that were there ſpreade abroade ſmellinge ſo ſwéetely, that they thought themſelues in Paradice, and they had great maruaile to ſee the Seruants to ſerue them ſo peaceable, but they would neuer ſpeak one word, they woulde gladly haue demaunded the cauſe why, but Huon hadde expreſly charged them that they ſhoulde make none inquirie.
               Thus they paſſed their dinner in great ioy, and thē waſhed theyr hands & aroſe vp from the Table, and the Biſhop and his Chaplaine ſayde grace deuouſly. Then Huon tooke the Biſhoppe by the hand, and ſayde: Cozen, wee will goe vp into the Pallaice, and then you ſhall goe downe into your Shippe, and ſhew them without they will die incontinent, let them be chriſtened, and dreſſe vp Tubbes with water of the Sea, and hallowe you it and chriſten them therein, and I ſhall come after you with my ſword and cleane armed, to the entent that if they refuſe thus to doe, I ſhall ſtrike oft their heades. Sir, (quoth the Biſhop) I ſhall doe your pleaſure.
               
                  Then Huon armed himſelfe, and went after the Biſhoppe and his Nephewe downe to the ſhippe, and when they came there, they found Elinas the Maiſter of them, who had preached ſo much vnto the Sarazins, that hée had conuerted them all except Tenne, they bare him in hand that they were glad to bee chriſtened, but theyr thoughtes were otherwiſe, for they Ten had concluded in their courages, not to renounce the Lawe of Mahomet, for to beleeue vppon Ieſus Chriſt, but they were content to be chriſtened, to the entent that they would not die there for famine.
               When Huon and the Biſhop was come vnto them, the Biſhop ſayd: Sirs, I require you all to ſhew me your intention, that if with a good heart not coloured, you will become chriſtened and beléeue on the Law of God the Father, and of his Son our Lord and Sauiour Ieſus Chriſt, and leaue the falſe and deteſtable Lawe of Mahound, the which is nothing woorth. Sir, (quoth they all) ſhortly deliuer vs, for wee bee ſo hungrie and thirſtie, that we are almoſt famiſhed, the which ouer-preſſeth vs ſo much, that we can no longer endure nor ſuffer it: and when Huon had well heard them, he humbly thanked our Lord God, and had great ioy thereof, and the Biſhop and his Chaplaine confeſſed them all, and aſſoyled them of all their ſinnes, and in twoo great veſſels chriſtened them all. Then they all cryed vppon Huon, and ſayd: Sir, for the loue of our Lord God giue vs ſome meate. Sirs, (quoth Huon) you ſhall haue incontinent ynough, ſo that you ſhall bee ſatiſfied. Then Huon and the Biſhop and his Chaplaine all thrée went into the Caſtle, and charged vpon their neckes meat ynough, and brought it into the Shippe, and cauſed all the Marchants to ſit downe, and the meat was ſet before them, and the wine powred out into Cuppes, among other ſat the tenne Sarazins, who had receiued the chriſtendome faintly and falſely, and at the firſt morſell that they did put into their mouthes, ſuddainly they died: the other Marchants when they ſawe that, they were greatly abaſhed, and regarded each other, and durſt not approach to touch the meat, for they had thought that they ſhould haue all died. Sirs, (quoth Huon) be not diſmayed nor abaſhed at this,

for theſe tenne men that are dead, did baptize themſelues but all onely to ſaue their liues and to haue meate, and not with a good conſcience, nor for ye loue of almightie God, who hath all mens heartes at his pleaſure: therefore be not afraid, eate and drinke at your eaſe, for yee ſhall want nothing, but haue all thinges at your wiſh.
               When the other Marchants vnderſtood by Huon, how that they that died were no true Chriſtian men, they were greatly abaſhed, and ſo fell to theyr meate and drinke: and when they had eaten and drunken at their pleaſures, they aroſe and tooke all the riches that were in the Shippe and carried it vp into the Caſtle, and when they came there, they had great ioy and pleaſure, to beholde the Hals and rich Chambers that were there: ſo much gould and ſiluer and other riches they ſawe there, that they hadde thereof great maruaile. Then they beheld the rich beddes, and Chambers apparelled whereas they might reſt them: and then they ſawe the faire Garden ſo pleaſant and delightfull to behold, that the more they regarded it, the fairer it ſeemed vnto them, the place was of length and breadth a bowe ſhoote and more. And when the houre came for ſupper, then Huon ledde them downe into the Seller, and after into the rich Chamber, whereas there was meat and drinke plentie, and after Supper they went againe into the Pallaice, and lay in the rich beds that they found there readie, and in the morning the Biſhop and his Chaplaine did ſing Maſſe before Huon, and all the other that were there preſent, and when they woulde eate, they went to the place accuſtomed, and there they founde alwayes readie euerie thing that they deſired or wiſht for, in the day time they would bee in the Garden to ſport them, oftentimes the Biſhop preached vnto them, and confeſſed them of all their ſinnes.
               Thus they were there all together the ſpace of one Moneth in great pleaſure and ſolace, but whoſoeuer had ioy, Huon had none, for his abiding there greatly greeued him, for oftentimes hee would complaine for his Wife the faire Ladie Eſcleremond, and for his Daughter Clariet, and ſayde. Madame, as often as I remember what danger I haue left you in, my heart néere

departeth out of my bodie: Ah curſed Emperour, thou cauſeſt me to ſuffer much ill, when I thinke that by this time thou haſt taken my Citie, my Wife, and my Child, and ſet them in thy Priſon, I would if it were the pleaſure of our Lord God, that they were heere with mee: then I would neuer depart from hence, and no more I ſhall doe, without it be by the grace of God. Ah noble King Oberon, you haue giuen me the realme of the Fayrie, if it might bée your pleaſure now ſo much to ſuccour mée, as to deliuer me from hence, and to ayd me to deſtroy this Emperour who hath done me ſo much ill: for euer were I bound to your Mightineſſe.
            
            
               Chap. CIX.
               
                  ¶ How Huon was borne by a Griffen out of the Caſtle of the Adamant, and how he ſlewe the Griffen, and fiue other young Griffens: And of the Fountaine of the fayre Garden, and of the fruit of the Tree neere to the Fountaine.
               
               
                  
                     THus as yee haue heard Huon
                   paſſed away the time in the Caſtle of the Adamant, and vppon a day hee leaned and looked out at a windowe into the Sea-ward, and hee ſawe a farre off a great birde come flyinge thether-ward, this bird or foule was bigger then any horſe in the world, whereof he had great maruaile. Then he ſawe where it came to the ſame Port, and lighted vpon the Maſte of a great Shippe, and ſaw how with the weight of the Foule, the Maſt had neere hand broken aſunder. Then after he ſawe the Foule alight downe into the Ship, and tooke with his tallants one of the Ten men that died becauſe they would not beleeue firmely vpon God, and of his Sonne Ieſus Chriſt, they could not putrefie, but lay ſtill in the Shippe al whole and found: then the Foule lifted him vp into the ayre, and carried him away as lightly as a Hauke would carie a Pigeon. Huon
                  
who ſawe this had great maruaile, and beheld the Griffen which way ſhe did fly, and as farre off as he might ſée, he ſawe to his ſimilitude a great Rocke, as white to the ſight as Chriſtall, and then he ſaid to himſelfe, I would to God that I were there, I think it be ſome place inhabitable, and then he thought within himſelfe to come thether againe the dext day, to ſée if the Griffen would come againe to fetch his pray, if hee did, he
                     •
                   thought if he would be out of the Caſtle, the Griffen might bear him armed as ſurely, that hee ſhould doe him no hurt with his tallants, thinking to lye downe armed with his Sword in his hand among the dead men, and when the Griffen had brought him where his young birdes were, then to fight with the Griffen, yet he thought before he would thus doe, he would againe ſée if the Griffen came, and held the ſame way that ſhe did before, for he thought ſurely that if ſhe returned to the ſame place, it muſt needes bee ſome Land, and hee thought that it were a thing impoſſible to get out of that Caſtle by any other manner of wayes.
               Then Huon returned againe to the Garden to the Biſhoppe and vnto the other companie, and made no ſemblance of that he hadde thought to doe, and then hee talked with them of diuers matters. And when the time came, they went to eat and drink as they had been accuſtomed to do before. When night came, and that Huon was in his bedde, he lay and ſtudied of the conuayance of the Griffen, deſiring greatly for the day light, to goe and ſee if the Griffen returned to fetch her pray. When day came, Huon aroaſe and heard ſeruice, and then hee went to the window, and looked there ſo longe, that at the laſte hee ſawe a far off where the Griffen came flying from the place as ſhee had doone the day before, and came and ſat downe vppon the ſame Maſte, beholdinge the dead men that lay vnder her, which of them ſhe might take to her pray: Huon beheld her, and ſawe howe that ſhe was a cruell Foule. Her necke was maruailous great, her eies as great as a Baſon, and more redder then the mouth of a fournace, and her tallants ſo great and ſo long, that fearefull it was to behold her, and then at laſt ſhe lighted downe into the Shippe, and tooke one of the dead bodies in her

tallants, and ſo mounted into the ayre, and flew the ſame way as ſhe did the day before.
               
                  Huon beheld the Griffen well, and ſaw how that ſhe flew to the white Rocke. This Rocke was called the Rocke of Alexander, for when Alexander paſſed the deſerts of India, and went to ſpeake with the Trées of the Sunne and of the Moone, hee came vnto the ſame Rocke, and at his returne, he bathed him in a Fountaine neere to the Rocke, and there hee taried a certaine ſpace, and ſawe there many thinges. Now let vs leaue ſpeaking of this Rocke, and returne vnto Huon, who fixed his courage, that hee determined to bee borne from thence by the Griffen, and ſayd within himſelfe, that he hadde rather aduenture death, then to abide any longer there: for hee had ſo great a deſire to ſee his Wife and his Child, that he put from him all feare of death.
               When Huon ſawe that the Griffen was gone with her pray, he went to the Biſhoppe and vnto his companie, and ſhewed vnto them all that hee had ſeene and thought to doe: and when they all had heard Huon, they beganne pitifully to weepe, and wrang their handes, and did tare their haire, making the greateſt ſorrow and greefe in the world, and cryed out and ſaid: Ah Coozen, (quoth the Biſhop) by the grace of God you ſhall neuer take vppon you ſuch a follie, you ought not io ſeeke your owne death, ſooner then it is the pleaſure of God that your houre bée come: Sir, for Gods ſake forſake vs not, but tarrie heere with vs. Freendes, (quoth Huon) when I remember the danger that I left my wife and my child, and my Citie and Lords, and Burgeſſes and Communaltie in, my heart is ſo ſorowfull and ſo agreeued there at, that it neere hande ſlayeth mee, you ſhall abide heere in the ſauegard of our Lord God, and I will take the aduenture that God will ſend me, and I pray you to ſpeake no more vnto me in this matter, for by the grace of God I will venture it.
               When they ſawe that they could not turne Huon from his Enterprize, the ſorrowe that they made no man can declare, that night they paſſed in great ſorrowe and dolour, vntill the next morning that Huon aroſe. Then hee came to the Biſhop,

and was confeſſed and receiued at his hand, then he dined wel with his companie, and then after dinner hée went and armed himſelfe in double armour, and with maile vppon his Legges and helmet vpon his head, and guirded his Sword about him, and when hee was readie and that it was time to depart, hee tooke his leaue of the Biſhop and of all the other, and commended them all into the ſauegard of almightie God. When the good Biſhop ſawe his departure, hee made great ſorrow and ſo did all the other, but none of them durſt ſpeake any more vnto him: the Biſhop embraced him at his departing, and ſayde. Coozen, into the ſauegard of almightie God and of his Sonne our Lord and Sauiour Ieſus Chriſt I commend you, and that he may of his grace preſerue you from all your enemies. Sir, (quoth Huon) the great deſire that I haue to ayd and ſuccor her, whome I left in great pouertie and doubt of her life, conſtrayneth me thus to depart, for if I goe not by this meanes, I muſt euer abide heere, and then I ſhall breake my promiſe vnto her, but by the grace of God I will keepe my faithfull promiſe. Thus I recommend you vnto God, and then he departed from them, and paſſed out of the gate, and went downe the ſtaires, and ſo came into the ſhippe, and then hee looked into the Sea, and ſawe where the Griffen was comming, and when hee perceiued that, he lay downe among the dead men with his ſword naked in his hand, and held it vpon his thigh▪ becauſe it ſhould not fall into the Sea, and aſſoone as hee was layd crewling amonge the dead men, the Griffen came, and alighted vppon the ſhippe Maſt as ſhe was accuſtomed to doe, and ſhe was ſo heauie and ſo great (as is aforeſaid) that the Maſt was neere hand broken aſunder.
               When Huon ſaw that, he was in great feare, and called vppon our Lord Ieſus Chriſt for aid and ſuccour, and to ſaue him from the cruel Griffen, and the Gr
                        •
                     ffen looking for her pray, ſaw where Huon lay armed, whereby hée ſeemed more greater then any of the other dead men, the Griffen deſired to haue him vnto her neſt, to giue him vnto her young birds: and then ſhe came downe into the ſhippe and tooke Huon in her clawes, and ſtrained him ſo faſte by both ſides, that her clawes entred into the

fleſh for all his armour, ſo that the bloud yſſued out, and Huon was in that diſtreſſe, that all his bodie trembled, and pitiouſly he called vppon our Lord God for ayd and ſuccour, but he durſt not ſtirre for any paine that he felt, the Griffen did beare him ſo hie and ſo farre, that in leſſe then thrée houres ſhe did beare him vnto the white Rocke, and there layde him downe, and for trauaile that the Griffen had, ſhe flew down the Rocke to a Fountaine to drink, the which Fountaine was of ſuch great vertue, that the bountie thereof could not bée deſcribed, and Huon who lay vppon the Rocke, was ſore wearie and faint, for the bloud that hee had loſt, hee thought within himſelfe, that if euer hee woulde eſcape from that daunger, it was time for him then to ſhewe his Proweſſe: then he aroſe vp and looked round about him, and ſawe how that there was neere him a faire Forreſt, and then hee prayed vnto our Lord God to ayd and ſuccour him to depart from thence in ſauegard, and that hee might once againe returne into his owne Countrey, to ſee his Wife and Child whome hee ſo well loued: then anone he ſaw the Griffen, who had ſeene Huon riſe vp, then ſhe came with her mouth open to haue deuoured Huon: but hee was repleniſhed with his Proweſſe, and came againſt the Griffen, who had her pawes readie open to haue griped Huon, but hee who was light and quicke, gaue the Griffen ſuch a ſtroake with his Swoord, that he ſtrake off one of her feete by the ioynt, and ſo the Griffen fell to the earth, and gaue ſuch a crie, that the young Griffens being in their neſt in the Forreſt heard the crie, and knewe well that it was the voyce of their Mother, Father they had none, for he was ſlaine but a little before by a Kinge of Perſia with his Archers, becauſe the Griffen had ſlaine the Kings Horſe for meat for his young ones.
               Thus when they heard the crie of theyr Mother, they aroſe vp into the ayre, they were fiue in number, they came all at once with open winges vppon Huon, and when he ſaw all fiue comming vppon him, he had great feare, he ſtrake the firſt vpon the necke, in ſuch ſort, that hee ſtrake off the head cleane from the bodie: then the ſecond ſeazed Huon by the maile, that if hée had not ſtriken off her Legge, hee hadde borne him vp into the

ayre, but Huon gaue him ſuch a ſtroake, that the Legge hanged ſtill at the lappe of the maile, and hee tooke it off with his hand and caſt it to the earth, and with another ſtroake hee ſlew that Griffen,: and then came the third and gaue Huon ſuch a buffet with his winges, that it made Huon to kneele downe vpon one of his knées. Then Huon ſtrake that Griffen ſuch a ſtroake on the wing, that it fell cleane from the bodie. And the fourth hée ſtrake off his Legges, and with another ſtroake ſtrake off his head, and then alſo he ſlew the other with the one winge. Then came the fifth Griffen, who was bigger then any of the other Griffens, and then Huon ſtrake at him, and the Griffen reared vp his féete and ſpreade abroade his winges, and gaue Huon ſuch a recounter, that the noble Knight was ſtriken to the earth.
               When Huon felt himſelfe hurt and lay vppon the earth, hee called vppon God for ayd and ſuccour, for hee thought that he ſhould neuer haue riſen more, and wiſhed himſelfe at that time that hee had taried ſtill in the Caſtle of the Adamant with his companie, who for ſorrowe that they had when Huon went into the ſhippe, they durſt not abide the comming of the Griffen, but went and did hide themſelues in the Caſtle, and Huon who was ſore wounded with this fifth Griffen, roſe vp as well as he might, and came to the Griffen, who was ready to deſtroy him with his beake and nailes. Thus Huon like a vertuous and a hardy Knight tooke courage, and lifted vp his Swoord with both his handes, and ſtrake the Griffen ſuch a ſtroake vpon the heade, that hee claue it to the braynes, ſo that the Griffen fell downe dead to the earth.
            
            
               Chap. CX.
               
                  ¶ How Huon fought with the great Griffen, and ſlew her.
               
               
                  
                  
                     WHen Huon ſawe that hee had ſlaine the fiue young Griffens, hee thanked our Lord God for the grace that hee had ſent him, as to ouercome ſuch fiue terrible Foules: then he ſat downe to reſt him, and layd his Sword by him, thinking that they had beene all ſlaine, but it was not long, but that the great Griffen who had brought him from the Caſtle of the Adamant, came vppon him with thrée feete, and beating with his winges, and when ſhee ſawe her young ones ſlaine, ſhe caſt out a great crie, ſo that all the Valley rang thereof. When Huon ſawe her comming, he was in great feare, for hee was ſore wearie with trauaile and loſſe of bloud, that it was paine to ſuſtaine himſelfe: howbeit, hee ſawe well that it was great neede to defend himſelfe, and then hee came to the Griffen to haue ſtriken her, but hee could not, the Griffen was ſo neere him beating with her winges ſo fiercely, that Huon fell to the earth, and his Sword fell out of his handes, whereof he had great feare, for he thought himſelfe neuer ſo neere death in all his life as hee was then, he called then right pitiouſly for ayd and ſuccour of our Lord Ieſus Chriſt, and the Griffen did 
                     •
                  eat him maruailouſly with her beake, winges, and tallants, but the noble coats of maile that he had on were ſo ſtrong, that the Griffen could not breake them, but if the Griffen hadde not loſt before one of her Legges; and loſt ſo much bloud as ſhe had done, Huon could neuer haue eſcaped without death, the Griffen ſo ſore defoyled and beat him, that hee could not in no wiſe ariſe vp againe.
               Then Huon remembred himſelfe, howe that hee had by his ſide a rich knife, the which he brought with him from ye Caſtle of the Adamant, he drew it out, and therewith ſtrake the Griffen vppon the breaſt ſixe great ſtroakes, euerie ſtroake as déepe as the knife would goe, and as his fortune was, this knife was of length two foote, and therewith the Griffen fell downe dead. Then Huon aroſe and put off his helmet, & lifted vp his hands vnto Heauen, and thanked our Lord God of his victorie, and

he was ſo ſore trauailed, and charged with bloud and ſweat, that hee put off his helmet and beheld round about him, and could ſee nothing to trouble him. When hee had taried there a certaine time, hee aroſe vp and looked downe the Rocke, and hee ſaw a Fountaine in a faire meadowe: then he went down and came thether, and he ſawe the Fountaine ſo faire & cleare, that he had great maruaile thereof, he ſawe the workemanſhip thereof rich, all of white Iaſper wrought richly with flowers of fine gould and Azure, and when hee ſawe the water ſo faire, he had great deſire to drinke thereof, then hee did off one of his double armours to be the more lighter, and ſo approached vnto the Fountaine, and ſawe the grauell in the bottome all of precious ſtones, and then hee put off his helmet, and dranke of the water his fill, and he had no ſooner droonke thereof, but incontinent hee was hole of all his wounds, and as freſh and luſtie as hee was when hee came from the Caſtle of the Adamant, whereof hee moſt humbly thanked our Lord and Sauiour Ieſus Chriſt.
               This Fountaine was called the Fountaine of youth, the which was of ſuch vertue, that whatſoeuer ſickneſſe a man or woman had, if they bathed them in the ſtreame of that Fountaine, they ſhould be hole of all infirmities. Then Huon vnarmed himſelfe, and put off all his cloathes and bathed himſelfe in the ſtreame, to waſh away the bloud and ſweat that his bodie was coloured withall, and when hee was cleane waſhed, he armed himſelfe againe with one of his armours, and left off the other. By this Fountaine there grew an Apple Trée charged with leaues and fruite, the faireſt that might bee founde. When Huon ſaw the Trée charged with ſo faire fruit, he aroſe vppon his feete and approached vnto the Trée, and tooke thereof a faire Apple and a great, and did eat thereof his fill, for the Apple was great, & he thought that hee did neuer eate before of ſuch a fruit. Ah good Lord, (quoth he) I ought greatly to laud and praiſe thée, ſéeing thou haſt thus repleniſhed mee this day with ſuch a Fountaine and ſuch fruit. Then hée looked vppon his right hande, and ſawe a great Orchard full of Trées, bearing good fruit of diuers ſorts, that great beautie it was to behold

them. This Garden was ſo faire, that it ſeemed rather a Paradice then a thing terreſtriall. For out of this Garden there yſſued ſuch a ſmell and odour, that Huon thought that all the balme and ſpicerie in the world could not caſt out ſo ſwéet a ſmell. Ah good Lord, (quoth Huon) what place is this that I am in? for if the Griffen had not béen here, I would haue thought that I had béen in Paradice: good Lord God I pray thee to aid and ſuccor mee in all mine affaires and enterprizes, and at this time that I be not loſt nor dead.
            
            
               Chap. CXI.
               
                  ¶ Howe an Angell appeared vnto Huon, and commaunded him to gather three Apples of the Tree by the Fountaine, and no more: and how the Angell ſhewed him tidings of his wife the faire Eſcleremond, and of his Daughter Clariet, and ſhewed him the way that hee ſhould goe from thence.
               
               
                  
                     THus as yee haue heard Huon
                   deuiſed by himſelfe at the Fountaine, then hée went againe to the Trée, and ſaide that hee would eat of that fruit, and gather thereof as much as ſhould ſuffice him for ſixe dayes, and in that ſpace he truſted to come to ſome place, whereas hee ſhould haue meat ſufficient. Thus as hee was going towards the Trée, ſuddainly there appeared vnto him a light ſhining, that hee thought hee was rauiſhed in Heauen among the Angels, therewith hee heard a voice Angelicall that ſaid: Huon, know for troth, that our Lord God commandeth thée, not to bee ſo hardy as to gather any more fruite of that Tree, except thrée Apples, the which God is well content that thou ſhalt gather, and no more, heereafter they ſhall ſerue thée well, ſo that thou doeſt kéepe them cleane and worthily as they ought to be kept, it ſhall not bee long ere thou ſhalt haue great neede of them, the fruit of this Trée is called the fruit of youth,

it hath ſuch vertue, that if a man of Four-ſcore, or of a Hundred yeares of age doe eate thereof, hee ſhall become againe as young as he was at the age of Thirtie yeares, in yonder Garden thou maiſt goe and gather there of the fruit at thy pleaſure, and eate what thou liſt: but eate no more of this that thou haſt eaten of, and therefore beware I charge thée, gather no more thereof, except the ſaid thrée Apples. Knowe for troth that if thou breakeſt my commaundement, the fruit ſhall bee dearely ſold vnto thee.
               Sir, (quoth Huon) laud and praiſe be giuen to our Lord God my Creatour, when hee ſheweth his grace vnto mée that am ſo poore a ſinner, and that hee will thus viſit mée, I ſhall neuer conſent to breake his commaundement, I had rather die then ſo to doe: my bodie and my Soule I recommend vnto his good grace. But thou the Meſſenger of God, I require thee to ſhew me how doth my wife Eſcleremond and Clariet my Daughter, whome I haue left in my Citie of Bourdeaux, beſieged by the Emperour Tirrey of Almaine, I haue great feare that they be famiſhed within the Citie, and my Lords and company that I left there with her ſlaine and dead. Fréend, (quoth the voice) know for certaine, that the Citie of Bourdeaux is taken, and all thy men dead or taken, and thy wife in priſon in the great Tower of Mayence, whereas the Emperour Tirrey keepeth her ſtraightly, and thy Daughter Clariet is at Cluny in the Abbey, whereas ſhee is well ſerued, and the Abbot who hath alwaies loued thée, he hath her in his keeping, and ſhée is as well cheriſhed there, euen as ſhe were his owne Daughter. Sir, (quoth Huon) and why was ſhee brought thether? Huon, (quoth the Voice) knowe well that Barnard thy coozen Germaine brought her thether. Fréend, (quoth Huon) I pray you to ſhew me if Gerames, Richard, and Othon be aliue or not? Freend, (quoth the Voice) at the taking of the Citie they were ſlaine by the Emperour.
               When Huon had well heard thoſe pitifull tidings, he began tenderly to weepe, complayning for the faire Eſcleremond his wife, and for the death of the old Gerames, and ſaid: Fréend, I require you to ſhew mee if euer I ſhall eſcape, conſidering that

I am heere cloſed in with the Sea, the which goeth round about this Rocke, I ſée no way to goe out thereof, gladly I would knowe if euer I ſhall returne into my Countrey, to ſée my Wife and Daughter who are in great feare and daunger. Huon, (quoth the Voice) comfort thy ſelfe, thou ſhalt ſée them againe, thy Wife Eſcleremond and thy Daughter Clariet, and thy good Citie of Bourdeaux, but ere thou ſhalt come there, thou ſhalt ſuffer much paine, and bee in great feare and danger, the Emperour Tirrey hath conquered all thy Countrey, and Geronnell is vnder his obeyſance with the Citie of Bourdeaux. Then Huon ſware and made promiſe, that if our Lord Ieſus Chriſt would giue him the grace that he might returne into his own Countrey, that ſurely he would ſlay the Emperor Tirrey whatſoeuer end come thereof. Meſſenger of God, I require you to ſhew mée by what manner of wayes I may paſſe out of this Rocke. Huon, (quoth the Voice) goe to the ſaid Trée, and gather the thrée Apples, (as I haue ſaide vnto thée before) and keepe them well and cleanly, for thou ſhalt heereafter haue ſo much profit by them, that at the end thou ſhalt come vnto thy deſire and will, and ſhalt bee out of thy great paine, trouble, and thought, take this little path that thou ſéeſt here vppon thy right hand, and ſo goe thou downe vnto the foote of the Rocke, and there thou ſhalt find a faire cleare water, and thereuppon a faire ſhippe, enter into it, but firſt goe into the Garden, and gather fruit to ſerue thée as long as thou ſhalt be in the ſhippe, then vnlooſe the ſhippe from the chaine that it is tyed by, and let the ſhippe goe whether as it will, vntill it commeth to the Port whereas thou ſhalt arriue: but bee thou ſure before thou commeſt there, thou ſhalt be in as great feare as euer thou wert in all the dayes of thy life, nor thou wert neuer in ſo great perill, I commend thee into the ſauegard of our Lord Ieſus Chriſt, I goe my way, and leaue thee héere.
               Then Huon knéeled downe and held vp his hands, and ſaid: Ah thou verie Meſſenger of God, I require thee to haue me recommended vnto my Creatour. Huon, (quoth the Voice) be of good comfort, for as longe as thou art true and faithfull, thou 
                     •
                  ha
                     •
                  t haue ayde and ſuccour of our Lord and Sauiour Ieſus

Chriſt, and ſhalt attaine to thy deſires, but ere thou commeſt thereto, thou ſhalt ſuffer much paine and feare: but after (as I haue ſaid) thou ſhalt haue wealth inough, & exalt al thy Feends. Huon was glad of that the Voice had ſaid vnto him, but he was in great diſpleaſure, in that his Wife the faire Eſcleremond was Priſoner in the great Tower of the City of Mayence, and of the death of the old Gerames and of other his Lordes & Seruants, and ſaid to himſelfe, if I may, the Emperour ſhall deerly abuy that bargaine.
               Then Huon went to the Garden, and gathered fruit to bear into the Shippe: and then hee went to the Fountaine, whereas the Trée of youth was there by, and there by the commaundement of the Angell, hée gathered thrée Apples, and truſſed them ſafely: and then he dranke of the Fountaine at his pleaſure. Then hee departed, and tooke the little path, the which was betweene the Garden and the ſtreame that yſſued out of the Fountaine, the which ſtreame ranne and fell into the great Riuer whereas the Shippe lay, and when hée was entred into this ſtreame, he ſawe the goodlyeſt precious ſtones that euer he ſawe, they were ſo faire and ſo rich, that the value of them could not bee eſteemed, the grauell of the ſtreame that yſſued out of the Fountaine were all precious ſtones, and they caſt ſuch light that all the Mountaine and Rocke did ſhine thereof, whereof Huon had great maruaile. Alſo he ſawe the Shippe ſo faire, that he was thereof greatly diſmayed and abaſhed, the Riuer ioyned to the rich Garden, whereas Huon had gathered fruit of Fourteene ſorts, the which hee put into the Shippe, and then recommending himſelfe to our Lord and Sauiour Ieſus Chriſt, he entred into the Shippe, and vntyed the ſhip from the chaine: then the ſhippe departed from that Port, this Riuer was called Diplayre. Thus this ſhippe went as faſt as though a bird hadde flowne, and thus as yee haue heard Huon ſayled all alonge in this Shippe vppon the Riuer of Diplayre, right deſirous to bring out of danger his Wife the faire Ladie Eſcleremond.
               
            
            
               
               Chap. CXII.
               
                  ¶ How Huon of Bourdeaux ſayled in a rich Shippe, and of the perilous Gulfe that he paſſed by: and how hee arriued at the Port of the great Citie of Thauris of Perſia.
                  
               
               
                  
                     THus as yee haue heard, was Huon vppon this rich Riuer in his Shippe, the which was bordered with white Iuorie, and nayled with nayles of fine gould, and the fore Caſtle of white Chriſtall, mingled with riche Ca
                     •
                  ſidony, and therein a Chamber, the ſealing wrought with ſtarres of gould and precious ſtones, the which gaue ſuch clearneſſe in the darke night, as though it had beene faire day, and the bedde that Huon lay vpon, there is no humane tongue can eſtéeme the value thereof, therein lay Huon euerie night, and in the day came abroad in the Shippe, it was yrkeſome to him for that hee was alone without companie, and ſayled euerie day betwéene two Rockes without ſight of any Towne or Village, man or woman: and when hee had béene in this Shippe thrée dayes and thrée nights, hee beheld before him, and ſawe how the two Rockes beganne to drawe together and couer the Riuer, and it ſéemed vnto his fight, that the Shippe ſhould enter into a darkeneſſe: howbeit, the Riuer euer ſtill kept his full breadth, but the néerer he came, the darker the paſſage ſéemed: and when the ſhippe came néere vnto it, ſhee went ſo faſt, that Huon thought that no bird in all the world could flye ſo faſt, and then it beganne to be ſore blacke and darke, and the wind roſe and it hayled ſo extreamly, that hee thought the Ship ſhould haue periſhed, and Huon was ſo cold, that hee wiſte not howe to get him any heat. Then he heard pitifull voyces ſpeaking diuers languages, curſing the time that euer they were borne. Then hee heard thunder, and ſaw lightning ſo often, that certainly hee thought to haue beene periſhed, and neuer to haue

eſcaped out of that danger.
               Thus Huon was in this ſhippe in great feare of loozing of his life, and when he was hungrie, hee did eat of the fruit that he had brought thether, then againe he was comforted, in that the Angell had ſaid vnto him, that he ſhould ſée again his Wife Eſcleremond, and his Daughter Clariet. When hée had beene in this caſe the ſpace of thrée dayes, he ſat downe vpon the Sea board of the Ship, and then hée heard ſuch a brute ſo great and ſo horrible, that if the thunder had fallen from the Heauens, and that al the Riuers in the world had fallen downe from the Rockes, they could not haue made ſo hideous a noyſe as the Tempeſt of the Gulfe made, the which is betweene the Sea of Perſia and the great Sea Ocean, it was neuer heard that euer any Shippe or Galley eſcaped that way without periſhing. When Huon ſaw himſelfe in that danger, deuoutly hee called vppon our Lord God, and ſaid. Ah good Lord, now I ſée and perceiue, that without thy ayd and ſuccour I am loſt and come to my end, but ſéeing that it is your pleaſure and will that I ſhall periſh héere, I beſéech your beneuolent grace to accept my Soule into your fauourable handes.
               
                  Huon had no ſooner ſpoken thoſe words, but a winde aroaſe with ſo great a Tempeſt, that hee thought then ſurely to haue beene caſt away. Then he ſaw comming againſt him great barres of yron red hoat, that fell downe from on high into the Riuer before Huon in ſuch ſort, that when they fell into the water, by reaſon of the heat of the barres troubled ſo the water, that fearfull it was to behold it. Thus Huon was a great ſpace, before he could paſſe the Gulfe, the which was ſo perrilous, and the Shippe went ſo ſore by force of the wind, ſo that the ſhippe went out of the middeſt of the ſtreame, and was neere to the Land, ſo that the Ship was grounded, and could goe no further.
               When Huon ſaw and perceiued that the Shippe was vpon the grounde, hee thought then ſurely to haue béene drowned. Then hee tooke an anchor and put it into the water, to knowe how many foote the water was of déepeneſſe, and hee found it but fiue foote. Then hee tooke one of his anchors and caſt it

a ſhoare, and then drewe by the coard, vntill the ſhippe came neere to the bancke-ſide, then hee yſſued out of the Shippe and leapt a land, and then hee ſawe ſuddainly about him a great clearneſſe, whereof he was greatly diſmayed and abaſhed, and wiſt not what to thinke: then hee ſawe before him that all the grauell in the water were mingled with precious ſtones, and when Huon ſaw that, he tooke a ſcoope and caſt into the ſhippe ſo much of thoſe precious ſtones, that it gaue as great a light as though tenne Torches hadde beene burning, and ſo much of this grauell Huon did caſt into the Shippe, that hee was wearie of labour, and when hee ſawe the Shippe ſufficiently charged, then hee entred againe and drewe vp the anchor, and trauailed ſo ſore, that hee brought againe the ſhippe into the middeſt of the ſtreame, then the ſhip went ſo faſt that a bird could not haue followed it.
               Thus he was tenne dayes before he could paſſe that Gulfe, and thus day and night hee ſayled with great feare, and ſore oppreſſed through hunger and thirſt, for hee had nothing to eat nor drinke but fruit, ſo that thereby hee was waxed ſo feeble, that he could ſcarce ſuſtaine himſelfe vppon his feete, and vpon the eleauenth day at the Sunne riſing, hee ſawe appeare the clearneſſe of the day light, and then he was out of the darknes, and entred into the Sea of Perſia, the which was ſo pleaſant and peaceable, that great pleaſure it was to behold it, and then the Sunne aroſe and ſpread abroad his ſtreames and ſpheares vppon the Sea, whereof Huon was ſo ioyfull, as though he had neuer felt paine nor feare: then a farre off hee ſaw appeare before him a faire great Citie, and in the hauen therof there were ſo many ſhippes and Galleys, that their Maſtes ſeemed to bée a great Forreſt, whereof Huon hadde ſuch ioy at his heart, that he knéeled downe lifting by his hands vnto Heauen, and humbly thanking our Lord God that hee had ſaued him from this perilous Gulfe.
               This Citie was called the great Citie of Thauris in Perſia, the Lord thereof was a puiſſant Admirall, who had made to be proclaimed and publiſhed, that all manner of Marchaunts by land or by Sea that would come to his Citie, ſhould haue frée

going and frée comming without lette or diſturbance, either in their bodies or goods, whether they were chriſtian men or Sarazins, ſo that if they loſt the worth of a penny, they ſhould haue againe foure times the value thereof, and the ſame time that Huon came and arriued at that Port, was the day of their frée Feaſt: wherefore there was ſo much people of diuers Landes, that they could not well bee numbred. When Huon was come into the Port, hee caſt his anchor neere vnto the bancke-ſide, and was right ioyfull when hee ſawe himſelfe that he was vppon the firme land: and then hee had great deſire to knowe in what place hee was arriued in, and whether hee was arriued at a good Port or no? Now lette vs leaue ſpeaking of the good Duke Huon, vntill wee haue occaſion to returne vnto him againe.
            
            
               Chap. CXIII.
               
                  ¶ How Sir Barnard departed from the Abbey of Cluny, and went to ſeeke for Huon his Cozen, whom he found at the Port of the great Citie of Thauris.
                  
               
               
                  
                     YE haue heard heere before, howe after the taking of Bourdeaux, Barnard
                   who was Cozen vnto Huon, had borne Clariet Huons child into Burgoine, and deliuered her to bee kept with the good Abbot of Cluny. After that Barnard had taried there the ſpace of eight dayes, he was wearie with being there, and vpon a day hee ſayde vnto the Abbot. Ah Sir, I would at the taking of Bourdeaux, I had béen ſlaine with my Cozen Gerames, for when I remember my good Lord Huon, my heart fayleth mee in ſuch wiſe, that it is great paine for mee to beare the ſorrow that I endure, and afterward when I remember the Ducheſſe Eſcleremond his Wife, who endureth ſuch miſerie that it is pitie to thinke thereof, doubleth the ſorrowe and greefe that I haue at

my heart. Alas, what ſhall Huon ſay, if hee returne and find his Citie taken, his men taken and deſtroyed, and his Wife in Priſon in great pouertie and miſerie? I feare mee that hee will die for ſorrowe. Alas, I ſée all that I haue is loſte for the loue of Huon my Lord, for the which I care little for, if hee bee in ſafetie aliue, and that hee may returne againe, and I am in great diſpleaſure, that wée can heare no newes of him ſince hée departed from Bourdeaux, I ſhall neuer reſt as longe as I liue vntill I haue found him, or heare ſome certaine newes of him. Cozen, (quoth the Abbot) if you will enter into this enqueſt, you ſhould doe mee great pleaſure, and for the great deſire that I haue had, that you ſhould goe this Voyage, I will giue you a Thouſand Florents towardes your iourney. Sir, (quoth Barnard) I thanke you.
               Then the Abbot deliuered him the money, and Barnard made him readie to depart the next day, and ſo hee did, and tooke his leaue of the Abbot and departed, and reſted not vntill hee came to 
                     Ʋenyce, whereas hee found Galleys readie to goe to the holy Sepulchre, whereof hee was right ioyfull, and ſo ſayled foorth vntill they came to the Port Iaffe, whereas hee went a ſhoare with other Pilgrims, and euer as he paſſed by the other Ports, he euer demanded for Huon, but he could neuer find any man, that coulde ſhewe vnto him any manner of newes of him, and then he departed from the Port Iaſte and went vnto Ieruſalem, whereas he taried eight dayes. Then when hee had done his Pilgrimage, he tooke forth his iourney vnto Kayre in Babilon, and when he came to Gaſere, which ſtandeth at the entring of the Deſarts, hee met with many Marchants, who were going to the frée Feaſt which was holden in the great Citie of Thauris. Then hee thought to demaund of them whether ſo much people were going, and all in one companie, and he ſpake vnto a Marchant of Geanes, and demaunded of him whether ſo much people went together in one companie, for they were to the number of ſix-ſcore Marchants chriſtian men, and hee. Then the Marchant ſaide: Sir, as mee thinketh by you, you are of the Countrey of Fraunce, I ſhall ſhew you whether we goe: Sir, within this eight dayes the frée Feaſt ſhalbe at the

great Citie of Thauris, whereas there ſhall come a great number of Marchants, as well Chriſtian men as Sarazins, as wel by land as by Sea, and there is nothing in this mortall world but there you ſhall find it, and heare of all manner of newes, from all the parts of the world.
               Nowe I haue ſhewed you whether wee are going, I pray you ſhewe mee whether you would goe and whome you doe ſeeke for? Sir, (quoth Barnard) knowe for troth that I am of the Realme of Fraunce, and I doe ſéeke for a Knight who is Lord of Bourdeaux, and is called Huon, and it is longe ſince I departed out of my Countrey, and I could neuer heare any thing of his life nor death. Sir, (quoth the Geneuoys) if euer you ſhall heare of him, (if you will beléeue mée) you ſhall goe with vs into the Realme of Perſia, to the frée Feaſt at the great Citie of Thauris. Sir, (quoth Barnard) in a good houre I haue met with you, I ſhall not leaue your companie vntill you come there, to ſée if God will ſend mee ſo good fortune as to find him that I ſeeke for.
               Then the Marchants departed, and road all together vntill they came vnto the great Citie of Thauris, and when they were lodged, they went about their marchandize whereas they lyſted. Thus Barnard was eight dayes in the Citie going heere and there, euer enquiring newes for him whome he ſought for: and vppon a day he went down to the Port vnto the Sea-ſide, whereas many Shippes and Galleys lay at anchor, and as hée looked about, he ſaw neere to the Sea-ſide a little proper Veſſell maruailouſly faire, and the neerer he came vnto it, the fairer and richer it ſeemed, for he ſaw great clearneſſe and ſhining within it, by reaſon of the rich ſtones that were therein, wherof he had great maruaile, and eſpecially becauſe hee ſaw within the Shippe but one man cleane armed, hee wiſt not what to thinke, but he thought that he was chriſtened: then he approached neere to the Shippe and ſaluted Huon, and ſayde. Sir, God giue you good aduenture, for me thinkes you bee a Chriſtian man. Fréend, (quoth Huon) God ſaue thée, me thinkes by thy ſpeach, that thou wert borne in the good Countrey of France, by reaſon that thou ſpeakeſt French, for I haue great

ioy when I heare that language ſpoken: and fréend, I require thée to ſhew me where thou wert borne, and what thou ſéekeſt for heere?
               Sir, (quoth Barnard) ſéeing you will know of my buſineſſe, I ſhall ſhew you, as he that is right ſorrowfull and heauie, and little ſhall you winne thereby when you doe know it, but ſéeing that it is your pleaſure, I ſhall ſhewe you the troth. Sir, I was borne in the good Citie of Bourdeaux, whereas I haue left my houſe and heritage, to ſéeke for my good Lord ſomtime Lord of the ſame Citie, and he was called Duke Huon, who went from Bourdeaux to ſéeke for ſome ſuccour whiles the City was beſieged, and ſo it is, my Lord Huon returned not, nor it cannot bee knowne where he is become, and becauſe the Citie at his departing was beſéeged by the Emperour of Almaine, and the Citie but ill fourniſhed with victuall to maintaine it long, and alſo it was ſo ſore beaten with Engins, that the Emperor wanne the Citie perforce, and ſlew all thoſe that my Lord Huon had lefte there, except thrée Hundred, the which were taken Priſoners by the Emperour, and led into the Citie of Mayence, with the noble Ducheſſe Eſcleremond wife vnto my good Lord Huon, and ſhee is kept in a ſtraighc Priſon, whereas ſhe ſpendeth her dayes miſerably, whereof my heart is in ſuch ſorrowe and gréefe, that when I remember them, it neere hand ſlayeth my heart.
               When Huon hadde well heard and vnderſtood Barnard, hee knew him well, but hee had no power to ſpeake any word vnto him, his heart was ſo full of ſorrow and gréefe, for that his Cozen Barnard had ſhewed him, and the chéefeſt of his ſorrow was for the trouble of his wife the faire Lady Eſcleremond, who was in great perill of death. Thus Huon was a great ſpace, and could ſpeake no word for ſorrow and gréefe, and wiſt not what to doe: and alſo hee ſaw his Coozen Barnard, who hadde taken great paines to ſearch for him, whereof hee had ſuch pitie, that the teares fell from his eyes.
               When Barnard ſaw that the Knight gaue him no anſweare, and beheld vnder the ventaile of his helmet, the teares of water fell downe from his eyes, hee was thereof ſo diſmayed and

abaſhed that he wiſt not what to ſay. Then hee ſayde: Sir, mee thinkes you are a Chriſtian man, and becauſe I ſee and perceiue in you that you are a man, that hath beene in many places and Countreys: therefore I deſire you to ſhewe mee, if you heard euer any manner of ſpeaking of my good Lord Huon Duke of Bourdeaux, whome I haue ſought for in many Countreys both by land and by Sea, and I could neuer heare any certaine tidings of him, whereof I am right ſorrie, for if I can heare no word of him by you, I will neuer hope more to haue any knowledge of him: I thinke I ſhall haue ſome knowledg by you if he be aliue, for if I knowe nothing by you, I will neuer ſéeke him further, but I will goe into a Deſart vnto ſome ſolitarie place, and there to doe penance, and to pray vnto God for my good Lord Huon, and to pardon me of all my ſinnes and offences, and I require you in the name of our Lord and Sauiour Ieſus Chriſt, to ſhewe mee what you bée? and where you were borne? and from whence you come, that hath brought in your ſhippe ſo great riches, for I knowe certainly, that in all Fraunce cannot bee found the value of ſo great riches: nor the puiſſant Charlemaine coulde neuer aſſemble together ſuch riches as you haue in your Shippe.
               When Huon had well heard Barnard, hee ſayde: Freend, I haue great maruaile of that I heare you ſay, for in my Shippe I knowe neither gould nor ſiluer, nor none other thing but my bodie and mine armour. Sir, (quoth Barnard) beware what you ſay, for the riches that I ſee in your Shippe, if you will ſell it, you may fill againe your ſhippe with monney, if you will beleeue me, the Treaſure and riches that you haue brought in your Shippe, the value thereof cannot bee eſtéemed. When Huon heard that, he had great maruaile and was right ioyfull, then he looked downe into the bottome of the Shippe, and ſaw the rich ſtones there lying among the grauell, the which he neuer tooke heede of before, for when he did caſt it into his Ship, hee thought all had beene but grauell to ballaice his Shippe withall, that it might ſayle the more ſurely. Then Barnard ſayd: Sir, I pray you hide it not from mee, where haue you had this Treaſure and in what Countrey? all the ſtones that

bee there I knowe the vertue of them all, for ſince I came out of my Countrey, I was a whole yeare with the beſt Lapidarie and knower of ſtones that was in all the world, and he taught me his Science: Sir, ſurely the place whereas you had them in is of great dignitie. Freend, (quoth Huon) I ſhall ſhewe you the troth, fortune brought me by the Gulfe of Perſia, whereas as I ſuffered much paine and trouble, but thanked be God, I eſcaped from that hard aduenture, the force of the winde that came out of the Gulfe, draue my Shippe out of the ſtreame to the land, and when I ſawe that I was ſo néere to the land, I went out of the ſhippe and tooke a ſcoope, and therewith I did caſt into the ſhippe ſome ſtore of the grauell that lay by the ſea ſide, to ballays my ſhippe therewith, not knowing that any precious ſtones had beene amonge the grauell: and when I thought that I caſt in ſufficient, I entred againe into my ſhip, and ſo ſayled foorth more ſurely then I did before, there I had theſe ſtones that be in this ſhippe: the which yée ſay be of ſo great value.
               Sir, (quoth Barnard) I pray you wherefore ſerueth yonder foote of a great Foule or beaſt, that I ſee hange yonder in your Shippe, I cannot tell whether it be of a Foule or of a Dragon, for it is a fearfull thing to behold. Fréend, (quoth Huon) anone I ſhall ſhew you, but firſt I pray you ſhewe mee, what vertue and bountie are in theſe ſtones, the which you haue ſo much praiſed: and alſo to ſhew me vnto whome this noble Citie appertaineth. Sir, (quoth Barnard) this Citie is called Thauris, whereof is Lord a rich Admirall, who is Lord of all Perſia and of Media, who when hee ſhall bee aduertiſed of your comming hether, he will haue of you Tribute as hee hath of other Marchants, and as for your ſtones, twoo of them that I ſée yonder if you giue them for your Tribute, hee will bee well content: and Sir, I ſhall aid you in your marchandize to the beſt of my power, the Admirall is a noble man in his Lawe, and of great credence. Fréend, (quoth Huon) I thanke you for the courteſie that you ſhew mee: but Sir, I pray you ſhew me the ſtones that be of ſo much vertue, I would haue the beſt laid apart from the other. When Barnard heard howe Huon deſired

him to ſhewe the vertue of the ſtones, then eſpecially hee ſhewed Huon ſixe ſtones, and he drew them out from the reſt, and laide them vppon Huons ſhéeld, and ſo choſe out Thirtie other, and ſhewed them all vnto Huon, and ſayd. Sir, theſe Thirtie ſtones that I haue layde vppon your ſheeld, are of ſo great value, that there is neither King nor Emperour that can pay the value of them, and eſpecially of fiue of them: and when Huon heard that, he was right ioyfull. Then hee would hide no longer himſelfe from Barnard, and alſo becauſe of the great heat that hee was in, he did put off his helmet, the which hee kept on all that ſeaſon, becauſe he would firſt know of Barnard ſome tidings ere hée would be knowne vnto him, for hee knew his Coozen Barnard well ynough at his firſt comming vnto him.
            
            
               Chap. CXIIII.
               
                  ¶ How Huon of Bourdeaux and Barnard his Cozen, acknowledged themſelues eache to other, and ſhewed the diſcourſe of their aduentures.
               
               
                  
                     WHen Barnard ſawe Huon
                   put off his helmet, hee became as ruddie as a Roſe, and was ſo rauiſhed that he wiſt not what to ſay or thinke, and ſayde: Sir, I cannot ſay truly what you bee, but you reſemble ſo much like Huon whome I ſéeke for, that I cannot tel whether you be he or not. Coozen, (quoth Huon) come hether vnto mee and embrace me, I am hée whom you doe ſeeke for, and ſo they embraced each other in ſuch wiſe, that of a long ſpace they could not ſpeake one to another, at laſt Huon ſayde. My right deare Coozen, I pray you ſhewe vnto mée all the newes that you know of Bourdeaux ſince my departing. Sir, (quoth Barnard) I ſhall ſhewe you that I would faine know my ſelfe, but firſt Sir, I pray you ſhew vnto mee

the aduentures that you haue hadde ſince your departing from Bourdeaux. Coozen, (quoth Huon) if I ſhould ſhew you all the Aduentures and Fortunes that I haue had ſince my departing from you, it would be ouer-long to rehearſe it: but breefely I ſhall declare it vnto you.
               When I was vppon the Sea, a great Tempeſt roſe vppon vs, the which continued the ſpace of Ten dayes without ceaſing, and then Huon ſhewed him how he was in the Gulfe, and what perill he was in there, and how he ſpake with Iudas, and how he arriued at the Caſtle of the Adamant, and how his companie there died by famine, and how he entred into the Caſtle and ſlewe the Serpent, and ſhewed him of the beautie and aduentures that were in the Caſtle: and how he was borne vnto a Rocke by a Griffen, and how he ſlew the fiue young Griffens, and afterward the great Griffen, whoſe foote was in the Ship the which hee ſhewed vnto Sir Barnard: and diſcourſed of the Fountaine and Garden, and Trée of youth, and of the Shippe the which they were in, and how he found it by the Riuer, and how by the voice of the Angell he entred into the Shippe: and afterwards hee ſhewed what great paine and perill hée ſuffered in paſſing the Gulfe of Perſia: and howe hee was perforce driuen a ſhoare, and there he caſt in the ſtones thinking it had been grauell: and how he was as then come and arriued at the great Citie of Thauris in Perſia.
               
               When Barnard had well heard and vnderſtood Huon, he embraced him, and ſayd: Ah right deare and vertuous Knight, to whome in proweſſe and hardineſſe none can bee compared, of your comming I ought to bee ioyfull, and I thanke our Lord God of the grace that he hath ſent you. Sir, (quoth Huon) I ought greatly to thanke our Lorde Ieſus Chriſt, in that I ſée you in good health, and nowe I pray you to ſhewe mee what hath fallen in the Countrey of Bourdeaux ſince I departed from thence. Then Barnard all wéeping ſhewed him euerie thinge as it had fallen, and ſhewed vnto Huon the manner howe the good Citie of Bourdeaux was taken, and of the death of the old Gerames and his companie, and of the taking of the noble Ducheſſe the faire Eſcleremond: and how the Emperour held her

in priſon in the Citie of Mayence, in great pouertie and miſery, and of his Daughter Clariet, howe he had brought her vnto the Abbey of Cluny, and ſet her in keeping there with the Abbot her Coozen.
               When Huon had well vnderſtoode Barnard, hee made great ſorrow in his heart and ſayd, if God would ayd and helpe him, hee would cauſe the Emperour to die an euill death. Sir, (quoth Barnard) will you appeaſe your ſelfe, if you haue truſt in our Lord God, deſire of him aid & ſuccour, and let the whéele of fortune runne, and if you doe thus and take in woorth any thing that is fallen vnto you, you ſhall not faile but come vnto your deſire: thus with ſuch words Barnard appeaſed Huon his Coozen, and thus they deuiſed together of diuers things. Coozen, (quoth Huon) I pray you to ſhewe mee the vertue of theſe precious ſtones that you haue layd aſide from the other. Sir, (quoth Barnard) the fiue that lyeth there by themſelues haue great vertue, this ſtone is of ſuch great vertue, that he that beareth it vppon him cannot bee poyſoned, alſo it is of ſuch dignitie and woorth, that whoſoeuer doe beare it, may go and come thorow fire without féeling of any heate, though hee were in a hot burning Ouē, alſo if a man fall into the water, hauing this ſtone about him, hee cannot ſinke nor drowne: Sir, this is the vertue of this firſt ſtone.
               Then Huon tooke it and kept it for himſelfe: and then Barnard tooke vp another and ſayd. Sir, heere is another ſtone of ſuch vertue, that a man bearing it about him, can haue neither hunger, thirſt, nor colde, nor ſhall not waxe elder by ſéeming neither in bodie nor viſage, but he ſhall euer ſeeme to bée of the age of Thirtie yeares, nor faſting ſhall not impaire him. Then Huon tooke that ſtone and put it into his bagge, and ſaid that hee would keepe that ſtone for himſelfe. Well, (quoth Barnard) Sir, heere is another of ſuch bountie and vertue, that he that beareth it cannot bee hurt in armes, nor vanguiſhed by his enemies, and if any of his kinne were blind, and touch but his eyes with this ſtone, incontinent he ſhall ſée againe, and if the ſtone be ſhewed vnto a mans eyes, he ſhall incontinent bée blind, and if a man be wounded, doe but turne this ſtone in the

wound, and incontinent he ſhall be whole.
               When Huon heard that, hee was right ioyfull, and ſaid that hee would keepe well that ſtone. Sir, (quoth Barnard) heere is another, the which hath ſo great vertue, that if a man or woman bée neuer ſo ſicke, ſhewe them but this ſtone, and incontinent they ſhall be whole of any manner of maladie, and alſo if a man were cloſed in priſon, in chaines and fetters, handes and feet, doe but touch them with this ſtone, and the chaines ſhall breake, and alſo if any man haue any cauſe to be pleaded in any Court before any Iudge, be his matter rightfull or wrongfull, hee ſhall winne his cauſe whether it bee for Landes or Goods, and alſo if a man haue this ſtone in his hande and cloſe it, hee ſhall bee inuiſible and may go whereas he liſt and ſhall not bee ſeene. And you ſhall ſée the proofe, for as he had this ſtone in his hand, he cloſed it, and incontinent he was inuiſible, ſo that Huon could not ſee him, whereof he was not content, for he feared leaſt that hee had loſt his Coſen Barnard foreuer, and ſayd: Ah good Lord, thou haſt giuen mee the grace to find my cooſen Barnard, who ſhould haue kept me companie vntill I had returned into mine owne countrey, and now I ſee well that I haue loſt him.
               When Barnard hearde Huon, hee laughed, and Huon who heard him, groaped all about with his armes abroad, vntill at laſt he embraced him, and held him faſt, and when Barnard felt that, hee opened his hande, and then Huon ſawe him againe, whereof hee was right ioyfull, and bleſſed him at the vertue of that ſtone, and tooke it and layde it vp amonge the other in his bagge, and ſayd how that he would keepe that ſtone eſpecially, becauſe it was of ſuch a woonderfull great vertue.
               Thus Barnard did chooſe out the ſtones one from another, and there were ſo many good ſtones, that the value of them coulde not be eſteemed: then hee turned vp the bottome of the grauell to ſeeke out the beſt, and among other hee did chooſe out a Carbouncle, the which caſt out ſuch a light, as though twoo Torches had beene light. Barnard tooke it and deliuered it vnto Huon, and ſaid: Sir, bee you ſure that whoſoeuer beares this ſtone vppon him, may goe drie footed vppon the water, as ſure

as though hee were in a Veſſell, and alſo if a man goe in the darke night, he ſhall ſée as well as though he had the light of ſixe Torches, and if a man bee in battaile, hauing this ſtone about him, hee cannot bee ouercome nor hurt, nor his horſe weari
                     •
                   nor faint, nor hurt nor wounded. When Huon heard that, hee ſmiled, and tooke the ſtone and put into his bagge among the other.
               Thus as they were deuiſing together, there came vnto them diuers Marchants Sarazins, who with great maruaile beheld this little ſhippe, and they ſawe it ſo faire and rich, and ſo wel garniſhed with precious ſtones, that they thought that all the marchandize that were in the Hauen, was not halfe the value and woorth of that they ſawe there, then they approached vnto the ſhippe and ſaluted Huon, and ſayde: Sirs, is it your pleaſure to ſell vs any of your ſtones, wee are heere diuers Marchants, that will bee glad to buy of them, if yee pleaſe? Sirs, (quoth Huon) as for mée, as this day I will ſell none vntill to morrow in the morning, and then if it pleaſe yée, you ſhall haue of them: therewith the Marchants held their peace and ſpake no more, but there came ſo many Sarazins and Paynims to behold the Shippe, that great maruaile it was to behold them: ſo that the newes thereof ſpread abroad in the City, and the Admirall was aduertized thereof, who incontinent accompanied with his Lords, came to the Port ſide, whereas this Ship lay at anchor.
               When the Admirall was come thether, he beheld the Ship, the which hee thought faire and rich, and how that there was neuer Kinge nor Emperour that euer behelde any ſuch, and it ſhined ſo cleare by reaſon of the ſtones, that the Admirall and all ſuch as were with him, thought that it had been the Sunne ſhining in the middeſt of the day. Then hée approached vnto the ſhippe, and found there Huon and Barnard, the Admirall ſaluted them, and ſaid: Sirs, it appeareth well that you be Chriſtian men, it is conuenient that you pay mee the Tribute that is accuſtomed to be payd in this Citie. Sir, (quoth Huon) it is good reaſon and right, that we pay you as we ought to doe. Sir, heere is twoo ſtones the which I giue you, and I deſire

you to take them in woorth: the Admirall tooke the ſtones and beheld them well, and ſaid. Fréend, nowe you may goe and come into this Citie, to make your marchandize at your pleaſure to your moſt profite and gaine, for the guift that you haue giuen me is to me more acceptable, then if you had giuen mee the value of foure of the beſt Cities in all this Countrey, right ioyfull was the Admirall, for hee knewe well the vertue of the ſtones, the one of them was of ſuch bountie and dignitie, that the bearer thereof could not bee poyſoned, nor no treaſon could be done nor purpoſed, comming in the preſence of him that beareth this ſtone, but incontinent the dooer ſhould fall downe dead: and the other ſtone had that vertue and dignitie, that the bearer thereof coulde neuer bee periſhed by fire nor water, nor deſtroyed by yron, for though hee were all a day burning in a hot Ouen or Fournace, hee ſhould not looſe one haire of his head, nor periſh in the Sea. Fréende, (quoth the Admirall) the courteſie that you haue done vnto mee this day ſhall be well rewarded, I will and commaund that throughout my Realme as well of Perſia as of Media, that you ſhall goe at your pleaſure to ſell your Marchandize, and no man ſhall let nor trouble you: but one thinge I would deſire of you to ſhewe mee, what aduenture hath brought you hether? and of whence you bee, and of what Countrey? and in what place you haue founde theſe ſtones, whereof you haue ſo great plentie? howbeit I vnderſtand your language, whereby I knowe that you bee French-men, longe agoe I was in Fraunce and dwelt there, and ſerued in the Court of Kinge Charlemaine, and was neuer knowne, and I haue great maruaile where you haue found ſo many goodly ſtones, it is neere hand a Hundred yeares ſince I was guirded with a Swoord: but I neuer ſawe ſo rich ſtones heere before.
            
            
               
               Chap. CXV.
               
                  ¶ How the Admirall of Perſia did great honor vnto Huon of Bourdeaux, and ledde him into his Pallaice, whereas he was receiued with great ioy and triumph.
               
               
                  
                     WHen Huon of Bourdeaux had well heard and vnderſtood the Admirall, he regarded him much, becauſe hee was a faire olde man, and ſéemed to be a noble man, and ſayd. Sir, becauſe I knowe and ſée apparantly in you great nobleneſſe, troth, and fréedome, I ſhall ſhew you at length all mine aduentures, without hyding of any thinge from you. Sir, knowe for troth, my name is Huon, and I was borne in the Countrey of Fraunce in a Citie named Bourdeaux, and I departed from thence about two yeres paſt, ſince the which time I haue ſuffered much paine and pouertie. When I departed from thence, I had with mee Seauen Knightes, and my Chaplaine and a Clarke to ſerue him, and we tooke our Shippe at Bourdeaux, and wee ſayled downe the Riuer vntill wee came into the maine Sea, then the wind roſe againſt vs, and ſo continued a long ſpace, ſo that our Patrone knew not where he was, and ſo at the laſt we came to a Port, whereas wee found many ſhippes of ſtrang Countreys, and there we got vs a new Patron, and as ſhortly as we might wée ſayled foorth on our iourney. But when wée were come againe into the hye Sea, a great Tempeſt aroſe ſo that wee were neere hand all periſhed: this Tempeſt endured Tenne dayes, ſo that wee were faine to abandon our ſhippe to the wind, and vppon the eleauenth day we arriued at the perilous Gulfe, whereas wee found Iudas, who betrayed our Lord and Sauiour Ieſus Chriſt, wee were then in ſuch feare, that wee looked for nothinge but when wee ſhoulde periſh and end our liues: but God alwayes his Seruants and ſuch as beleeue in

his holy Lawes, and keepe his Commaundements, will euer kéepe and preſerue them, hee ſent vs a wind, the which draue vs from that perilous Gulfe, and brought vs vnto the Caſtle of the Adamant, and there hee ſhewed the Admirall at length the beautie of that Caſtle, and howe there arriued a ſhippe with Sarazins who were Pirats of the Sea, and howe they fought together, and alſo he ſhewed him all the aduentures of the Caſtle that he had there, as well of his men that dyed by famine, as of them that hee left there, and alſo hee diſcourſed howe hee 
                     •
                  ame by victu
                     •
                  ls, and alſo hee ſhewed how hee departed from thence, and was borne away by the Griffen, and how he ſtrake off one of her Legges when hee fought with her, after the Griffen had ſet him vppon the Rocke, the which Legge hee ſhewed vnto the Admirall, whereof he had woonderfull great maruell: and then alſo he ſhewed him how he fought with the fiue young Griffens, and ſlew them, and alſo of the old Griffen, and alſo of the Fountaine wherein hee bathed himſelfe, and of the faire Garden, and of the Trée of youth that ſtood by the Fountaine, and of the vertue of the fruit thereof, and howe hee did gather of the ſame, and more woulde haue done, but that hee was forbidden ſo to doe by an Angell ſent from God, but before I was commaunded to the contrarie, I did both eat of the fruit, and dranke of the water of the Fountaine▪ whereby I was whole incontinent of all the great wounds that the Griffens had giuen mée when I ſlewe them. And Sir, (quoth Huon) knowe for tro
                     •
                  h, that of this Trée I gathered thrée apples by the commandement of the Angell, and haue kept th
                     •
                  m ſurely: then the Ang
                     •
                  ll ſh
                     •
                  wed mée the way howe I ſhoulde goe from the Rocke, and vnder the Rock ſide I found a great faire Riuer, and there I found this ſhippe that we be now in, and entred into it: and then there came a wind (quoth he) and draue my ſhippe ſo faſt, that a bird could not haue ouertaken it. Then hee diſcourſed vnto the Admirall, howe hee paſſed by 
                     •
                  he Gulfe of Perſia, and what torments hee ſuffered there, and howe hee was there ten dayes and how he was driuen to the ſh
                     •
                  are, whereas he found 
                     •
                  hoſe precious ſtones, and he thought that it had beene nothing 
                     〈◊〉
                   grau
                     •
                  ll, and that hee purpoſed nothing elſe but to ball
                     ••
                  ice

therewith his ſhip, that the ſhip might ſayle the more ſurely, and he ſaide. Sir, God vppon whome I ſtedfaſtly beleeue ſo aided and ſuccoured mee, that I am eſcaped from thence in ſauegard.
               When the Admirall had well heard and vnderſtood Huon, hee had great maruaile, for hee neuer heard before of ſo great and woonderfull aduentures, and was ſore diſmayed and abaſhed, and ſaide. Fréend, I haue great maruaile of that I haue heard you ſay, for it is neere hand ſix-ſcore yeares ſince I came firſt into this world, and I neuer heard that euer any man eſcaped aliue out of the Gulfe of Perſia: therefore you may well ſay, that the God vpon whome you doe ſtedfaſtly beleeue, hath ſhewed that hee loueth you well, when hee hath ſaued and preſerued you out of that perilous Gulfe, your God is puiſſant, and loueth all men that ſtedfaſtly and vnfainedly beleeue in his holy Lawes, and keepe his Commaundements, and hee is falſe and vntrue that beleeueth not in his Lawes, but hee loueth you well, when hee hath deliuered you out of twoo ſuch Gulfes, and alſo from the Caſtle of the Adamant, from whence none can depart nor neuer did, nor I thinke neuer ſhall: and alſo hath ſuffered you to ſlay the Griffens, ſurely you ought to loue him that hath giuen you that grace, and for the great maruailes that he hath done vnto you, I will be chriſtened and receiue your Lawe, but I feare me if my Lords and men knewe thereof, they would ſlay me ſhortly, for againſt them all I cannot reſiſt.
               Sir, (quoth Huon) to the entent that you ſhould haue the firmer beléefe in our Lord & Sauiour Ieſus Chriſt, I haue three Apples, the which haue ſuch vertue in them, that if you will beleeue in our Lord and Sauiour Ieſus Chriſt, I ſhall giue you one of them, the which you ſhall eate, and incontinent after you haue eaten it, you ſhall become young againe of the age of Thirtie yeares, and you ſhall b
                     •
                  e as faire and as luſtie, as you were when you were of that age, there is not ſo olde a man nor ſo crooked, if hee eate of this and beleeue firmely and vnfainedly in our Lord Ieſus Chriſt, but hee ſhall become as yong and as luſty as he was at Thirtie yéeres of age. Freend,

(quoth the Admirall) if it bee ſo, that by eating of this Apple I ſhall become as young and as luſty as I was at Thirtie yéeres of age, whatſoeuer come of mée, I will bee chriſtened and beleeue in the Lawe of Ieſus Chriſt, the feare of death ſhall not let me to doe it, for too longe I haue beleeued in this falſe and deteſtable Lawe of Mahomet, for if I hadde neither ſeene nor heard no more then you haue ſhewed vnto mée, I ought to beleeue yet in your Law, and I ſhall doe ſo much, that I truſt I ſhall cauſe all my Realme to beleeue in the ſame. Sir, (quoth Huon) and if you doe as you ſay, you ſhall be ſaued, and I ſhall giue you the Apple, the which you ſhall eat in the preſence of all your Lordes and men: and when they ſhall ſée you waxe young againe, know for troth, that maruaile thereof ſhall cauſe them to beleeue in our Lord Ieſus Chriſt, and to renounce their falſe and deteſtable Law of Mahomet. Fréend, (quoth the Admirall) I beleeue well that which you ſay, and I ſhall vſe my ſelfe after your aduiſe.
               Then the Admirall tooke Huon by the hand, and went together out of the ſhippe, and Huon left Barnard there to keepe it, many people were come thether to ſée the Shippe, and alſo for the great maruailes that they had heard fallen vnto Huon, and they beheld Huon, and hadde great maruaile of the honour that the Admirall made vnto him, for hee led him ſtill by the hand 
                     •
                  ntill hee came to his Pallaice, as they paſſed through the Citie they were greatly regarded of men of ſundrie Nations, for Huon was ſo faire in his viſage, and ſo valiaunt a Knight in 
                     ••
                  ature, that none could bee found as then that might bee compared vnto him.
               When Huon was come to the Pallaice, whereas hee was honourably receiued with great ioy, the Admirall made him great feaſt and chéere, and the Tables were ſet vp, and they ſat downe to dinner: of their ſeruice and meats I will make no long rehearſall, but when dinner was done, the Admirall commaunded Carpenters to make a great ſcaffold of Timber before the Pallaice, the which was couered with rich cloathes of gould and ſilke, and thether was brought a riche Standard of gould with other thinges, and then hee commaunded throughout

the Citie, that all his Lordes and Barons of his Realme that were come thether vnto his frée Feaſt, that they ſhould all come vnto him at an houre appointed, the which they did, there came ſo many ſtrangers and other, that there were mo
                     •
                   aſſembled together then a Hundred and Fiftie Thouſand men.
               When they were all there aſſembled together, then the Admirall holding Huon by the hand, mounted vpon the rich ſtage, and diuers other great Lordes with him, and when they were there, the Admirall ſtoode vp, and ſayd with a hye voice vnto the Lordes and to the people. Sirs, yée that bee come hether by my commaundement, knowe for troth, the great loue that I haue had vnto yée and haue, mooueth me to ſay and to ſhew you the way, how that I and al you may come to eternall Saluation, for if wee die in this caſe that we bee in, wee ſhall bee all damned and loſte by the falſe and deteſtable way that you and I doe hold: therefore I counſaile and pray you, for the loue that you haue longe borne vnto mee, that you will leaue with mee the Law of Mahomet, and beleeue in the Law of our Sauiour and Redéemer Ieſus Chriſt, who is worthy and holy, as yée may ſée by the euident miracles that he hath ſhewed for this poore Knight that yée ſée héere by mée. Then the Admirall ſhewed vnto the people all the maruailous aduentures that had fallen vnto Huon, that is to ſay, how he had béene at the Caſtle of the Adamant, and how the Griffen did beare him from thence, whome hee ſlewe and fiue of the young Griffens, and alſo of the Fountaine and Garden, and of the fruit of the Trée of youth, and how he had paſſed the two Gulfes, whereas he had taken the rich ſtones that he had brought thether, the which thinges could not haue been without the ayd and helpe of our Lord and Sauiour Ieſus Chriſt, and alſo hee ſhall ſhew before you euident Miracles, that Ieſus Chriſt will doe for me if I will take his Lawe, for hee ſayth vnto mee, that if I will beleeue in his God, hee will make mée to eate of ſuch a holy fruite, by the which I ſhall become againe but of the age of Thirtie yeares, and as luſty as I was at that time: and therefore Sirs, if Ieſus Chriſt will doe this for me, I will be chriſtened. Then all

the people anſweared and ſayd: Sir, if this that you haue ſayd come to proofe, wee ſhall be all content to bee chriſtened, and to beleeue vppon the Lawe of Ieſus Chriſt, and to leaue the law that wee haue longe kept, but wee are hard of beleefe that this ſhall bee, for if it be ſo, there was neuer heard of ſuch a w
                     •
                  onderfull Miracle.
            
            
               Chap. CXVI.
               
                  ¶ Howe the Emperour, by reaſon of the Apple that Huon gaue him to eat, he became of the age of Thirtie yeares, whereby hee and all the people of Perſia and Media were chriſtened, and of the great honour that the Admirall made vnto Huon.
                  
               
               
                  
                     WHen Huon hadde well heard and vnderſtood the Lords and the people, how they were content to leaue their Lawe and to beleeue vppon Ieſus Chriſt, he was right ioyfull, and thanked God with all his heart: then Huon ſayde vnto the Admirall. Sir, eate of the Apple that I haue giuen vnto you, and then the people that be here aſſembled, ſhall ſée what grace our Lord God ſhall ſend you, the Admirall tooke the Apple and began to eate thereof, and as he did eate hee beganne to change colour, his haire and his beard the which were white, beganne to change and waxe yellow, before the Apple was cleane eaten he was cleane changed, and his beautie and ſtrength as he was when he was but of Thirtie yeares of age. Then generally all the people that were there, with one voice cried and required to bee criſtened, whereof the Admirall and Huon were right ioyfull, becauſe they ſawe that the good will and deſire of the people was to receiue Chriſtendome.
               When the Admirall felt himſelfe againe younge and luſty, the ioy that he had at his heart could not be declared, the people alſo were right ioyfull, the Admirall who was a goodly Prince,

tooke Huon by the hande and ſayde. My right déere Fréend, bleſſed be the houre that you came hether, for me and my people you haue brought vs into the way of Saluation, and deliuered vs out of darkeneſſe, therefore I will from hencefoorth, that in all my Realme you ſhall haue your part as well as my ſelfe, and I will and commaund that you be ſo obayed: then he embraced and kiſſed Huon more then Tenne times, ſaying: Fréend, bleſſed bee the good houre that euer you were borne, and happie was that woman that bare you in her bodie, the Paynims and Sarazins that were there, ſéeing the great beautie that the Admirall was of, and alſo the woonderfull great Miracle that they had ſeene, ſayd one to another, how they neuer hadde heard of ſuch a Miracle, and how that from thencefoorth they that would beleeue vppon Mahound, were accurſed and vnhappie, for they ſayd that his beleefe, his lawe, & his doctrine, was of no valour: then they cryed with a hye voice. Oh right noble and puiſſant Admirall, deſire that noble man that is there with you, that hee will cauſe vs to receiue Chriſtendome.
               And as then in the Citie there was a Biſhop of Greece, who was come thether in ambaſſage to ye Admirall from the Emperour of Conſtantinople, who hearing the will and deſire of the people, was right ioyfull, and hee came vnto the Admirall and to Huon and ſayd. Sir, it ſhall bee no daunger for you to bee chriſtened, for Sir, I am heere readie to doe it. Then incontinent there was brought foorth Fortie great Veſſels full of cleare water, the Biſhop did hallowe them, and chriſtened the Admirall, and named him Huon, becauſe Huon was his Godfather. Then afterward all the Lords and people were chriſtened, and receiued the Lawe of our Sauiour and Redéemer Ieſus Chriſt.
               When they were all chriſtened, the Admirall with great triumph and ioy, returned vnto his Pallaice leading Huon by the hand, and great ioy and feaſting was made that day in the Citie, and eſpecially of the Chriſtian Marchants that were there, among the which there were about fiftéene Prieſts, and they all aided the Biſhoppe to chriſten the people, the number

could not be declared of the men, women, and children that receiued that day chriſtendome. The Admirall being in his Pallaice, making great ioy and Feaſting with the noble Duke Huon of Bourdeaux, ſayd vnto him: Freend, well you ought to render thankes to our Lord Ieſus Chriſt, ſéeing by you theſe two Realmes, that is to ſay Perſia and Media, are reduced and brought vnto the Chriſtian faith and Lawe, and I will that you knowe, that you may well ſay that in theſe two Realmes you may commaund any thing at your pleaſure, without finding any perſon to doe or ſay to the contrarie of your will and pleaſure, and to the entent that you ſhall ſurely beleeue what great loue and affection I beare vnto you: I will that mine all onely Daughter you ſhall haue to your wife, ſo that you be not bound vnto none other. Sir, knowe for troth, the great deſire that I haue to haue you tarie ſtill heere with me, mooueth mee thus to doe, I haue none other heire but my Daughter, whereby after my death you ſhall bee Lorde and heire of the Realmes and Dominions that I hold, and in the meane ſeaſon, I will that the moitie of the reuenewes of theſe Realmes and Dominions ſhall bee yours, for your companie pleaſeth mée ſo entirely, that I would neuer haue you to depart from hence.
            
            
               Chap. CXVII.
               
                  ¶Of the complaints that Huon made vnto the Admirall of Perſia vppon the Emperour of Almaine, and of the ſuccours that the Admirall promiſed vnto Huon.
                  
               
               
                  
                     WHen Huon had well vnderſtood the Admirall, hee ſaide: Sir, knowe for troth, that it is foure yéeres paſſed ſince I was maried vnto a noble Ladie, who paſſeth in beautie all other that be aliue in theſe dayes, and when I remember her, all my bodie and heart trembleth

for ſorrow, when I thinke of the trouble, diſpleaſure, and pouertie that ſhee is in: and therefore Sir, I thanke you of the great honour and courteſie, that of your bountie you offer mée, I pray vnto God that hee may reward you. Huon, (quoth the Admirall) ſeeing it is ſo that you haue a Wife, I hold you wel excuſed: but I pray you to ſhew vnto me, for what cauſe your Wife is in ſuch caſe, or what Chriſtian Prince is ſo hardie as to trouble you, or to doe you any diſpleaſure? Sir, (quoth Huon) when I came out of my Countrey, I left my Citie of Bourdeaux beſieged by the Emperour of Almaine, who hath taken my Citie and ſlaine my men, and ſome hee keepeth in ſeruage, and my Wife put in priſon, and there kept in great pouertie and miſerie, the which when I remember, ſorrowe and gréefe ſo ſore gripeth my heart, that all my members and ioynts tremble with diſpleaſure. Huon, (quoth the Admirall) I pray you to leaue your ſorrow and diſpleaſure, and caſt it from you, and take ioy and comfort, for by the holy law that I haue receiued, I ſhall ſo ayde and ſuccour you, that the Emperour who hath done vnto you ſo many diſpleaſures, I ſhall make him ſuch warre, that whether he will or not, for the dammage and loſſe that you haue had and receiued, I ſhall conſtraine him to make full reſtitution, for I ſhall lead with me in your company ſuch number of people, that all the Valleys and Mountaines ſhall be couered with them.
               Sir, (quoth Huon) of the courteſie and ſuccour that you offer me I humbly thanke you, but if it pleaſe our Lord and Sauiour Ieſus Chriſt, who hath ayded mee out of many perils, I hope that he will ſo aide mee, that I ſhall not neede to make any warre to deſtroy the Chriſtian bloud, but Sir, firſt I ſhall goe to the holy Sepulchre, and then I will returne into my Countrey, and doe what I can to get my Wife out of daunger and the paine that ſhee is in. Sir, the wife that I haue wedded, was Daughter to the Admirall Gaudiſe, who held as then Babilon and all the Realme of Egipt.
               
               Then Huon ſhewed him all the matter how he came by the faire Eſcleremond, whereof the Admirall was ſore abaſhed, for the great maruailes that hee hadde heard Huon declare, and ſo

were all other that heard it, and ſaid one to another, that without Huon had beene well beloued of our Lord Ieſus Chriſt, hée could neuer haue eſcaped the death, with one of the leaſt aduentures that he had ſhewed vnto the Admirall. Sir, (quoth Huon) the Emperour of Almaine hath taken my Citie and my Wife, and deſtroyed my men, and hath taken into his handes all my Lands and Signiories, but by the grace of God, I ſhal doe ſo much to get them againe, and if I cannot attaine thereto, then I ſhall returne againe vnto you to haue your ſuccour and ayd. Huon, (quoth the Admirall) put all melancholy from you, for if you giue mee knowledge that you cannot haue your wil of this Emperour, I ſhall bring you people innumerable, that all Chriſtendome ſhall tremble for feare of you, and ſhall render vnto you your wife and al your Lands and Signiories, and your men that bee in priſon or in ſeruage, and I ſhall put the Emperour into your hands, to doe with him your pleaſure, or elſe I ſhal not leaue in all his Land neither Citie nor towne ſtanding vppon the earth.
               Sir, (quoth Huon) of this I thanke you heartily, but Sir, I muſt woorke another way firſt, for when I eſcaped from the Gulfe of Perſia, I promiſed vnto God, that before I went into mine owne Countrey, to goe and viſite the holy Sepulchre in Ieruſalem, and to make warre vppon the Sarazins, before I made any warre vppon any Chriſtian men, but Sir, if I may get of the Emperour by faire ſpeach my Landes and my wife, I ſhall ſerue him with all my heart, for as long as I liue I ſhall make no warre againſt any chriſtian man, if I may haue right and reaſon ſhewed vnto mee. Sir, (quoth the Admirall) of this that you ſay I giue you good thankes, but by the grace of God I ſhall goe with you the Voyage to the holy Sepulchre, and take with mee fiftie Thouſand men, to make warre againſt the Paynims and Sarazins ſuch as beleeue not in God, and I ſhall put to my paine with all my power, to exalt and encreaſe the lawe of our Lord Ieſus Chriſt. Sir quoth Huon, you haue ſayde nobly, if you thus doe, great grace and glorie perpetuall you ſhall deſerue, whereby you ſhalbe crowned aboue in the Emperiall Heauen. Nowe leaue wee to

ſpeake of this matter.
            
            
               Chap. CXVIII.
               
                  ¶ Howe the Admirall of Perſia aſſembled much people, and hee and Huon with all his armie, tooke the Sea and came to the Port before the Citie of Angory, whereas they found a great number of Paynims and Sarazins, readie to defend the Port.
               
               
                  
                     AFter that the Admirall and Huon had deuiſed together of many thinges, the Admirall ſent out his letters and bréefes, commaunding through-out Perſia and Media men of warre to bee readie, and gaue them a day to bee readie to goe with him, certifying them, that his Nauie of Shippes ſhould be readie for the tranſporting of him and them, the which was done, and euerie man came at the day that was aſſigned. In the meane ſeaſon, Huon and Barnard went oftentimes together, and viſited the Citie of Thauris, whereas much honour was made vnto them, whereof Huon and Barnard oftentimes thanked God, of the good aduenture that he had ſent them.
               Thus as yée haue heard, the Admirall of Perſia aſſembled a great number of people, and made him readie and entred into his ſhippe, and all other into diuers Shippes, and ſhipped their Armour and horſes, and Huon who deſired to pleaſe the Admirall, tooke his owne little Shippe and diſcharged it, and tooke all the precious ſtones & did put them into another ſhip, the which the Admirall had deliuered to ſerue him, and then he ſayd vnto the Admirall. Sir, I know well that the little ſhip that I came in hether, is not to ſerue in the warres, and therefore Sir, as it is I doe giue it vnto you, whereof the Admirall had great ioy, for in all the world there was none ſuch of beautie nor of riches. Then Huon gaue the Admirall all a Buſhell of the ſtones and vnto the Lordes together, and they thanked Huon
                  
of his courteſie and Larges, of all the ſtones he kept to his owne vſe but thrée Hundred, and gaue away all the reſidue. Then hee entred into the Shippe that was appointed for him, and then euerie man entred into their Shipps, the which were well fourniſhed and victualed for the wars: then the Admirall tooke his leaue of his Daughter, who pitifully wept at her Fathers departing, and then they weighed vp anchors and hoyſed vp the ſayles, and they had ſuch good winde, that anon they were farre from the Port: A goodly ſight it was to beholde the Nauie, for at their departing they made ſuch great noyſe with Trumpets, Drummes, and Hornes, that all the Sea did ring thereof.
               Great ioy and gladneſſe had Huon and Barnard of the grace that God had ſent them, ſo longe they ſayled with good winde and ſayle, that they entred into the great Sea of Caſpis, and then they ſaw a farre off a faire City ſtanding by the Sea-ſide, called the Citie of Angory, wherein there dwelt an Admirall right puiſſant and rich, and the ſame time he was in one of his Towers of his Pallaice, and when he ſaw and perceiued ſuch a puiſſant Nauie come ſayling ſo faſt towardes his Citie, hee had great maruaile, and was ſore diſmayed and abaſhed, for he knewe well that the Shippes were of Perſia, by the penons and banners that hee ſawe wauing vppon the ſhippes, and vpon the other part he ſawe in the toppes and fore-caſtles, baners ſtanding all of white, and therein red croſſes, then he ſaid vnto his Lordes that were about him. Sirs, I am greatly diſmayed and abaſhed, what meaneth yonder great fléete, ſéeing this Citie was wonne by Reignard of Montauban, there came neuer Chriſtian man heere, and I haue more maruaile to ſée the bann
                     •
                  rs and armes of Perſia, the which theſe Chriſtian men doe bear
                     •
                   vpon their ſhippes.
               Then the Admirall went downe, and publiſhed in the Citie that euerie man ſhould arme them, and goe to the Port to defend it, that the chriſtian men ſhould not land there, then the crie and allarum began in the Citie ſo great and horrible, with the noyſe of Trumpets, and Drummes, Hornes, and Baſons, ſo that the noyſe of them range vppon the Sea, ſo that the Admirall

of Perſia and Huon, and ſuch as were vpon the ſea might well heare them. Then the Admirall ſaid vnto Huon: Sir, I ſee and perceiue well that at our landing wee ſhall haue great battaile and reſiſtance. Sir, (quoth Huon) I pray you what people be they that haue that City in guiding, and who is Lord thereof? Sir, (quoth the Admirall) knowe for troth, that this Citie is great and well peopled, they beleeue not in God, and about Twentie yeares paſſed this Citie was wonne by a Lord of Fraunce, called Reignard of Montauban, and hee made it to bee chriſtened, and then about eight yeares after, it was wonne againe vpon Chriſtian men by the Admirals Sonne, the which Admirall was Lord thereof when it was wonne. And now againe they bee all Paynims and Sarazins, as you may ſée vpon the ſea-ſide they are readie to abide for vs and to defend their Port. Sir, (quoth Huon) we ought greatly to thanke our Lord Ieſus Chriſt of this faire aduenture, when we ſée before vs the enemies of our Chriſtian faith, and by the grace of our Lord and Sauiour Ieſus Chriſt, this day we ſhall doe ſo much, that the Citie and the Inhabitants therein ſhall be in our handes to vſe them at our pleaſure. Sir, (quoth the Admirall) I beſéech almightie God to giue vs the grace that it may be ſo, great grace our Lord God ſhall doe vnto vs if wee may winne this Citie.
               Then the Admirall cauſed his men to bee armed, and then they ſawe halfe a League from the Citie a Port or Hauen, the which was not kept nor defended, becauſe the Admirall of Angory would not yſſue out farre from his Citie, vntill hee ſawe what countenance the chriſtian men would make. Then the Admirall of Perſia and Huon aduanced themſelues ſo forward, that they caſt out their anchors, and launched out their boats well garniſhed with men Archers and Croſbowes, ſo that they landed at this Port in ſauegard & without any danger. Then the ſhippes drew to the land, and vnſhipped their Armour and Horſes, and ſo euerie man landed, except ſuch as were aſſigned to keepe the ſhippes, and then euerie man mounted vpon their horſes, and ordained three Battailes, the firſt was led by Huon, and with him twentie Thouſand men of hautie and hye

courage: the ſecond was ledde by a great Lord of Perſia, who was Marſhall of the Hoaſt, the third guided the Admirall of Perſia, who road from ranke to ranke, admoniſhing his men to doe their endeauours valiantly, then a ſoft pace they drewe in battaile array towards the Citie.
            
            
               Chap. CXIX.
               
                  ¶ Howe the Admirall and Huon tooke the Port, and fought with the Admirall of Angory, and dicomfited him and tooke the Citie, and howe afterward Huon went into the Deſerts of Abillant, to ſearch aduentures.
               
               
                  
                     WHen the Admirall of Angory
                   ſawe and perceiued, that the chriſtian men hadde taken land and were readie to giue battaile, and were comming towardes the Citie, hee ordained & ranged his Battailes, and deuided them into foure parts, and ſet them to be led and guided by ſuch as hee thought beſt, then he aduaunced forward, and was to the number of fiftie Thouſand men. When theſe twoo Hoaſtes ſawe each other, there was none of them but that feared the death, the day was faire and cleare, and ſo they approached, and all at a ruſh on both partes daſhed together in ſuch wiſe, that by reaſon of the pouder and duſt that did riſe by their horſes, the Sunne that was faire and bright waxed darke, and 
                     •
                  he ſhot on both partes flewe ſo faſt and as thicke, as though it had ſnowed. At their firſt méeting many ſpeares were broken, and many a Knight borne to the earth, ſo that they could neuer be releeued after, but lay on the ground among the horſe feete and there died in dolour, there were many horſes running abroad, trayling their bridles after them, and their Maſters lying dead vppon the earth in the bloud and in the myre.
               Great ſlaughter there was made vppon both parts, and Huon
                  
who went breaking the great preaſſes whereas hee ſlewe ſo many Paynims, that euerie man feared him, he ſaw where the Admirall of Angoryes Nephew was, who had ſlaine a chriſtian Knight, and they ranne ſo fiercely each at other, that the Paynim brake his ſpeare vppon Huon, and Huon fayled him not, but gaue him ſo maruailous and ſo great a ſtroake, that his Speare paſſed through his bodie, and ſo he fell downe to the earth and died. Then Huon ranne at another, and gaue him ſuch a maruailous ſtroake that it paſſed through his ſheeld and bodie, and with drawing out of the ſpeare, hee fell to the earth and neuer reléeued after, and ſo they thrée and foure more hee ſerued in like manner, and did ſo valiantly behaue himſelfe, that he ſlewe eight before his Speare brake, and then he drew out his Sword, and therewith hee did ſuch déedes, that it was fearfull to behold him, hee cut legges and armes, and raſſed off helmets, ſo that none of his enemies durſt approach néere vnto him, but they fledde before him, as the birde doth before the Hauke, hee brake aſunder the thicke preaſſes, hee did ſo to bee feared that his enemies left him, for hee neuer ſtrooke any man with a full ſtroake, but hee that receiued it was ſlaine. Alſo with him was Barnard his Coozen, who euer followed him, and did maruailes in armes, for hee was a ſharpe and an eager Knight. And alſo the Admirall of Angory enforced himſelfe to doe dammage vnto the Chriſtian men, hée ſawe where the Admirall of Perſia was ſlaying of his men, and came and ranne at him, and the Admirall of Perſia ſawe him, and encountred with him by ſuch force and puiſſance, that each of them bare the other to the earth, then quickly they releeued themſelues with their Swords in their hands, willing both of them to ſlay each other, the which had beene done indéede, if their men had not come and ſuccoured them, but thether came ſo many on both parts, that the twoo Admirals hadde no power one of them to touch the other.
               With great force came thether Paynims and Sarazins, ſo that the Chriſtian men could not remount vp againe the Admirall of Perſia, but was faine to fight a foote, and hadde beene in great ieopardie and danger, if Huon and Barnard had not come

and reſcued him, they came thether haſtily, when they heard the ſhowting and crying that was made about the Admirall of Perſia, and they brake aſunder the great preaſſe of the Paynims. And when they ſaw Huon approach neere vnto them, they were ſore afraid, and they knewe him well and parted, and ſpread abroad and durſt not abide, and Huon ſeeing the Admirall of Perſia a foot among his enemies, with his Sword valiantly defending himſelfe, which ſhould but little auailed if he had not beene quickly ſuccoured: and when Huon ſawe him hee ſayde. Oh right puiſſant Admirall haue no doubt, then Huon tooke a Speare out of the handes of a Paynim whom hée had ſlaine, and therewith he ranne at the Admirall of Angory, and gaue him ſo horrible and ſo vehement a ſtroake, that the Speare paſſed through his bodie more then a foote, and ſo hee fell downe dead among his men, whereof the Paynims were ſore diſmayed and abaſhed, when they ſaw their Lord lye dead vppon the earth, and then Huon quickly tooke the Admirals horſe by the raine of the bridle, and came vnto the Admirall of Perſia, whereas he was fighting a foote, and ſaid: Sir, mount vppon this horſe, for the Paynims and Sarazins are diſcomfited. Sir, (quoth the Admirall) bleſſed bee the houre that e
                  
                     •
                  er you were borne, for by your excellent Proweſſe I am ſaued and all mine Hoaſt, and haue vanquiſhed and ouercome mine enemies.
               Then the Admirall mounted vppon the good horſe, whereof he was right ioyfull, and ſo he and Huon and Barnard dealt ſuch ſt
                     •••
                  kes amonge the Paynims and Sarazins, that they were conſtrained to 
                     •
                  y and to turne their backes, and then they were chaced by ſuch force, that they entred into the Citie one with another▪ then the Chriſtian men ſ
                     •
                  ewe the Paynims and Sarazins, men, women, and children, that great pitie it was to 
                     〈…〉
                   lye dead vppon heapes in the ſtréets, ſo that the bloud of them that were ſlaine, ran through the ſtreets to the horſe paſtours: finally by the hye proweſſe of Huon, and by the puiſſa
                     ••
                  e of the Admirall of Perſia, the Paynims and Sarazins were diſcomfited in the Citie of Angory.
               
               When the ſlaying was ceaſed, and that the Admirall and

                  Huon ſawe how that they hadde ouercome their enemies, they ceaſed ſlaying of the people, and they went into the Temples, Towers, and Pallaices, wherein many Paynims and Sarazins were withdrawne, they were taken to mercie, promiſing to ſaue their liues, if they would leaue the falſe and deteſtable Lawe of Mahomet, and beléeue in our Sauiour and Redéemer Ieſus Chriſt, and ſo many were chriſtened, and ſuch as would not, were ſlaine. When the Admirall and Huon ſawe that the Citie was become chriſtened, then they ſet their Officers, Prouoſts, and Baylifes to gouerne the Citie, and with them two Thouſand perſons to keepe the Citie.
               Thus they taried there by the ſpace of Eight dayes, and thē they made readie to depart, and truſſed & new vittayled their ſhippes, and then they entred into their ſhippes, and the trompets, buſins, and tabors made great noyſe, and the Marriners weyed vp their anchors and hoyſed vp their ſayles, and ſayled ſo long vntill they were out of the Sea of Caſpus and entred into the great floud of Euphrates, the which deſcendeth into the great Sea, and when they were paſſed the Riuer, they coaſted the deſerts of Abilaunt, the ſeaſon was faire and cleare and the wind
                     •
                   freſh. Thus as they ſayled by this great ſea, the Admirall and Huon ſtood at the boord ſide of their ſhippe, and deuiſed of their aduentures, and prayſed God of his grace for that he done vnto them: Huon quoth the Admirall, I haue great deſire to ſée the holy Citie where our Lord God was crucified and laid in the Sepulchre. Sir quoth Huon, by the grace of God wée ſhall right well and ſhortly come thether, and I hope hée ſhall doe vnto vs farre greater grace yet, as to ayde vs to conquer and to deſtroy all thoſe in our way, that beléeue not on our holy Lawe, for that is the chéefeſt entent of our Voyage. Thus they deuiſed together the ſpace of eight dayes, without finding of any aduenture, and ſo vppon an Euening, Huon all alone ſtood leaning ouer the ſhippe board, beholding the Sea the which was plaine and peaceable, and then hee remembred the Ducheſſe Eſcleremond his Wife, therewith the teares ran tenderly downe his viſage, and ſaid. Ah right noble Ladie, when I remember what peril and daunger that I left you in,

and in what pouertie and miſerie you bee in nowe, I haue no ioynt nor member but that trembleſh for the diſpleaſure that I am in, and for feare leaſt that the falſe Emperour cauſe you to die ere my returne: then he beganne to make great ſorrow and gréefe, but Barnard who was not farre from him, ſaid. Ah Sir, you knowe well that in all the fortunes and aduentures that haue come vnto you, God hath ayded you and ſaued you from the perill of death, therefore take good comfort to your ſelfe, and laud and praiſe our Lord God for that he ſendeth vnto you, and doubt not if you haue perfect hope and truſt in him, he will ayd and comfort you, and he neuer forgetteth them that with good heart ſerue him. Thus with ſuch wordes Barnard comforted Huon, and then the Admirall came and leaned down by Huon, and they deuiſed together about diuers and ſundrie matters.
               The ſame time there aroſe vp a wind and Tempeſt ſo great and ſo horrible, that the ſayles were broken in diuers places, and ſome Maſtes brake and flew ouer the boards of the ſhippe, the ſea beganne to bee rough and furious, ſo that euerie man thought to haue beene periſhed, the fortune of this Tempeſt was ſo horrible, as euerie man deuoutly called vpon our Lord God to ſaue them from the perill and daunger that they were in. Sir, (quoth Huon) I pray you to ſhewe mee what Countrey is yonder that I ſee before mée, we were happie and fortunate if wee might arriue there, and caſt our anchors vnder the Rocke that I ſee there? Sir, (quoth the Admirall) wée bée arriued at an euill Port, for wee bée néere to the Deſerts of Abilaunt, vppon yonder Mountaine that you ſée is conuerſant an enemie, who hath cauſed many a ſhip and Veſſell to be drowned in this Sea, whereby wee bée all in great daunger to bee loſt, for none can approach to this Rocke, but that he is ſtrangled and ſlaine by the enemie that is there: then euerie man was in great feare, and the Admirall ſaid vnto the Marriners. Sirs, I pray you if it may bee, let vs drawe out of this quarter. Sir (quoth Huon) mee thinkes you are too ſore diſmayed & a
                     •
                  aſh
                     •
                  d, for by that Lord that made me to his ſemblance, I ſhall neuer haue ioy at my heart, vntill I knowe why that

enemie cauſeth them to periſh ſo faſt this way, I ſhall neuer reſt vntill I haue ſpoken with him, and if hee doe any thinge contrarie to my pleaſure, I ſhall ſtrike off his head. Huon, (quoth the Admirall) I haue great maruaile of that you doe ſaye, for if there were fiue Hundred ſuch as you bée, within one houre you ſhould bée all dead and ſtangled. Sir, (quoth Huon) doubt not you that, for though I ſhould die in the quarrell I will goe ſée him, and knowe the cauſe why hée letteth or troubleth this paſſage, before it be three dayes to an end, I ſhal goe and ſpeake with him what fortune ſoeuer commeth thereof. Sir, (quoth the Admirall) in you it is to doe your owne will, for ſince it pleaſeth you I muſt bee content, but if you would beleeue mée, you ſhould not take vpon you that Voyage and Enterprize. Sir, (quoth Huon all ſmiling) I haue my hope and truſt in almightie God, who hath heeretofore ſaued me from death, and ſo I hope he will doe yet, for it is a common prouerbe ſayd, hee whome God will ayde and ſuccour no man can hurt. Sir, (quoth the Admirall) I pray vnto our Lord God to defend you from all euill, and to giue you the grace to returne againe in ſauegard. Sir, (quoth Huon) I thanke you heartily.
               Then Barnard aroſe vp and ſaide: Deare Coozen, I require you to let me goe with you, and then the Admirall ſayd. Sir, I deſire you to bee content, that I and Barnard may keepe you companie, and wee ſhall haue with vs for the more ſauegard of our perſons foure Hundred hardy Knights. Sir, (quoth Huon) by Gods grace I will goe alone, none ſhall goe with mee but my ſelfe and Ieſus Chriſt and his bleſſed Mother, in whoſe ſauegard I commit my ſelfe. When Barnard heard that, hee had great ſorrowe at his heart, and ſo had the Admirall when they ſawe that they could not turne Huon from his dangerous Voyage and Enterprize.
               Then Huon armed himſelfe, and tooke leaue of the Admirall and of the other Lords, and of Barnard, who made great ſorrow for his Coozen Huon, who all alone would goe into the Deſerts to ſeeke aduentures. When Huon hadde taken his leaue, hee was ſet a ſhoare, and made the ſigne of a croſſe vpon his breaſ
                     •
                  :

then hee mounted vppon the Mountaine, but ere hee was the halfe way, a great wind aroſe vppon the Sea, ſo that the Tempeſt was great and horrible, whereby the cordes and cables of the ſhippes with the Admirall burſt aſunder, and ſo perforce they were 
                     •
                  ain to take the Sea, and ſayle at aduenture as wind and weather would ſerue them, whereuppon they were caſt out of that great Sea, whereof the Admirall and Barnard and all the other Lordes had great feare, and greatly complained for Huon, who alone without companie was mounted vppon the Mountaine, and as hee was going, hee looked downe into the Sea, and ſawe the maruailous Tempeſt that was in the Sea, ſo that of two Hundred ſhips that hee had left there with the Admirall, he could then ſée no more but two together, for al the reſt were ſeperated one from another in great perill and danger. Then hée began pitifully to wéepe and complayne for his Wife the faire Eſcleremond, whome he thought then neuer to ſée more, becauſe hee was in that Deſert, and ſawe the ſhippes driuen from the land in great feare of looſing. Then he kneeled downe, and held vp his handes vnto Heauen, requiring our Lord God of his pitie and grace to ayd and to giue him comfort, that hee might eſcape from thence aliue, and to ſaue the ſhippes, and to bring them againe in ſauegard to the place from whence they departed.
               Then gréeuouſly he complained for his wife and Daughter, and ſayde: Ah right noble Ladie Eſcleremond, when I remember the paines and dolors and pouerties, that by my cauſe you ſuffer and haue ſuffered, all my body ſweateth by paine and dolour: Alas, I had thought in ſhort ſpace to haue aided and ſuccoured you, but nowe I ſée well that our departing is come for euer more, in yonder perilous Sea I ſée my Coozen Barnard and diuers other Lords, that by my cauſe are in the way of perdition without God doe ayd and ſuccour them, whome I humbly require to ſend them that grace, that they may arriue at ſome good Port, and that I may ſée them once againe, to the entent that I may fight againſt the Paynims and Sarazins, in exalting the Law of Ieſus Chriſt. Thus Huon of Bourdeaux made his prayers to our Lord Ieſus Chriſt.
            
            
               
               Chap. CXX.
               
                  ¶ How Huon went ſo long in this Deſert, that he found Cain, and ſpake with him a long ſeaſon: and how hee beguiled Cain and departed.
               
               
                  
                     AFter that Huon hadde thus made his prayers vnto our Lord God, he aroſe vp and bleſſed him with the ſigne of the croſſe, recommending himſelfe vnto our Lord God, and came to the toppe of the Mountaine, but when hée was there, all his bodie trembled with trauaile, ſo that he was verie faint and féeble. Then hée looked round about him, and ſawe in a faire meadowe a cleare Fountaine, thether he went to refreſh and to reſt him, then he layde him downe vppon the graſſe to refreſh him before hee would drinke, he was ſo hot, and when he was well cooled, hée came to the Fountaine and dranke thereof a little, and waſhed his hands and face, and then he went further into the Forreſt, and could find neither Towne nor Caſtle, Garden nor Trées with fruit, whereof hée was right ſorrowfull and ſore diſpleaſed, and ſo ſearched all day to find ſome man or woman, but al was in vaine, and when he ſawe that the Sunne went to reſt, and could find no creature, he was ſore diſcomforted, he choſe out a Trée, and there vnder layd him downe and ſlept, and in the morning when he ſaw the Sunne riſe, and that his beames ſpread abroad vppon the earth, he aroſe and bleſſed him, and ſo went foorth into the Deſert, and found neither man nor woman, beaſt nor birde, wherewith being ſorrowfull and angrie, deuoutly hée called vppon our Lord God, praying him to haue in his tuition and kéeping his bodie and ſoule, and that he might yet once ſée his Wife the faire Eſcleremond, and Clariet his Daughter.
               He went ſo long in this Deſert, that at laſt he came to a plain

of thrée bowe ſhoot large, and in the middeſt thereof he ſawe a Tunne made of the heart of Oake, bound all about with bands of yron, and it turned and rowled in the playne, and neuer paſſed out of the circuit of the plaine, and beſide the Tunne he ſaw where there lay vppon the ground a great mall of yron, great maruaile had Huon, when hée ſawe this Tunne roule about thus without ceaſe like a Tempeſt, and as it paſſed by Huon, hee heard a pitifull voice within the Tunne ſore complaning, and when hee had heard it two or thrée times, hée approached néere to the Tunne and ſayd. Thou that art in this Tunne, ſpeake vnto mée, and ſhewe mée what thou art, or what thing thou haſt néede of, and why thou art put there? Then when he that was in the Tunne heard Huon, he reſted ſtill and ſpake no word: and when Huon ſaw that it would not ſpeake, he ſayd. Whatſoeuer thou art, I coniure thée by him that created all the world, and by his Sonne our Lord Ieſus Chriſt, whom he ſent downe to ſuffer death and paſſion vppon the Trée of the Croſſe, to redéeme his Fréends, who by the ſinne of Adam and Eue were in Limbo, and by his glorious Reſurrection, and by his Angels and Archangels, Cherubins, and Seraphins, and by all his holy Saints I coniure thée to ſhewe mee what thou art, and why and for what cauſe thou art ſet heere in this Tunne?
               When hee that was within the Tunne heard howe ſore hee was coniured, he anſweared and ſaid. Thou that haſt coniured mée, thou doeſt great euill to cauſe me to ſhew thée the troth, know ſurely that I haue to name Cain, and Sonne I was vnto Adam and Eue, and am hee that ſlewe my Brother Abell, by falſe and curſed enuie that I had vnto him, becauſe his oblations and Diſmes that he made vnto God were exalted, and the fume thereof went vpward to Heauen, and thoſe that I made the fume went downe-ward, and when I ſawe that, I ſlewe and murdered my Brother Abell, wherefore, and for the great ſinne that I haue committed, I am damned to bee and to ſuffer this martirdome within this Tunne, wherein I am cloſed burning, and with Serpents and Toads héere within deuouring mee, and yet I cannot die, and héere I ſhall bee vntill the

day of Iudgement, and then my paine ſhall be doubled. Now haue I ſhewed thee thy demaund, wherefore I repute thée for a foole, when thou art ſo hardy as to enter into this Deſert, whereas neuer man entred and departed without death, for know for troth, that hether repaireth twoo enemies Féends of Hell, who ſhall ſlay thée and beare thy ſoule into Hell, without thou wilt doe as I ſhall ſhew thée.
               Fréend, (quoth Huon) I pray thee to ſhew me what it is that thou ſpeakeſt of, or what thing thou wilt that I ſhould doe and I will doe it, to the entent that I may depart from hence, there is nothing in the world but I ſhall doe it for thée, ſo thou wilt ſhewe mée the way howe I may depart from hence. Fréend, (quoth Cain) I ſhall ſhewe thée what thou ſhalt doe, thou ſhalt take this mall of iron that thou ſéeſt there, and ſtrike therewith ſo long vppon this Tunne vntill thou haſt broken it, to the entent that I may yſſue out, and when I am deliuered, I ſhall ſet thée in ſauegard in Ieruſalem or in France, or in what countrey ſoeuer thou wilt wiſh. If thou wilt doe this that I haue ſayd, and deliuer me from this torment: I ſhall ſet thée whereſoeuer thou wilt be in any Land Chriſtian or Heathen, and if thou doeſt not this that I haue ſaide, before it be night I ſhall cauſe thée to die with great tormentes, for anon thou ſhalt ſée come hether two Diuels of Hell, foule and hideous to behold, and they ſhall ſtangle thée and beare thy ſoule into Hell. Ah good Lorde, (quoth Huon) humbly I require and beſeech thée to ſaue mée from this torment. Cain, (quoth Huon) thou ſpeakeſt mée faire and ſayeſt as thou liſt, but I will not deliuer thée out of this Tunne, vntill firſt thou ſheweſt mée how I may depart from hence. Then Cain ſayd, if thou wilt promiſe mée by thy faith, and by thy part of Paradice to deliuer mée out of this Tunne, I ſhall ſhewe thée the manner howe thou ſhalt eſcape from hence. Cain, (quoth Huon) haue no doubt, and that I promiſe thée to kéepe my faith, ſo thou wilt ſhew mee the manner howe I may depart out of this Deſert, I ſhall deliuer thée out of thy torment. Then Cain ſaid: thou ſhalt goe by this little path that thou ſéeſt héere by vppon thy right hand, the which ſhall bring thée ſtraight to the Sea-ſide, the which is not farre

from hence, and then goe downe the Mountaine, whereas thou ſhalt find a ſhippe, and therein but one man, but before thou doeſt enter into the ſhippe, bleſſe thrée times, for hée that thou ſhalt finde there is a Féende of Hell, and ſhewe vnto him howe thou art Cain, eſcaped out of the rowling Tun, and bid him to paſſe thée ouer, and ſay that thou wilt goe and ſlay all the Chriſtian men that bee in the world, and bring their ſoules into Hell, and when hée heareth thée ſay thus, hee wlil paſſe thée ouer in ſafetie, for it is longe ſince that hee hath taried for mee, becauſe he thinketh that I ſhould eſcape out of this Tun: but thou muſt take with thée this mall of yron vpon thy necke, to the entent that hee ſhall the better beleeue thee, and ſurely he will then paſſe thee ouer.
               
                  Cain, (quoth Huon) I pray thee is this of troth that thou haſt ſayd? Fréend, (quoth Cain) I lye neuer a word. Now I pray thée ſeeing I haue ſhewed thée the manner how thou mayeſt eſcape, take this Mall of yron, and breake aſunder this Tunne that I am in, that I may be deliuered out of this paine and torment. Cain, (quoth Huon) I pray thee to ſhew mee who is hee that did put thée into this Tun, and what is his name? Sir, (quoth Cain) know for troth that God of Heauen ſet me héere, becauſe I had diſpleaſed him for ſlaying of my Brother Abell, wherefore I haue ſuffered ſo much paine and ſorow, that more I cannot endure: and therefore yet againe I pray thee to deliuer mee from hence. Cain, (quoth Huon) God forbid that I ſhould deliuer thee, ſéeing our Lord God hath ſet thee there: Know for troth, that thou ſhalt neuer depart from thence except it bee by his commaundement, for there thou ſhalt bee euer for mee, I had rather bee periured then to vndoe that thing which God will haue done, to puniſh thee for the euils that thou haſt done. I knowe well, as for the euill that I haue done, as in breaking of my promiſe to thee: God will lightly pardon mee for it, abide thou there with thy curſed ſinnes, for ſure by mee thou ſhalt haue none other ayd.
            
            
               
               Chap. CXXI.
               
                  ¶ How Huon departed from Cain, and paſſed the Sea in a Ʋeſſell guided by the Diuell, who beleeued it had beene Cain, and Huon arriued at a Citie called Colanders, whereas he found the Admirall of Perſia and Barnard his Cozen, who had layde ſiege to the Citie.
               
               
                  
                     WHen Cain had well vnderſtood Huon, he ſaid: Ah thou falſe Traytor, by whom I am beguiled and mocked, thou art not worthy to be beleeued in any thinge that thou ſayeſt, thou lyeſt worſe then a Dogge. Oh thou falſe periured Traitour, thou haſt ill kept thy promiſe, thou art not worthy to bee beleeued. Cain, (quoth Huon) other good getteſt thou none of mee, for thou art not worthie to bee heard, when thou haſt ſtaine thy deare Brother by falſe enuie and curſed treaſon, whereof thou art full: goe thy way falſe Traytour, too much euill cannot bée done vnto thee, bee content with the Tunne that thou art in, thou néedeſt not feare of any refreſhing nor of more furthering for mee, well haſt thou deſerued it, but within ſhort time thou ſhalt haue worſe paine and ſorrow. Ah Traytour (quoth Cain and falſe lyer, thou haſt loſt thy part of Paradice. Thou lyeſt, (quoth Huon) vnto thee ought to bee kept neither faith nor promiſe, becauſe thou haſt ſlaine Abell thy Brother: wherefore thou art now puniſhed and well haſt thou deſerued it. Ah thou falſe lier, (quoth Cain) ſubtilly thou haſt deceiued and mocked mee by thy falſe words and ſubtilties, I ſee well that thou wilt goe from hence and leaue me ſtill in this paine. Certainly, (quoth Huon) that which I promiſed thee was but to beguile thee, for as by mee thou ſhalt not come out, without hee commaund it that ſet thee heere. Well Huon, (quoth Cain) know for certaine, that in all thy life thou wert neuer better

counſailed, for if thou haddeſt deliuered me out, incontinent I would haue ſtrangled thee. Ah falſe Feend, (quoth Huon) yet haſt thou no repentaunce of thine euill that thou haſt done. I will goe my way, and thou ſhalt abide heere ſtill in great pain and torment foreuer, therewith Huon departed, and tooke the Mall vppon his necke, and entred into the little way that Cain had ſhewed vnto him.
               Now we will leaue ſpeaking of Huon, and ſpeake of the Admirall of Perſia, and of his Armie vppon the Sea. Vppon the ſecond day the Tempeſt ceaſed, and the Sea waxed calme and faire, then the ſhippes drew againe together as it pleaſed God, and arriued at a noble Citie, the which was as then in Arme
                     
                        •••
                     
                   called Colanders, a great and a faire Citie, but after it was deſtroyed by the noble Duke Ogyer the Danoyſe, he went into I
                        ••
                     ia. The Admirall and his company greatly complayned for Huon whome they had ſo loſt, they thought neuer to ſée him more, and Barnard his Coozen made ſuch ſorrow that great pittie it was to ſee him, the Admirall and all his Lords ſore wept and pitifully complayned for Huon, they thought neuer to ſee him agayne, but hee that our Lord Ieſus Chriſt will haue ſaued cannot periſh, for Huon the ſame time came downe the Mountaine, to come vnto the Port whereas the Veſſell lay and the Diuell within it. When Huon ſawe the Veſſell and the Feend within it, who was ſo hideous and horrible to behold, that it was maruaile to ſee, hee ſéemed well to bee the Diuell of Hell, his head was as great as an Oxe head, his eyes more 
                     •
                  edder then two burning coales, his téeth great and long, and as rough as a Beare, hee caſt fire and ſmoake out of his gorge like a Furnace, it was no maruaile though Huon doubted him, for when hee ſawe him ſo foule hee had great feare, and ſo lent himſelfe to a Rocke the better to behold him, and then hee bleſſed him with the ſigne of the Croſſe, recommending himſelfe to the ſauegard of our Lord God, but it fortuned ſo the ſame time that the enemie ſawe him not. Ah good Lord, (quoth Huon) I pray and require thee humbly to counſaile mee, in what manner I ſhould truſt in this foule Féend who is fearfull ſo behold, I maruaile how I might bee acquainted with him, whether I

might truſt to be in the ſhippe with him, certainly I haue great doubt that hee will caſt me into the Sea, or elſe ſlay mee on the other ſide of the Sea, I wotte not what to doe, for I muſt bee faine to truſt him, or elſe to returne into the Deſert, whereas I ſhall die with famine, and neuer more ſée wife nor child: but ſéeing it is thus, I ſhall aduenture my ſelfe with him, and if I may eſcape from this aduenture, I ſhall goe to the holy Sepulchre, whereas our Lorde Ieſus Chriſt was quicke and dead, and then I ſhall make warre vpon the Sarazins. Then Duke Huon tooke vppon him heart and courage, and with the Mall vppon his necke hee marched foorth fiercely: then hee called the enemy and ſaid. Oh thou that kéepeſt this Veſſell and paſſage, paſſe me incontinent ouer this Sea, and ſet me a land vpon the other ſide. When the Diuell ſawe Huon with the Mall vppon his necke, and ſpeaking ſo fiercely, hee ſaid: What art thou? whether wilt thou goe? or what doeſt thou ſeeke for héere? or how art thou ſo bold to come hether? thou ſhalt neuer goe further, but I ſhall caſt thee into the Sea or ſtrangle thée, and then beare thy Soule into Hell.
               When Huon heard him, he beganne to tremble, but he was nothing abaſhed, for if he hadde fainted or taried to haue made anſweare, hee had incontinent béene deſtroyed and ſlaine, but like a hardy Knight full of great Proweſſe, and firme in the faith of Ieſus Chriſt, ſayde. Hold thy peace thou Foole, for I am Cain, for whome thou haſt taried héere ſo long, I came euen now out of the rowling Tunne vpon the Mountaine, haſt thée and paſſe mée ouer this arme of the Sea, for I ſhall find neither man nor woman that beléeueth in Ieſus Chriſt, but I ſhall ſlay him, to the entent that hell may be filled with their ſoules. When the Féend heard Huon ſay ſo, he had great ioy, and ſaid. Cain, why haſt thou made me tarie héere ſo long as I haue don? I am ioyfull of thy comming, for I could neuer haue departed out of this place, without thou haddeſt béen deliuered out of the Tunne: therefore Cain come on thy way, enter into this Ship preſently, and I ſhall bring thée whereas thou wilt be, gladly I will paſſe thée ouer the Sea, to the entent that thou ſhouldeſt ſlay Chriſtian men and Sarazins, to haue their Soules into

hell.
               Then Huon entred into the Ship, recommending himſelfe to our Lord Ieſus Chriſt, and ſayde. Quickly paſſe me ouer: Before Huon thought that he had gone but two Leagues, he was ouer on the other ſide, whereof Huon had great maruaile that hee was ſo ſoone ouer, and thanked our Lord God that hee was out of that daunger: then hee tooke leaue of the enemie, and ſayde. Farewell, I will returne againe ſhortly, within theſe thrée dayes thou ſhalt heare tidinges of mee, and then the Féend anſweared ſhortly and ſayd. Cain, goe thy way quickly and haſt thée, to the entent that when thou returneſt into hell, thou ſhalt haue good chéere of our Maiſters, who greatly deſire thy comming. Then Huon departed quickly, he thought euer that the Diuell had followed him, and hee went ſo longe that hee approached to a Citie called Colanders, glad was Huon when hee had loſt the ſight of the euill Spirit, and in the Euening he entred into the Citie of Colanders with the Mall vppon his necke, the Paynims and Sarazins that were within the Citie had great maruaile, when he came alone afoote cleane armed into the Citie, and among other, there was one demaunded of him what hee was, and why hee went ſo alone armed? Then Huon anſwered him fiercely to abaſh him therewith, and ſaid: I am Cain, who by mine ilneſſe ſlew Abell my Brother, wherewith God was angrie with mée, but before it bee longe time I ſhall take ſuch vengeance, that as many men or women or children as I find beléeuing in the Lawe of Ieſus Chriſt, I ſhall deſtroy them all in ſuch wiſe, that the Paynims and Sarazins ſhall haue no doubt for any euill that they ſhall doe vnto them, for I ſhall deſtroy and ſlay them all, neither ſparing old nor young. When the Paynims heard that, they were right ioyfull, and that night ſerued Huon well and made him a great feaſt, becauſe they truſted that hee ſhould deſtroy all Chriſtendome, and ſaide among themſelues, that as then hee was welcome thether, becauſe the Citie the day before was beſieged by the Admirall of Perſia. Thus Huon had great ioy and feaſting made vnto him, and after Supper he was brought into a faire and rich Chamber, wherein hee lay and ſlept ſoundly vntill the

next morning.
            
            
               Chap. CXXII.
               
                  ¶ How Huon of Bourdeaux had great ioy, when he ſawe the Admirall of Perſia before Colanders, where he fought with the Sarazins.
                  
               
               
                  
                     AFTER that the Admirall of Perſia
                   had left Huon in the Deſert of Abillaunt, and how he had a great ſtorme vppon the ſea, and at laſt their Shippes aſſembled together, and arriued at the Port before the Citie of Colanders, in the which Citie Huon was now in, who was right ioyfull, when he knew that the Admirall was come thether to lay ſiege to the Citie, and the Admirall and his companie was ſorrowfull becauſe they had loſt Huon, and eſpecially Barnard his coozen, for he thought neuer to haue ſeene him againe: but hee had ſhortly tidinges of him as yée ſhall heare after. When the Admirall was arriued at the Port, they armed themſelues, and ordained their men as well as they might to aſſayle the citie of Colanders. They yſſued out of their Shippes, and came marching towards the City and made a great aſſault, and then the Paynims and Sarazins armed them on all ſides, and went to their defences: then the Captaine of the Towne came vnto Huon, and ſaid. Come on foorth Cain, it is time for you to ſhew what you can doe, for héere without are chriſtian men aſſayling the Citie, I pray you ſpare them not, for wee haue great truſt in you. Sirs, (quoth Huon) ſéeing I am in this citie, yée néede not to feare any perſon, anon yée ſhall ſée what I can doe. Cain, (quoth the captaine) I pray you goe on before and wee ſhall followe you. Well, (quoth Huon) with this Mall I ſhall aſtone them all, the Paynims had great ioy of his words, wéening ſurely it had been Cain. Then Huon armed himſelfe, and hee had a good horſe brought vnto him, whereuppon hee

mounted: then he and the Paynims yſſued out of the citie, and found as then the Admirall of Perſia and all his companie readie arriued in Battaile. And when hee ſawe that the Sarazins were yſſued out, hee ſette vppon them fiercely, and Huon, who was ioyfull of the aduenture that was fallen to him, hee ſtept out apart to behold the battaile, and wold not meddle, becauſe hee had beene ſo well receiued and feaſted in the citie by them of the Towne: and hee well perceiued, that the aſſaults were of the Realme of Perſia, and howe the Admirall and his coozen Barnard were there, whereof he had ſuch ioy, that hee wept for gladneſſe, and thanked God of the good fortune that he had ſent him, and ſaid. Ah good Lord, thou oughteſt greatly to be prayſed, for thou neuer fayleſt them at time of néede that ſerue thée, nowe I may well ſay, that with thy gracious ayd, yet I ſhall once more ſee my Wife and my child: thus Huon ſaide to himſelfe, beholding both Battailes fighting.
            
            
               Chap. CXXIII.
               
                  ¶ How the City of Colanders was taken by the Admirall of Perſia, after he hadde wonne the Battaile, and of the great ioy that was made vnto Huon, when hee was knowne by the Admirall of Perſia and his Cozen Barnard.
                  
               
               
                  
                     WHen the Admirall of Perſia
                   ſawe and perceiued, that they of the Towne were yſſued out, he marched foorth his Battailes, and ſet vpon his enemies, there was great ſlaughter made on both parts: but at the laſt they of the Citie had the worſt, for the chriſtian men were of a greater number then the Paynims and Sarazins that were yſſued out, wherefore they were conſtrained to graunt the Victorie to their enemies, the Paynims retired & fled towards their citie, and the Admirall & Barnard with their company chaced & ſlew them that it was pity to ſée it.

Finally, the Admirall oppreſſed them ſo ſore, that hee entred into the Citie with them, and Barnard and his companie, and ſlew and beat down the Sarazins, that great maruaile it was to ſee the bloud that ranne through the ſtréets. When the Admirall ſaw that hee had the victorie, then hée commaunded to ceaſe ſlaying, and that all ſuch as would beleeue in our Lorde God, their liues ſhould bee ſaued and their goods, and ſo all ſuch as would not bee chriſtened, ſhould bee ſlaine incontinent and none ſpared, the which was done, many of them receiued Chriſtendome, and as many as woulde not receiue it, were all ſlaine.
               Thus as this Citie was taken, then Huon (who was entred into the Citie with the Admirals men) came to the Pallaice, whereas hee ſawe the Admirall and all the Barons and Barnard his Coozen, Huon had ſtill his Mall vppon his necke, and when he came into the Hall he put off his helmet, and ſaluted the Admirall and all the other that were there. When the Admirall and his Lords ſaw Huon, the great ioy that they had no tongue can tell. Oh right déere and vertuous Knight, (quoth the Admirall) your comming doth ſo reioyce me, that I cannot tell whether I dreame or not, you are much bound vnto God, that hee hath giuen you the grace to ſaue you from perill. Then the Admirall embraced Huon, and you may well know that Barnard his Coozen had great ioy, and ſo had all the other, and then the Admirall ſayd vnto Huon. Sir, I pray you to ſhew mee what aduentures you haue had ſince you departed from vs? Then Huon ſhewed them all as yée haue heard héere before, and how he eſcaped.
               When the Admirall and the other vnderſtood Huon, they were neuer ſo amazed and abaſhed in all their liues, of that hée was ſo eſcaped from the handes of the Diuell, and ſayd that hée was much bound vnto God, they were all glad and right ioyfull for the comming of Huon, and eſpecially Barnard. Then the Captaine of the Citie who had newly receiued Chriſtendome, came vnto Huon and ſayd: Sir, I require you to deſire the Admirall to bée my good Lord and Maiſter, for I promiſed faithfully to abide heere in this Towne as his good and true

Seruant, keeping firmely the chriſtian faith, the which I haue newly receiued. When Huon ſaw the Captaine, who had receiued him into his houſe at his firſt comming into the Citie, he went vnto the Admirall, and ſaid. Sir, I require you to giue the keeping of this Citie vnto this noble man, and he to hold it as his owne, and to doe homage vnto you for it. Sir, (quoth the Admirall) all that you will I am agréeable vnto, I graunt it him for the loue of you. Then Huon thanked the Admirall, the Captaine ſeeing the great and rich guift that the Admirall had giuen vnto him for the loue of Huon, he had great maruaile of the great Larges and courteſie that was done vnto him by the meanes of Huon, and then hee kneeled downe before them and thanked them, and did homage vnto the Admirall in the preſence of all the Lordes and Barons, and promiſed truely to keepe the Citie, againſt all men that would doe any dammage thereunto, nor neuer to yeeld it vp vnto any perſon, but all onely vnto the Admirall or vnto him that ſhall haue his Commiſſion: thus as yee haue heard the Citie of Colanders was taken.
            
            
               Chap. CXXIIII.
               
                  ¶ Howe the Admirall of Perſia and Huon of Bourdeaux, and all their Hoaſt paſſed by Antioch, and by Damas, and came to the Citie of Ieruſalem to the holy Sepulchre, and was nobly receiued by the King of Ieruſalem: and howe the Souldans Meſſenger came and defied the Admirall of Perſia.
                  
               
               
                  
                     WHen the Admirall and Huon
                   ſaw this Citie wonne and brought vnder their obeyſance, and hadde eſtabliſhed there a newe Lorde and Captaine, and ſet Prouoſtes and Baylifes and other Officers, then they tooke aduiſe together, & determined ſince they were a 
                     •
                  and, to ſend backe againe their Nauie of ſhippes into Perſia,
                  
and they to goe by land to the Citie of Ieruſalem, for they hadde from thence as they were but Tenne dayes iourney vnto Antioch, and ſo to paſſe by that Citie, and then vnto Damas, and ſo to Ieruſalem, and there to doe their offering, and if by aduenture they founde in their way either Kings or Admirals, that would let or trouble them in their paſſing, they ſayd that they were of puiſſance ſufficient to reſiſt againſt them, and then they ſayd, howe that from Ieruſalem the Admirall might returne by land into Perſia, vnto the Riuer of Euphrates, and there his Nauie to méet him, and ſo to conuay him vnto his Citie of Thauris
                  ▪ and Huon to returne vnto laffe, and from thence by water to returne into Fraunce. Thus they concluded to doe, the which aduiſe was lauded and praiſed of all the Lordes and Barons of the Hoaſt.
               After this concluſion thus taken, the Admirall commaunded his ſhippes to be diſcharged of all thinges neceſſary to be caried by lande, the which was done diligently according to his commaundement, their horſes were ſette a lande, and their Tents and Pauillions truſſed vppon Mules and Cammels and Dromodaries, the which cariage ſéemed a great Hoaſt there were ſo many together, the noyſe and brute that they made ſéemed to be a new world, and when all the ſhippes were diſcharged, the Patrons and Maiſters of the Shippes tooke their leaue of the Admirall, who commaunded them expreſly to abide for him in the Riuer of Euphrates, and ſo they did accordingly. Nowe lette vs leaue ſpeakinge of them, and returne vnto our former matter.
               When theſe Shippes were departed and euerie thinge truſſed, then the Admirall commaunded through-out all the Countrey, that all Marchants and other able to doe it, ſhould ſend after his Hoaſt bread, wine, and fleſh, and biſket to vittaile his Hoaſt, and the charge to ſée this done was giuen to the newe Admirall of the Citie of Colanders, the which he did diligently. When the Admirall of Perſia ſawe his time to depart, he made it to bee proclaimed through-out the Citie by a Trumpet, that euery man ſhould make him ready to depart the next morning, to goe whether it pleaſed the Admirall: this was done ſo, that

at an houre before the next day there was great brute and noiſe made in the remoouing: then the Admirall and Huon made them readie, and mounted vppon their horſes, and yſſued out of 
                     〈◊〉
                   Citie, and e
                     •
                  tred into the féelds, and then the whole Hoaſt tooke the way towards Antioch: Of their iourneys I make no 
                     〈◊〉
                   fall, they road foorth ſo that they paſſed by low Armenia, 
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   th
                     •
                   hye Ermine, and ſo vpon a Monday they came before 
                     〈◊〉
                  , whereas they lodged that night a longe by the the 
                     〈…〉
                  , without that any perſon of the Citie made any 
                     〈…〉
                   or to let them, but they brought out of the 
                     〈…〉
                   bread, wine, and fleſh, and other thinges 
                     〈…〉
                   their companie, whereof the Admirall and Huon 
                  
                     〈…〉
                   ioyfull, and gaue them great thankes, and for that 
                     〈…〉
                   woulde not ſuffer that any of his Hoaſt 
                     〈…〉
                   hurt or dammage vnto any perſon of the Citie. 
                     〈…〉
                   buy when they had dyned, they tooke their way to 
                     〈◊〉
                   the Citie of Damas, and as they went thether-ward, they 
                     •
                  ooke certaine Townes and Caſtles, and brought them vnder their obeyſance, and ſuch as were taken perforce, and 
                     〈◊〉
                   not beléeue in our Sauiour and Redeemer Ieſus Chriſt, incontinent they were all ſlaine, and brought to vtter ruine and deſtroyed.
               
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   waſting and deſtroying the Countrey in their way, at laſt they came before the Citie of Damas. When they came thether▪ they lodged about the Citie in the Gardens and 
                     〈◊〉
                  
                  ▪ and conſtrained them within the Citie to bringe them 
                     〈…〉
                  , the which they did, for doubt of the deſtroying of their 
                     〈…〉
                   and fruits: there they lay one night, and the next day 
                     〈…〉
                   the way to Ieruſalem, and hadde diuers Battailes by the way, but they were of ſo great puiſſance that none could 
                     〈…〉
                   them. So longe roade this chriſtian Hoaſt, that they came and lodged before N
                        •
                     pelous, and there left their hoaſt: then the next morning, the Admirall and Huon, and diuers of the great Lords and Barons of Perſia accompanied with them, 
                     〈◊〉
                   from Napelous to the number of foure Thouſand vali
                  
                     •••
                   Knights, to guard them into the Citie of Ieruſalem, thether they came about noone, whereas they were receiued with great

ioy of Kinge Thibault, and of the Patriarke and Arch-prieſt, who as then were in the Citie of Ieruſalem, whome the Emperour Conſtantine had left there, and ordered for the keeping of the Citie. When the Admirall of Perſia, and Duke Huon and Barnard, and other went and offered to the holy Sepulchre, then they went to the Temple of Salomon, and vnto the holy Temple of Simeon, whereas they made their offerings, and the next Pilgrimages vnto all the holy places in the Citie, with great deuotion and reuerence.
               When they had accompliſhed their holy Pilgrimages, they returned to the Pallaice of the King of Ieruſalem, whereas they were greatly feaſted and honourably receiued, of their ſeruice I will make none account, but one thing I dare well ſay, that there was neuer Kinge nor Admirall better ſerued. And as they ſat at dinner, there entred a Sarazin 
                     •
                  oule and blacke, called Trampoiguyffle, the which is as much to ſaye as Balaach. Then he ſaid a hye before the Table, the ſame God that made the Firmament, and that downe to vs ſent his holy Prophet Mahomet to teach vs his holy Lawe, he ſaue and keepe Saphadin Souldan of Babilon and of Egipt, and may confound them that be his enemies. To the Admirall of Perſia and of Media, the Souldan ſendeth word by mée, that wrongfully and without cauſe thou goeſt and deſtroyeſt his Countrey and his people, not giuing him any knowledge why thou doeſt ſo, & therefore by me he ſendeth thee word, that am his ſecret Meſſenger, that he will aſſigne vnto thee the day of battaile, that is vpon Thurſday next comming, between Rames and lafte, whereas there is a plaine Countrey, and hée will that thou knoweſt for certaine, that if he take thée, thou ſhalt be hanged and ſlaine all quicke and neuer ſée faire day more, and al other that I ſée heere ſitting at this Table.
            
            
               
               Chap. CXXV.
               
                  ¶ Of the anſwere that the Admirall of Perſia and of Media made vnto the Souldans Meſſenger, and of the report that he made vnto his Maiſter.
               
               
                  
                     WHen the Admirall had well heard and vnderſtood the Souldans Meſſenger, he beganne to ſmile and ſaid. Tell thy Maiſter, that I ſet nothing by his threatning, nor by nothing that he can do, nor I will not leaue for all his ſaying, to deſtroy and to take his Townes and his Caſtles, and to ſlay all them that will not beleeue in the Lawe of Ieſus Chriſt, and ſay vnto him from me, that I am not in minde to retire backe, but by the ayde of God my creatour, I ſhall come and meete with him, ſo that he ſhall not neede to tarrie for mee, and I ſhall fight with him my puiſſance againſt his, to ſhew him howe they can doe that beleeue in Ieſus Chriſt. Goe thy way and ſay vnto thy Maiſter, that he ſhall not find me flying, for any feare that I haue of any man beléeuing in the falſe and deteſtable fayth of Mahomet. Then the Admirall commaunded to giue the Meſſenger meate and drinke, and fortie Florents, the Meſſenger refuſed it not but tooke it, and thanked the Admirall, and when hee had dyned, he taried not night nor day vntill hee came to the Citie of Gaſere, whereas he found the Souldan and al his Armie, the which was a great number, for they were a Hundred Thouſand men, and all they threatened the death of the Admirall of Perſia, but it is a comon ſaying, yt many things lacketh of fooliſh thoughts and ſo did they. When the Meſſenger was arriued at Gaſere, hee came before the Souldan, and made his reporte what anſweare the Admirall had made him, and when the Souldan had well heard and vnderſtood the Meſſenger, hee hadde great maruaile of the great outrage that hee thought to be in the Admirall

of Perſia, in that hee durſt abide him, and ſware by his Lawe, that if hée might haue the vpper-hand of the Admirall, that he would ſlay him quicke. Then he commanded his Hoaſt to diſlodge, and to take the way towardes Eſcalonne, the which they did.
            
            
               Chap. CXXVI.
               
                  ¶ Howe the Admirall of Perſia ſent for his men that lay at Napelous, and cauſed them to withdrawe towards Rames, and howe they departed from Ieruſalem: and howe he went to fight with his enemies.
               
               
                  
                     AFter that Trampoiguyfle the Meſſenger was departed from Ieruſalem, and returned to his Maſter the Souldan: then the Admirall of Perſia and Huon of Bourdeaux, who were in the Pallaice with the Kinge of Ieruſalem, thether they called all their counſaile, and when they were all aſſembled, the Admirall ſayd. Sirs, I pray you to counſaile me, in what manner I ſhall vſe my ſelfe, to goe and meete with the enemies of the Chriſtian faith, the which are come againſt vs: therefore I deſire euery one of you to ſhew me your opinions what in this caſe is beſt to be done. Then Thibault King of Ieruſalem aroſe vp, and ſayd. Sir Admirall of Perſia and Media, mée thinkes you ſhould not abide them heere, but rather you ought to depart, and to goe againſt your enemies, for if you abide for them in this Citie, you ſhall doe great dammage to this countrey, for wée haue truce with the Souldan for fiue yeares, the which with our honour wee cannot breake, for if we would haue made warre againſt him, we could not haue reſiſted againſt him, and alſo wee are far off from Fraunce, to ſeeke for ſuccor and ayd there: thus the King ſpake no more. Then Duke Huon of Bourdeaux ſayd: Sir Admirall, the King of Ieruſalem hath ſhewed you the troth, for

if wee ſhould abide heere, it ſhould bee alwaies to our reproach and ſhame, if this holy Citie ſhould bee loſt, the which was wonne by twoo noble Emperours of Rome and of Greece, for the King that is heere, his honour ſaued and the ſuertie of his countrey, may not breake the Truce that hee hath taken with the Souldan of Babilon: and therefore mine aduice is, that as 
                     〈◊〉
                   as we may commaund your men that be at Napelous, 
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   to diſlodge and to meete with you at Rames, and then when you haue ſomewhat refreſhed your Hoaſt, then ſet forward towards your enemies, (as the Kinge of Ieruſalem hath ſaid) for 
                     •
                   were great folly to giue them leaſure to come too farre forward, firſt let them knowe, how the Swords and Speares of the Perſians and Medians can ſtrike, who ſometime did 
                     〈◊〉
                   in armes, wherefore it is reaſon that they followe nowe th
                     •
                  ir Predeceſſors. When Huon had finiſhed his reaſon, the Admirall and all the other Lords that were there, praiſed and held that counſaile good, that was purpoſed by the King of Ieruſalem and of Huon, and then they departed and returned to their Chambers and Lodgings. Then the Admirall commaunded haſtily his Hoaſt to withdrawe towards Rames, whereas hee would tarie for them, the which thing was done diligently, and the Hoaſt reſted not vntil they came vnto Rames, whereas they 
                     •
                  ound readie the Admirals Harbingers, who had alreadie appointed their Lodgings.
               Thus after that the Admirall had written to his Marſhals of his Hoaſt, then hee tooke his leaue of the King of Ieruſalem, and in like wiſe ſo did Huon and Barnard his coozen, without knowledging of himſelfe to the King of Ieruſalem. Then they departed from the holy citie, and road ſo long that they came to the Towne of Rames, whereas they found their Hoaſt lodged. Then they reſted them there vntill the next day, and then the Admirall commanded them to diſlodge, and to make them readie to take the way towards Eſcalonne. A goodly ſight it was to ſee the Hoaſt diſlodge, Huon had thereof great ioy, for hee deſired rather to ſlay the Paynims, then to bee in chambers with 
                     〈◊〉
                   and Damſels. When they were all in the feelds, the Admirall ordained his Battailes, the firſt guided Huon of Burdeaux
                  
and Barnard his coozen, he had with him twentie Thouſand Perſians fierce and hardy, the ſecond Battaile ledde the Marſhall of Perſia, with twentie Thouſand of good m
                     •
                  n of warre, the third Battaile led the Admirall of Perſia and of Media, and with him thirtie Thouſand of the moſt valianteſt men in his hoaſt, and when euerie thing was ordained as it appertained, hee went and viſited them, exhorting them to doe well their deuoyre, and prayinge them to quit themſelues valiantly: then hee came vnto Huon, and ſaid. Oh right deare and vertuous Knight, garniſhed and repleat with al proweſſe, all my hope I put in the ſtrength and vertue of your armes and bodie: therefore I pray you this day to ſhewe out your great vertues wherewith you are garniſhed, for eſpecially for the loue of you and for your bountie, I haue taken and receiued the holy baptiſme, whereof I laud and praiſe our Lord God of his grace that hee hath done vnto mee: therefore I deſire you this day to ſhew vnto the Sarazins, that your Sword is to be feared. Sir, (quoth Huon) God giue mee grace to bee ſuch a one as you ſay, and to performe in me that which lacketh: and Sir, I truſt by me it ſhall not be let, but that this day our enemies ſhall haue no cauſe to praiſe nor to make their boaſt, and therefore Sir, let vs ride foorth ſurely, for by the grace of God I haue hope, that this day we ſhall make our enemies ſo much adoe, that they ſhall haue ſcarce time and leaſure to graunt vnto vs the Victorie.
               Now as the Admirall and Huon were thus deuiſinge together, they ſawe before them a farre off, the ayre waxe thicke, and that the Sunne loſt his clearneſſe, whereof they had great maruaile, becauſe they ſawe a little before the Sunne ſhine ſo faire and cleare, there as they were anon they perceiued, that the darkneſſe aroſe by reaſon of the duſt riſing of the Horſes of their enemies, who were haſtily comming towardes them to haue taken them in their lodginge, whereby they came all out of order, truſting al in their great number of men, for they were more then a hundred Thouſand, fearfull it was to ſée them comming, ſo faſt they roade that the one hoaſt might ſée the other. When Huon had well perceiued them, and ſaw their demeanour

and diſorder, hee ſaide vnto the Admirall: Sir, well you ought to praiſe our Lord God, for this day hee ſhall bring your enemies into your handes to ſlay them at your pleaſure: therefore Sir, I counſaile you, that incontinent we haſten and ſet vppon them, to the entent that they ſhall haue no time nor leaſure to aſſemble together to bring themſelues in good order, if wee doe thus, there is no doubt but by the grace of God wee ſhall ſhortly diſcomfite them before they bee aſſembled. Sir, (quoth the Admirall) your opinion is good and reaſonable, let it be done as you haue deuiſed. Then the Admirall commaunded the Marſhals and Captaines of his hoaſt to march forward his Battailes againſt his enemies, and then Trumpets and Drummes began to ſound, that it was maruaile to heare them, and then they ſette on towardes their enemies. When the Souldan and they of his hoaſt ſawe the Perſians comming againſt them readie ranged in battaile, hee called vnto him his Kinges and Admirals, who were fiftéene in number, and ſayd vnto them. Sirs, it were good that our men reſted ſtill a ſeaſon, that wee may order and range our Battailes, for yonder we may ſée well our enemies comming. Then ſtept foorth the Admirall of Dorbrey, who was horrible and great to behold, he was fiftéene foote of height, and road vppon a goodly ſplayed Mare, the moſt faireſt and greateſt that euer was ſéene, ſhee had a great horne in her fore-head, if ſhee were any thing chafed, none durſt approach néere vnto her but alonely her Kéeper, this Admirall was foule and great, hee rather ſéemed a Féend of Hell then any humane creature, and when he came vnto the Souldan, euerie man made him way: then hee ſayd vnto the Souldan. Sir, I haue great maruaile of thée that thou art ſo affraid for a ſmall number of men, who are comming towards their deaths. Sir, know for troth, that before you can order your men in battaile array, I ſhall diſcomfite your enemies, and deliuer vnto you the Admirall of Perſia either quicke or dead. When the Souldan had well heard and vnderſtood the Admirall of Dorbrey, hee ſayd: Sir Admirall, I put all the conduct of mine hoaſt into your hands, I haue great affiance in the vertue that is in you, and in the ſtrength of your armes, the

which are greatly to bée feared: then the Souldan commanded all his hoaſt to ſet vppon their enemies, and ſaid. Séeing the the Admirall of Dorbrey is with mee, I feare no man of Perſia nor of Media, and ſo ſpurred his horſe, without making of any good order.
            
            
               Chap. CXXVII.
               
                  ¶ Now ſpeake wee of the great Battaile that was in the playnes of Rames, betweene the Souldan of Babilon and the Admirall of Perſia, the which was diſcomfited by the Proweſſe of Huon of Bourdeaux.
                  
               
               
                  
                     WHen Huon who led the firſt Battaile of the Perſians, beheld and ſaw how the Sarazins came on without any good order or conduct, hee ſounded his Trumpets, exhorting his men to doe well and valiantly, and commaunded his Conſtables and Marſhals to march forward, and ſo did the Admirall and his company, and they ioyned néere one to another, to the entent each of them to ſuccour other. When Huon ſawe his enemies approach, and that it was time to ſet vpon them, he commaunded his Archers and Croſbowes to ſhoote, and ſo they did, that by reaſon of the ſhooting of both partes, it ſéemed like a cloud, that thereby and with the duſt together it darkened the light of the Sunne, and then Huon 
                  
                     •
                  ouched his Speare, and ranne at him that bare the Souldans Standard, who was comming before all the other, to cauſe his company to follow the faſter, Huon gaue him ſuch a ſtroake with his Speare, that he pierced him cleane through the bodie, ſo that hee fell from his horſe with the Standard, whereof the Sarazins were ſore abaſhed and diſpleaſed, then they approached and came to rayſe vp againe their banner, but Huon and the Perſians encountred them ſo fiercely, that many were ſlaine on both parts: he that had ſéen Huon howe he ſlew

and beat downe the Paynims and Sarazins, would haue ſaid that hee was no mortall man, but rather a man of the Fayrie, for the great proweſſe and maruailes that he did, for he cauſed the Paynims whether they would or not to retire backe, and to forſake the banner that lay vpon the earth, for before he departed from thence hee ſlewe fiue Kinges and twoo Admirals, Huon was ſo feared, that there was none ſo hardy that durſt approach néere to him, aad alſo his Coozen Barnard was greatly to be feared, and he euer followed Huon as néere as he could, then there ioyned the Battailes of the Marſhals, and the Admirall of Perſia ſet vppon the Souldans battaile, and the Battaile began ſo great and horrible, that a hundred yeares before were ſéen none ſuch, ſo valiantly did the Admirall of Perſia and ſuch as were in his companie.
               When the Souldan ſawe his menne ſo ſlaine, he was right ſorrowfull and ſore diſpleaſed, and ſayde vnto the Admirall of Dorbrey: I may well curſe the day and time that I beléeued you, for by you I haue loſt my banner, and I ſée my men ſlayn, for if I had ordered my battailes before, this miſchiefe had not hapned, nor that which is apparant to fall, and then the Souldan couched his Speare, and ſtrake therewith a Knight who was great Maiſter of the houſe of Perſia in ſuch wiſe, that the Souldan ranne him cleane through, and ſo he ſerued the ſecond, third, and fourth, and when his Speare was broken, he drew out his Sworde and did therewith great dammage, great crie and noyſe was made when the battailes ioyned, there might haue béene ſeen many horſes running abroad in the field, trayling their bridles after them, and their maiſters lyinge in the field amonge the horſe féete, and a horrible thinge it was to ſee and to heare the complaints and cries, that the wounded men made among the horſe féete, hauing no power to relieue themſelues, but there died and finiſhed their dayes miſerably, great crie made the Sarazins and Perſians that fought together, and eſpecially whereas Huon fought and ſearched the Rankes, and brake the great preaſſes, he beat downe and confounded al that came before him, ſo that none durſt abide before him, for by that time hee had ſlaine ſixe of the Kinges, and fiue Admirals

beſide many other, ſo that the noiſe and crie came to the hearing of the Admirall of Dorbrey, who did great diſtruction among the Perſians, ſo that it was an horrible thing to ſée and behold, and when hee heard how that there was a Knight that did great dammage and hurt among them, and had ſlaine diuers Kinges and Admirals, hee ſaid vnto a Paynim who had brought vnto him thoſe tidings and newes. Goe thy way and ſhewe him vnto me that hath done vs ſo great damage. Sir, (quoth the Paynim) I ſhall ſhew him vnto you, but I will approach to him no néerer then I am, now you may ſée him yonder how he fighteth, and maketh our men to retire backe from him, for there is none ſo hardy that dare approach néere vnto him.
               Then the Giant beheld Huon, and ſawe howe hee made the Paynims to retire backe, and then hee ſtrake his Mare with his ſpurres, and Huon who well perceiued and ſawe him comming, feared him: howbeit, he refuſed him not, but came with his Sword in his hand then againſt the Sarazin, and the Sarazin (who bare a great hatchet vppon his necke) ſawe Huon comming, and ſtrake at him, but as God would haue it he miſt him, for if the ſtroake had lighted vppon h
                     •
                  m he had béen ſlain, the ſtroake alighted vppon the crooper of his Horſe, ſo that the horſe fell downe dead and Huon vppon his backe, and hee was not ſo ſoone relieued, but that the Gyant tooke him by the armour, and caſt him before his Saddle as lightly as though it he had béen but a feather, and ſo hee held and caried Huon with the one hand and fought with the other hand. When Huon felt himſelfe ſo taken, he cryed and called vppon our Lord God, and prayed him to haue pitie and compaſſion of Eſcleremond his Wife, for hee ſawe well that his life was determined. The Gyant who was right ioyfull, in that hee had taken Huon who had done the Sarazins ſo much dammage, hee deſired to finde the Souldan to make him a preſent of Huon, ſo that with the haſt that he made hee ſtrake his Mare, and ſhee began to leape and gambauld, and beganne to runne, and as fortune was, ſhe ranne among the broken ſpeares and dead men that lay vppon the ground, ſo that ſhee ſtumbled, & thereby knéeled to the

earth, and the Gyant thought to gaue relieued her but he could not, by reaſon of the weight that lay vppon her ne
                     •
                  ke, and by the great ſwiftneſſe of her running, ſhe was faine to fall down to the earth.
               When Huon ſaw and well perceiued that, he was light and quicke, and aroſe vppon his feete, and when he ſawe the Giant fallen downe and beganne to relieue, he haſted him, and lifted vp his Sword with both his handes, and gaue the Gyant ſuch a ſtroake vpon the helmet, that he claue his head to the braines, ſo that therewith he fell downe dead to the earth, and then Huon ſeazed vppon the Mare by the raines of the bridle, and leapt vppon her and had great ioy, and ſo had the Perſians, and the Admirall had great ioy, for it had beene ſhewed him how the Gyant had taken Huon, and that he was eſcaped and had ſlaine the Gyant. When Huon felt himſelfe vpon the ſtrong Mare, hee daſhed in amonge the Paynims and Sarazins, and mette with the King of Olyfarne, whome hee gaue ſuch a ſtroake, that he claue his head aſunder: then he ranne at the Admirall of Orca
                        ••
                     y, who was Brother Germaine vnto the Souldan, he gaue him ſuch a ſtroake vppon the ſhoulder, that hee ſtrake off his arme, ſo that it fell downe to the earth, ſhéeld and all, and when the Admirall felt himſelfe hurt and wounded, hee would haue fled away, but Huon ſitting vppon the Mare, who was the ſwifteſt of pace in all the world, ranne after him, and when Huon had ouertaken the Sarazin, he gaue him ſuch a ſtroake vppon the head, that he claue it to his téeth, and ſo hee fell downe 
                     ••
                  ad to the earth, whereby the Paynims and Sarazins were 
                     •
                  o affrayde, that after that they durſt not aſſemble together. This was ſhewed vnto the Souldan, howe the Gyant was ſlaine and fiue other Kinges and Admirals, and his Brother alſo ſlaine, and all by the hands of one Knight, and alſo he ſaw his Battaile ſore broken, and how they beganne to flye: wherefore he ſawe well that if he taried there long, he ſhould be either ſlaine or taken, then the King of Antiphoney, who was néere pa
                     •
                  ent to the Souldan, came vnto him and ſayd. Sir, thinke how to ſaue thy life, for if thou tarieſt long heere, there is none can ſaue thée, for if the Knight that is with the Admirall of Perſia
                  
happen to come hether, thy life is loſt: therefore I counſaile thée to depart and ſaue thy ſelfe, or elſe thou art but dead. Then the Souldan and about Twentie men with him departed, and tooke the way by the Sea-ſide to goe towards Acres, the which as then appertained vnto the Sarazins, and Huon who was mounted vppon the puiſſant Mare, beating downe his enemies, ſo that none durſt abide his ſtroakes, and the Admirall of Perſia following him, regarding that by the hye proweſſe of Huon his enemies were confounded and diſcomfited, and ſaw well how that there was no humane bodie that had any power to reſiſt againſt him, and eſcaped without death: then hee ſayd vnto all his Lords and to Barnard. Sirs, (quoth the Admirall) yonder before you yee may ſée maruailes and thinges incredible to be declared, for you may ſée that there is none ſo puiſſant and ſtrong that can reſiſt againſt my Fréend Huon, I would to God that he were vnmaried, then hée ſhould neuer depart from mée, for I woulde then giue him my Daughter in mariage, I ſhall bee verie ſore diſpleaſed and diſcomforted when hee ſhall depart from me.
               Thus as yee haue heard the Admirall of Perſia and Media ſayd vnto his companie, and ſo ſlaying and beating downe the Paynims and Sarazins that fledde, the Admirall and Barnard followed Huon, but by reaſon of his good horſe hee was ſo farre before them, that they could not ouertake him, for hee deſired nothing ſo much as he did to ouertake the Souldan, who was flying as faſt as hée might towards the Citie of Acres. When the Admirall ſaw that he could not ouertake Huon, then he and Barnard entred in among the Sarazins who were flying away, the Admirall and Barnard ſlewe and beat them downe, that great pitie it was to ſée and behold them, for with the bloud of the dead Paynims and Sarazins their ſwoordes were taynted all red, if I ſhould ſhew all the hye Proweſſe and maruailous déedes that were done there that day, it would bée ouer-long to rehearſe, but I dare well ſay, that by the great proweſſe of Huon, the Battaile was vanquiſhed and cleane diſcomfited, the Perſians and Medians chaced the Paynims and Sarazins, and ſlewe and did beat them downe: the chace endured more

then foure Leagues, and the Admirall had great maruaile that he could not ouertake nor heare any thing of Huon, who chaced ſtill the Souldan and followed him ſo long, that Huon found the Souldan all alone, for his men could not follow him ſo faſt, becauſe their Horſes were ſo wearie that they coulde not goe no further, the Souldan road vppon a puiſſant and a goodly horſe, and Huon who followed him vppon the puiſſant Mare, anon ouertooke him, and when he came néere to the Souldan, he ſaid. Oh thou traiterous Souldan, great ſhame and reproach thou maiſt haue, when thou flyeſt away thus all alone without any company, turne thy ſhéeld againſt mée, or elſe I ſhall ſlay thée flying. When the Souldan had well heard Huon, hee hadde great maruaile and was greatly feared, for hée knew well that it was he by whome he had receiued ſo great loſſe and damage, and by whome many Kinges and Admirals had béene ſlaine, and thought to himſelfe, if hée returned not, that hee ſhould bee ſlaine, wherefore he tooke courage to himſelfe, ſeeing that Huon was alone aſwell as he, and alſo hee thought, that it ſhould not be long before he was ſuccoured with ſome of his men that followed him: and therefore like a hardy Knight he turned his horſe head towards Huon, who fiercely ranne one at another, and gaue each other great ſtroakes. But it had béene vnto the Souldan but ſmall profite if hee had not béene reſcued by his men, for if they had not come when they did, Huon had ſlaine him: but thether came about fortie Knightes Sarazins, and they all ranne at Huon, who was ſore diſmayed and abaſhed when he ſawe himſelfe ſo incloſed with his enemies: howbeit, hee might haue ſaued himſelfe well ynough if he had liſted to haue fledde away, but for any feare of them hee would not flye, and he dealt ſuch ſtroakes amonge them, that there was none ſo hardy that durſt approach néere vnto him, ſo ſore they feared him, for hee ſtrake none with a full ſtroake, but that his head was clouen to the braines or to the teeth, ſo that hee needed after no Surgeon.
               When they ſawe that they could not take nor ſlay him, they were right ſorrowfull and angrie: then the Souldan cryed and ſayd. Sirs, vppon him, great ſhame it is vnto you all, when

by the bodie of one man you are ſo put barke, and you ſée well that he hath no ſuccour, goe and ſlay the Mare that hee rydeth vppon with ſpeares and darts, then he ſhall be ſoone ouercome, and you know well that it is he whome I haue ſuffered at my great loſſe and dammage, it is he that hath ſlaine my men, and by him I haue loſt the Battaile, if he eſcape from you, yée ought neuer to be ſéene in any Princes Court. When the Paynims and Sarazins had well vnderſtood their Souldan, then they ſore oppreſſed Huon, who did great maruailes in armes, but his puiſſance & vertue ſhould but little haue auailed him, if he had not béen ſhortly aided & ſuccoured, and alſo by reaſon of the rich ſtones and pearles that were vppon him: then the Paynims and Sarazins who of fortie were left aliue but twentie eight, they ſaw well that they could not ouercome Huon, without they ſlew the Mare firſt that hee road vppon: therefore they caſt at her Darts and Iauelins in ſuch wiſe, that finally they ſlew her vnder him, whereof Huon was right ſorrowfull and ſore diſpleaſed, and was as then in great feare of his life, then he called vppon our Lord Ieſus Chriſt to haue pitie and compaſſion of his ſoule, for he ſaw that his life was at an end, and ſaid. Deare Lord Ieſus Chriſt, I pray thee by thy ſwéet mercie to haue pitie and compaſſion of my Wife Eſcleremond, who is in great perrill and pouertie for the loue of mee, without any deſert of her part, and alſo I recommend into thy ſauegard my litle Daughter Clariet. After that Huon had made his praier vnto our Lord God, he tooke his ſhéeld and his ſword in his hand afoote, and he ſaw where there grew a buſh, he went thether and ſet his backe thereunto, that the Sarazins and Paynims ſhould not come behind him, and ſo he ſtood at a bay like a wild Boare baited with Houndes, there was not ſo hardy a Paynim or Sarazin that durſt aſſayle him, they caſt at him ſpeares and darts, but they could neuer hurt his fleſh, he couered himſelfe ſo well and ſo ſurely with his ſheeld, that nothing could pierce him.
               The Souldan ſéeing that nothing could hurt him, he ſaid to his men: Ah yée falſe and vntrue Cowards, of Mahomet be yée curſed, when yée cannot ſlay nor take one man alone, and then

the Souldan approached vnto Huon, and gaue him a great ſtroake, ſo that he brake his ſheeld in two peeces, whereof Huon then was in great feare of death. Then the Souldan drew backe, and looked behind him into the playnes of Rames, wheras the great Battaile had beene: and then hee ſawe comming the Admirall of Perſia with twentie Thouſand men, and they came to ſeeke for Huon, and when the Souldan ſawe that ſuccour was comming vnto Huon, the which he knew by reaſon of the great baner of Perſia: then the Souldan ſaid vnto his men. Sirs, let vs leaue this enemie, who by force of armes cannot be ouercome nor vanquiſhed, let vs ſaue our liues, for yonder I ſée comming the Admirall of Perſia, and if we tarie long héere we ſhalbe all ſlaine and deſtroyed. Néere vnto them was the ſea-ſide, about a League from Iaffe the way towardes Surrey, there was ready a Galley, the which the Souldan had ſent thether from the Citie of Eſcalonne, the Souldan road thether, and his men left and did forſake Huon, who was right wearie and could not long haue endured, nor had not endured ſo longe but for the vertue of the riche ſtones and pearles that were about him. The Souldan to ſaue his life, hee and his men did ſo much, that they came vnto the place whereas the Galley was, and entred into it in as great haſt as they could by any meanes for the ſauegard of their liues, and they did forſake their horſes vppon the Sea-ſide.
            
            
               Chap. CXXVIII.
               
                  ¶ How the Admirall of Perſia and of Media found Huon, wheras he had fought with Fortie men Sarazins, and how the Souldan fled to Acres, and how the Admirall of Perſia and Media beſieged him there, and of the ſtrange Ʋiſion that Huon had in the night.
               
               
                  
                  
                     AFter that the Souldan was thus fled and departed, the Admirall of Perſia and Media came to the place whereas Huon was ſore wearie of trauaile, and ſawe lying about him a great number of men ſlaine, whereof they had great maruaile, the Admirall ſéeing Huon alone, began ſore to wéepe for pitie and for ioy that hee hadde, and ſaide. Oh right noble and valiant Knight, moſt excellent of all other liuing in the world, to whom in Proweſſe and valour none can bee compared, you are the mirrour of all Knightes, the Temple of truth, the comfort of widdowes and Orphelings, to whom God hath giuen ſo great vertue and grace, that none can report the bountie that is in you, by whome the honour of the Perſians and Medians this daye is ſaued and kept, I deſire you right hartely my deare Freend, to ſhew mée if you haue any hurt, whereby you ſhould bee in any perill or daunger. Sir, (quoth Huon) it appertaineth not vnto me to haue ſuch hie words or prayſes to be giuen, I ought to haue none other praiſe but as one of your other Knightes, whereof you haue ſo many noble and valiant that they cannot be numbred: but Sir, know for troth, this grace and glorie commeth of our Lord God, who hath aided and ſuccored you, reporting how that you haue in him perfect affiance, and then the Admirall alighted, and came and embraced Huon, and after him came Barnard, ſore wéeping for compaſſion and for ioy that he had found his Coozen Huon in ſauegard, and came and kiſſed him more then ten times and ſayd. My right deare Lord and Maiſter, well you may thanke our Lord God for his goodneſſe alwayes towardes you, who hath ſaued you from ſo many perilous and dangerous aduentures, whereof I thanke our Lord Ieſus Chriſt that hath giuen you ſuch grace, and then he was of all the Barons greatly feaſted, and they had al great maruaile of the perils and aduentures that Huon had eſcaped: wherefore they ſayde, that they ought greatly to laud & praiſe God, in that Huon was arriued in their Countrey, by

whome they were reduced and brought to beléeue in the faith of Ieſus Chriſt.
               Thus deuiſed the Lordes and Barons amonge themſelues, and behelde the dead men that lay about Huon, and when they had beene there for a ſeaſon, and ſawe that the Souldan was fledde, then a Horſe was brought vnto Huon and hee mounted vppon him, and then they departed from thence, and came vnto the place whereas the Battaile hadde béene, whereas they found thrée-ſcore and fourtéene Thouſand men lye dead vppon the earth, beſide them that were ſlaine in the flying in that chace, whereas there were ſlaine twelue Thouſand men, beſides the Priſoners: Great goods the Perſians and Medians wanne there, the which was parted and deuided to ſuch as it appertained, ſo that they were all made rich. Then the Admirall and Huon departed from the playnes of Rames, and then they went and lodged in the Towne, and in the morning they determined to tarie there three dayes to refreſh them, and vppon the fourth day they departed, becauſe it was ſhewed them how that the Souldan was departed from Sayre, and gone by ſea with a ſmall companie to the Citie of Acres. Then the Admirall and Huon drewe their Hoaſt towards Napelous, and there taried two dayes, and from thence they went to Iene, and ſo to the Citie of Nazareth, and viſited that holy place, whereas the Angell brought the ſalutation Angel-like to the Virgin Marie. Then from thence they went to the Caſtle of Saffet, and tooke it with aſſault, and ſlew all them that were within it, except ſuch as would beléeue in our Lord Ieſus Chriſt: and then from thence they went and lodged within halfe a League of Acres, and there pitcht vp their Tents and Pauillions, and when they were all lodged, their Foragers ranne abroad, and brought to the Hoaſt great plentie of victuals, often times they ſkirmiſhed before the Citie of Acres. But they coulde neither finde man nor woman that durſt yſſue out to doe any deede of armes, there they lay eight dayes, and no man did them any dammage, for the Paynims and Sarazins were ſo affraid for the great loſſe and dammage that they had ſuffered, that they durſt not ſtirre nor make any ſemblance. And the Souldan

who was within, wrote Letters into all his Countreys, as well into Arabia, Egipt, Barbary and Europe, as to all other his Fréends, that they would come and ſuccour him at his neede, he ſent diuers Meſſengers both by land and by ſea, and alſo hée ſent into Antioch and into Damas, and to all other places wheras he thought to haue any ayd or ſuccour: and vpon a day two Foragers of the Admirals went foorth vppon the Sea-ſide, and they found by the way Trampoiguiffle the Souldans Meſſenger, they tooke and brought him into the Admirals Tent, and there hee was examined, and his Letters taken from him, the which were ſeene and read before the Admirall and Huon, the which when they heard it and the contents therof, thereby they knewe ſomewhat of the Souldans counſaile, then they tooke the Meſſenger, and brought him before the Citie of Acres, and made there a paire of Gallowes, and hanged vp the Meſſenger within the ſight of the Souldan, and of them there within the Citie.
               The ſame day the Admirall aſſembled his Lordes and Barons in his Tent, and ſaid vnto them. Sirs, all you that bee heere aſſembled, know, that I haue great deſire to know what thing is beſt to be done, and how we ſhall vſe our ſelues in this warre that we haue begunne, you know well that the Victorie by the grace of our Lord Ieſus Chriſt, and by the hye proweſſe of Huon wee haue now obtained, and haue heere our enemie incloſed, who cannot flye except it be by the ſea: therefore I deſire you all, that euerie one of you will ſhew your aduiſe what is beſt to be done, and that to morrowe about this time to giue me an anſweare. Then all the Lordes and Barons aduiſed together, and ſo amonge them was diuers opinions and reaſons, howbeit, they departed euerie man to their owne lodging, becauſe they had day of anſweare, and the next day following: thus the day paſſed without any thinge done, and at night euerie man went to reſt, except ſuch as had the charge of the watch that night, who went not to bed as is the order and cuſtome of the warres. Huon taried all that night in the Admirals Tent, and about the houre of midnight Huon dreamed in his ſleepe, and thought that he was at the Citie of Mayence in priſon, and

ſawe the Emperour of Almaine take Eſcleremond his Wife out of priſon, and ſhe ſéemed vnto him pale and leane and ill coloured, and howe ſhee was in her Kirtle, and her haire hanging about her ſhoulders, and ten men leading her out of the Town to be burnt, and he thought that ſhe made pitious complaints for Huon her Huſband, and for Clariet her Daughter. And alſo hee thought that he ſaw paſſe through the ſtreets three Hundred Genlemen, who had beene taken at Bourdeaux when the Citie was taken, and he thought that he ſaw diuers Gallowes made, and howe the Emperour had ſworne to hang them all, ſo that hee thought that hee was right ſorrowful and ſore gréeued in his mind, to ſee that companie led toward their deaths, for in his ſleepe hee thought verily that all this had beene true and that he could not helpe it.
               Thus as Huon was in this paine ſleeping, he gaue an horrible crie, ſo that the Admirall and Barnard awoake therewith in haſt, thinkinge it had beene their enemies that had entred to haue ſlaine them: then they heard Huon ſay. Oh good Lord, I pray thée euen for thy Sons ſake and by thy pittie and grace to ſuccour and comfort my good Wife, for certainly I cannot tell but my heart thinketh, that the falſe Emperour will cauſe her to die and all the other Priſoners. Then the Admirall and Barnard aroſe vp and came vnto Huon, and had well heard his complaints, and ſayd. Ah Sir, diſcomfort not your ſelfe, nor giue no faith nor credence to dreames, for the Emperour will neuer doe ſuch a villany, as to put to death ſo noble a Ladie, it is nothinge but your thought and remembraunce that you haue dayly, the which in the night repreſenteth vnto you ſléeping. Ah Sir, (quoth Huon) I cannot beleeue but that my Wife hath ſomewhat to do. Alas too long haue I taried here, but if your warres were at an end I would gladly go my way, for I ſhall neuer haue ioy at my heart vntill I may knowe the troth. Then they aroſe for it was day, and the appointed houre was come that al ye Lords of the counſaile ſhould aſſemble together in the Admirals Tent, and euerie man ſat downe vppon benches well couered with cloath of gold, and other rich clothes of ſilke, and when they were there aſſembled, the Marſhall aroſe

vp, for he was a right ſage & wiſe man, and ſayd. Sir Admirall, wee haue communed together, and debated the matter at length, and wee haue had diuers opinions, but wee bee all concluded to ſay nothing, vntill that Huon who is there by you hath ſhewed firſt his opinion, what hee thinketh is beſt to bee done in this matter, for it is good reaſon that hee bee heard to ſpeake firſt, and then the Admirall beheld Huon, and ſayd. My deare Freend, you heare what my Lordes and Barons haue concluded together, and how they all reſt vppon you, that firſt you ſhall ſay your aduiſe: wherefore I require you for the loue of our Lord God, to ſhewe mee what I ought to doe as you thinke beſt.
            
            
               Chap. CXXIX.
               
                  ¶ How Huon of Bourdeaux counſailed the Admirall of Perſia, to rayſe vp his ſiege before Acres for diuers reaſons, and to returne into Perſia.
                  
               
               
                  
                     WHen Huon hadde well vnderſtood the Admirall, and that he had well heard the Lordes and Barons, that their opinions was that they would not ſpeake vntill hee had firſt ſhewed his aduiſe and opinion: then hee ſaid vnto the Admirall. Sir, if it be your pleaſure, I ought not to beginne firſt this reaſon, for you haue many Lordes that can ſpeake better in this matter then I, but ſéeing that it is your pleaſure and theirs, I ſhall ſhewe vnto you ſhortly mine aduiſe, and as I would doe if I were as you are. Then Duke Huon of Bourdeaux ſayd: Sir Admirall of Perſia and of Media, it is a long ſeaſon ſince you departed from your Countrey, Landes and Signiories, and not without great trauaile and much paine, and that God hath done you that grace, that with one Armie all you haue paſſed and taken Caſtles, and haue ſlaine and deſtroyed the Countreys, and men of the

Souldans of Babilon and of Egipt, and haue béen at the holy Citie of Ieruſalem, the which is in the middeſt of his Countrey, & after that the Souldan hath fought with you with people innumerable, whom you haue diſcomfited and ſlaine almoſt all they that were with him. And alſo God hath giuen you the grace, that you are ſafely eſcaped with little loſſe or dammage, and now you haue in this Citie before vs beſieged and incloſed in, the Souldan your enemie, who night and day doth imagine howe hee may recouer his loſſe, as you may well knowe by his Letters ſent by his Meſſengers, the which you haue ſéene and red the contents of the ſame. And Sir, you may well thinke, that hee hath ſent diuers other Meſſengers aſwell by Land as by Sea to his Fréendes, to ſeeke for ſuccour and for ayd, in the intention to bee reuenged of you: wherefore I counſaile you, ſéeing you are ſo farre off from your Countrey, as ſhortly as you can to depart from hence, and to rayſe your ſiege and to returne into your owne Countrey, your men be wearie and ſore trauailed, and the Souldan is in his owne Countrey, hée will alwayes aſſemble great numbers of people, and alwayes hee may haue ſuccour and victuals, the which you cannot doe nor haue, for héere without great paine you ſhall haue no victuall, for the Country is ſore fowled and oppreſſed, and you can haue no ſuccour from any part, wherefore of neceſſitie you muſt depart, the which you may doe without any loſſe. For you may paſſe the Riuer of Euphrates, before his people bee aſſembled to doe you any dammage, and when the ſpring time of the yeare commeth, if it bee your pleaſure, you may returne with ſuch number of men as you ſhall thinke beſt, for you are of puiſſance ſo to doe. Sir, this that I ſay, is for nothing that I would forſake or leaue you as long as you be in theſe parts, I had rather die, although it be ſo as you well knowe, that the thing that I ought moſt to deſire, is to depart from you and to goe into my owne Countrey, whereas I haue left my Wife, my Daughter and my Countrey in great pouertie and daunger of death and deſtruction.
            
            
               
               Chap. CXXX.
               
                  ¶ Howe the Admirall of Perſia agreed well to the counſaile of Duke Huon of Bourdeaux, and praiſed his ſaying: and of the faire offer that the Admirall of Perſia made vnto Duke Huon of Bourdeaux.
                  
               
               
                  
                     WHen the Admirall had well hearde and vnderſtoode Huon, hee behelde his Lordes, and all wéeping ſaide. Sirs, all you that be my men, you haue all well heard Duke Huon, who hath ſhewed his aduice and opinion: and therefore I commaund and deſire you all to ſhewe mee what you thinke by the ſaying of Huon: then they all with one voice ſayd. Sir, a more noble or profitabler counſaile no mortall man can giue, for your wealth and ſuerty of your perſon and of vs all, there was neuer man ſpake better, and therefore all we pray and counſaile you to vphold the counſaile that hee hath giuen you. Then the Admirall ſéeing that all his Lordes and Barons agréed to the counſaile that Huon had giuen him, hee ſayd: Sirs, as for mée ſince yo
                     •
                   
                  
                     •
                  re agréed thereunto, I am readie to beléeue all good counſaile, there was neuer a higher counſaile giuen vnto any Kinge or Prince, and when the Admirall had ſaide, howe that hee would beleeue the counſaile that Huon had giuen him, hee called then Huon vnto him, and ſayd. Sir Duke of Bourdeaux, the pillar, ſhéeld, and ſword of the Chriſtian faith, and the Defendour of the Perſians and Medians, I knowe well that by right I ought not to kéepe you, for it is good reaſon that you returne thether where as you were borne, and to ayde and comfort your true Spouſe and Wife, for whome you be in great diſcomfort and not without cauſe, and therefore for the goodneſſe and honour that wée haue found in you, wée offer to goe with you in our owne proper perſons, with all our Armie and more, to the number ineſtimable,

and to aide to reuenge you of the falſe Emperour of Almaine, who hath doone to you ſo much ill and dammage, or elſe if you will returne vnto vs into Perſia at this next ſpringe time, we ſhall deliuer vnto you ſuch puiſſance, and my ſelfe to goe with them into Almaine, ſo that the Valleys and Mountaines ſhall bee full of people, and wee ſhall doe ſo much by the grace of our Lord God, that wée ſhall deliuer the Emperour into your hands, to doe with him at your pleaſure. When Huon had well heard and vnderſtood the Admirall of Perſia and of Media, who offered him ſo great an offer, hée ſayd. Sir, of the courteſ
                     •
                  e and kindneſſe that you offer mee, I thanke you with all my heart, God forbid that I ſhould be the cauſer of deſtruction of Chriſtian bloude, firſt I will aſſay with all ſwéetneſſe and reaſonable offers, as much as in mee is poſſible to doe, to preſent and offer vnto the Emperour, to the entent that I may attaine to his loue and to haue peace, the which thinge I will and deſire to doe with all my heart. And if it be ſo, that he will not encline neither to right nor reaſon, then Huon will come to you, and vnto all other that I thinke or knowe to bee my Fréends, and then deſire you all of your courteſies for ayd and ſuccour.
            
            
               Chap. CXXXI.
               
                  ¶ How Duke Huon of Bourdeaux tooke his leaue of the Admirall and of all the other Lordes of Perſia, and went and tooke ſhipping at the Port of Theſayre, and how he arriued at Marſellis, without finding of any ſtrange aduenture.
               
               
                  
                     WHen the Admirall had well vnderſtood Huon, he ſayd. My right deare and wel-beloued Fréend, I giue you good thankes of that you ſay, you may bee ſure that if you haue any neede, and that you can make no appointment with the Emperour,

the offers that I haue made vnto you I ſhall vphold, and ſuccour you in mine own
                     •
                   perſon. Sir, (quoth Huon) I moſt hartely thanke you, for I am much bound vnto you: wherefore I am yours. Then the Admirall tooke Huon by the hande, and ſayd. Sir, I ſee well that wee two muſt part, the which gréeneth mée ſore, but ſince it is thus I muſt ſuffer it, and I knowe well that you thinke longe vntill you bee gone, the ſeruice that you haue done vnto mee I cannot recompence it, for our tw
                     ••
                   wayes are contrarie, yours is by water, and mine is by land. And therefore at the Port of Theſayre there is a riche Shippe, the which was wonne vppon the Souldans men, I giue her to you, enter into her at your pleaſure, and therewith I giue you tenne Somers charged with gould, and Tenne other charged with cloathes of gold and ſilke, and you may take with you all the French men that be in this hoaſt, ſuch as followed vs when we departed from Ieruſalem, lette them goe with you into their Countrey, and after that you are departed, I ſhall rayſe my ſiege and returne into Perſia. Sir, (quoth Huon) of your guift and of your courteſie I thanke you. Then the Admirall ſent theſe Somers to the Port of Theſayre, and there all the riches were put into the Shippe that were giuen vnto Huon, and then hee deliuered to Huon to ſerue him, all the Pilgrims that were there of Fraunce, & the Admirall gaue them rich guifts, whereof they were right ioyfull, and of the faire aduenture that was fallen vnto them, for they had more monney at their departing, then they hadde when the came out of their owne Countrey, whereof they thanked the Admirall, and promiſed to doe true ſeruice vnto Huon, and not to leaue him vntill he had atchieued all his buſineſſe.
               Then Huon made him readie, and tooke with him t
                     ••
                   great Griffens foote, and the Admirall and his Conſtables and Marſhals and the other Lordes of the Hoaſt leapt vppon their Horſes, and conuayed Huon and his companie to the Port of Theſayre, whereas his ſhippe was readie fourniſhed, with victuall and other things appertaining thereto: then Huon all wéeping tooke his leaue of the Admirall and of the other Lords and Barons, for whoſe departing they were right ſorrowfull, and ſo

returned to their Hoaſt before Acres, deuiſing of the great valour, proweſſe, and courteſ
                     •
                  e that was in Huon. Then the Admirall commaunded priuily the next morning to diſlodge and depart, the which was done.
               Thus the Admirall departed from the Citie of Acres, and tooke his way towards Perſia, and he found vppon the Citie of Euphrates all his ſhippes, and ſo with them hee ſayled into his owne Countrey. And Huon and Barnard his Coozen, and diuers other Knightes and Squiers of Fraunce, and when they were in their ſhippe, they weighed vp their anchors and made ſayle. Then they paſſed the Gulfe of Sathale, and then paſſed by the Rhodes, and by Sardaine, and ſo long they ſayled without danger or lette, that they came and arriued at the Port of Marſell
                        •
                     s, and there they went a ſhoare with great ioy, and diſcharged the ſhippe, and then Huon gaue the ſhippe to the Patron that had brought them thether, whereby the Patron was riche and thanked Huon. When they were all a land, they conuayed all their baggage into their Lodging in the Towne, whereas they reſted about eight dayes. Nowe let vs leaue to ſpeake of Huon and of them that were with him, and let vs ſpeake of the Abbot of Cluny.
               
            
            
               Chap. CXXXII.
               
                  ¶ How the good Abbot of Cluny layd an ambuſhment of men of armes, betweene Maſcon and Tournous, againſt the Emperour of Almaines Nephewe, who was there ſlaine and all his men, whereof the Emperour was ſo ſore vexed and troubled, that hee tooke the Ducheſſe Eſcleremond out of priſon to haue burnt her, and the three Hundred Priſoners of Bourdeaux, to haue hanged them all.
               
               
                  
                  
                     YEE haue well heard in this Hiſtorie, how Barnard departed from the Abbey of Cluny, to go and ſearch for his Nephew Huon, and the Abbot ſeeinge that hee coulde heare no newes of Huon, nor of Barnard his Coozen who was gone to ſéeke for him, he was right ſorrowfull and ſore diſpleaſed, that he could haue none other knowledge, but the thing that cauſed him to paſſe the matter the more eaſier, was becauſe of Clariet Huons
                   Daughter, whome he kept, and ſhee was all his comfort, ſhe was ſo faire and ſo ſwéet, that none were like her in beauty and in good vertues, and againe when hee remembred the Ducheſſe her mother Eſcleremond, whome he knew was in great pouertie and miſerie, he was therewith ſo ſore diſpleaſed, that all his members trembled. So vppon a day it was reported vnto him by a notable man, that as he came from Saint Iames and by Bourdeaux, how that a Nephew of the Emperours ſhould goe from Bourdeaux to the Citie of Mayence, to his Vncle Tirrey the Emperour of Almaine, and howe hee ſhould haue with him a great number of the Burgeſſes of the Citie of Bourdeaux as Priſoners, becauſe vppon a day they ſpake of Huon their naturall Lord, and alſo how that he ſhould carie with him, the Tribute and monney of the Rents and Reuenewes of the Countrey of Burdeloys, and ſuch monney as euerie man was bound to paye vnto the Emperour.
               When the good Abbot of Cluny was aduertiſed of the comming of the Emperours Nephew, whome he reputed as his enemie, hee aſſembled a great number of noble men, the moſt part appertaining vnto the Duke of Burgoyne, who as then was Father to Gerard of Rouſſellon, being at that time but three yeares of age, and when the Abbot had aſſembled a great number of men, he choſe the Lord of Vergier to be Captaine and leader of that companie, and then he ſent out his Spies to knowe certainely which way the Emperours Nephewe ſhould come, and at the laſt hee had certaine knowledge that hee was lodged

at Maſcon, and the next day he ſhould depart to Tournous, and then the Lord of 
                     Ʋergier and diuers other, by the commaundement of the Abbot of Cluny, went and layde their ambuſhment betwéene Maſcon and Tournous in a Valley, ſo that by their Spies who laye vppon a Mountaine, they ſawe the Almaines comming about the number of two Thouſand horſes, and the Lord of 
                     Ʋergier hadde in his companie aboue three Thouſand horſes, defencibly apparelled, and they were right ioyfull when they heard by their Spies that their enemies were comming: then they apparelled themſelues to abide their enemies, who were come ſo forwarde, that they were paſt their firſt ambuſhment, and were entred into the Valley. When they of the firſt ambuſhment and they of the ſecond ambuſhment ſawe their time, they yſſued out, and brake vpon their enemies, and made a great crie, ſo that within a ſhort ſpace their enemies and the moſt part of them were ſlaine, not one that eſcaped, but either he was ſlaine or taken, they could not ſaue themſelues, becauſe vppon the one ſide was the Mountaine and vpon the other ſide the Riuer of Some, and before and behinde their enemies were they themſelues. The ſame time the Emperours Nephewe was ſlaine, who was a goodly Knight, and the Emperour had before ſent him to Bourdeaux, to gouerne the Land and Countrey of Burdeloys, and he had ben there the ſpace of foure yéeres, of whoſe death the Lord of Vergier was ſorrie, for he had rather that he had béen taken Priſoner, then they tooke his bodie and buried him in the chiefe Church of Tournous, whereas they lay all night with their Priſoners, who were to the number of eight Hundred, they of Bourdeaux that were taken as Priſoners were right ioyfull, when they were thus eſcaped from the handes of the Almaines.
               After this diſcomfiture they returned to the Abbey of Cluny, whereas they were receiued with great ioy of the Abbot and of the Couent, then the Lord of 
                     Ʋergier ſhewed the whole diſcourſe of their diſcomfiture, and then the booties were deuided amongeſt them that had wonne, and all the men of warre departed except a Thowſand men, whome the Abbot retayned for the ſauegard of the towne of Cluny, who made many ſkirmiſhes

with the Emperours menne. And after this diſcomfiture, the newes thereof was preſently brought to the Citie of Mayence to the Emperour Tirrey, who was right ſorrowfull for the death of his Nephew who was his ſiſters ſonne, by reaſon of the ſorrow and great diſpleaſure that he had, for hee was thrée dayes after before he would come foorth of his chamber, and on the fourth day he ſent for all his Lords and Councell, and to them he made his complaints, how by the occaſion of Duke Huon of Bourdeaux, he had loſt foure of his Nephews and his Baſtard ſonne, and ſaid. I ought greatly to be gréeued, when I cannot bée reuenged of Huon, I thinke hee ſhall neuer returne againe, but ſéeing it is ſo that I can take no vengeance of him, I ſhall take it vppon his Wife Eſcleremond, and vppon the thrée Hundred Priſoners that I brought out of Burdeaux, but by the ſame Lord that made and fourmed mee to his ſemblance, I ſhall neuer haue ioy at my heart nor eate nor drinke, vntill I haue ſeene Eſcleremond burnt in a fire, and the thrée Hundred priſoners hanged and ſtrangled, and I wil that each of you knowe, that he that ſpeaketh to me firſt to the contrarie, I ſhall hate him euer after. When the Lords had well heard the Emperour make that promiſe, there was none ſo hardy that durſt ſpeake one woord: then the Emperour commaunded in haſt great plentie of thornes to be caried out of the Citie, vnto a little Mountaine there beſide, and there by to be reared vp certaine Gallowes, to hange thereon the thrée Hundred Priſoners.
               All this was done as hee commaunded, for more then tenne Load of thornes were caried out to burne the noble Ladie Eſcleremond, and ſhe was ſent for out of the priſon by foure hangmen, and the Priſoners with her were brought into the Citie, and all to bée beaten by the way. When the noble Ladie ſaw how ſhee was dealt withall, ſhee pitiouſly complained for her good Huſband Huon, and for her Daughter Clariet, and ſaide. Ah my right ſwéet Lord and Huſband Huon, at this time ſhall bee the departure of vs two, and then ſhee called vppon our Lord Ieſus Chriſt, praying him by his grace and pity to bring her ſoule into Paradice: thus crying and complayning, the noble

Ladie was ledde through the Towne, and then Ladies and Burgeſſes and Maidens of the Citie ranne to their windowes and dores, and beheld the dolourous and pitifull companie leading towardes their deaths: then they ſayd a high. Ah right noble Ladie, where is become the great beautie that you were woont to bee of? for now your Viſage is pale and diſcoloured that was woont to be ſo faire, and nowe ſo loathed and diſfigured, where is become your faire haires that nowe bee ſo blacke and rugged, for the great pouertie that you haue endured? Alas noble Ladie, great pitie and compaſſion we haue to ſée you in this eſtate if we could amend it: thus as this Ladie was led through the Towne, ſhe was bemoned of them that ſawe her, the three Hundred Gentlemen were alſo led forth, and the Emperour Tirrey and his Lords road after them, for his deſire was to ſee the noble Ladie burnt, and the other Priſoners hanged: hee made haſt, becauſe of the ſorrow that hee had for the death of his Nephewe and of his men, who were newly ſlaine by the meanes of the Abbot of Cluny.
               
               When they were yſſued out of the Citie of Mayence, Duke Hildebert a néere kinſman of the Emperours, was comming into the Citie the ſame time that the Ladie was ledde foorth, and hée ſawe how rudely they dealt with the Ladie: and when he ſawe her, he knew well that it was the faire Ladie Eſcleremond, but when hee ſawe her at that point, the water was in his eyes, and he ſayd vnto them that ledde her. Sirs, go not too faſt, vntill I haue ſpoken with the Emperour, the which they did gladly. When the noble Ladie Eſcleremond had well heard and vnderſtood the Duke, ſhee had ſome little hope, ſhee turned her eyes towards him, & ſayd. Ah right noble Prince, haue pittie and compaſſion of mee, for I haue done nothinge whereby I ſhould deſerue to die. When the Duke had well vnderſtood her, he had ſuch pitie that he could ſpeake no word, his heart was ſo full of ſorrowe, and then he road as faſt as he might to méet with the Emperour, and paſſed by the thrée hundred priſoners, and had great pity and compaſſion of them, and ſo he came vnto the Emperour all wéeping, and ſaid. Ah right noble Emperour, I require you in the honour of the paſſion

of our Lord Ieſus Chriſt, haue pitie and compaſſion of this dolourous companie, that are likely to die this day, remember that it is nowe in the holy time of Lent, wherefore I require you to reſpite their liues vntill it be paſt Eaſter, and Sir, humbly I require you, for all the ſeruice that I and mine haue done vnto you, graunt me but this requeſt for my reward, the which is both reaſonable and iuſt, great wronge you doe to reuenge your anger vppon this noble Ladie, you haue chaced her out of her Countrey, Landes and Signiories, the which you hold in your handes, and take the Reuenewes and profits thereof▪ if you bee not ſufficed with this, I doubt that our Lord Ieſus Chriſt will be ſore diſpleaſed with you. When the Emperour had well heard the Duke his Cozen, hee ſtoode ſtill and ſpake haſtely, and ſayd. Faire Coozen, I haue well heard you, and therefore I anſweare you in briefe wordes, how that if all the men that bee in mine Empire, and all the Prieſtes and Friers were here, and did preach vnto me a whole yeare, deſiring me to reſpite this Ladies death and the other that be with her: I would doe nothing for all them, and therefore ſpeake no more to me in that matter, for by the beard that hangeth vnder my chinne, ſince I cannot haue Huon her huſband at my will, I ſhall neuer eat nor drinke vntill I haue ſéene her burnt and the other perſons hanged. For when I remember the death of my Nephewes and of my deare Sonne, the which haue béen ſlaine by Huon, there is no member in my bodie, but that trembleth for ſorrow and diſpleaſure.
               When the good Duke Hildebert vnderſtood the Emperour, hee had great ſorrowe at his heart, and departed without any word ſpeaking and without any leaue taking, but returned from thence, and hee became full of yre and diſpleaſure, then the Emperour Tirrey cryed with a hye voyce and ſayde, howe that he would ſhortly diſpatch the matter, to ſée ye Lady burnt, and ledde to the hill whereas the fire was readie. When the Ladie perceiued the place whereas ſhee ſhould die in, ſhee caſt out a great crie, and made a pitifull complaint to our Lord Ieſus Chriſt, and ſayd. Ah right ſweet Lord Ieſus Chriſt, thou knoweſt that for the loue of thée I am chriſtened, to beléeue in

thy Lawes wherein I will liue and die, and I ſée well that my dayes are but ſhort, and thou knoweſt well that there is no cauſe wherein I haue deſerued death: therefore I require thee humbly to haue pitie and compaſſion of my Soule, and that thou wilt vouchſafe to kéepe and preſerue my Huſband Huon, and my Daughter Clariet. Thus as yee haue heard the noble Ducheſſe Eſcleremond made her complaints, her handes bound and kneeling vppon her knées before the ſtake, abiding for the houre of her death. Nowe let vs leaue to ſpeake of this noble Ladie, vntill we haue occaſion to returne againe: and ſpeake of the noble King Oberon and of his companie.
            
            
               Chap. CXXXIII.
               
                  ¶How King Oberon ſent twoo of his Knights of the Fayrie, that is to ſaye Mallabron and Gloriand, to deliuer the Ducheſſe Eſcleremond, who ſhould haue been burnt, and the three Hundred Priſoners that ſhould haue been hanged, who were all deliuered by the ſayd Knights.
               
               
                  
                     NOwe ſheweth the Hiſtorie, that the ſame day that the Ducheſſe the faire Ladie Eſcleremond ſhoulde haue béene burnt, Kinge Oberon of the Fayrie was in his Pallaice of Momur, whereas he had holden a great Court and a ſumptuous, for his Mother the Ladie of the priuie Iſle was there, and alſo the noble Quéene Morgue
                        ••
                      ſay, and the Damſell Tranſeline her Néece, with diuers other Ladies of the Fayrie, and diuers Knighte
                     •
                   of the ſame making great ioye. King Oberon was ſitting 
                     〈…〉
                   throne, garniſhed and bordered with fine gould and precious ſtones, and as hee ſat, hee fell in a great ſtudie, and therewith the droppes of water fell out of his eyes, and he began to wéepe and complaine ſo ſore, as though he ſhould haue been drowned with droppes of water: and when theſe Quéenes, Ladies, and

Damſels ſawe him make ſuch ſorrow, they had great maruell, and there was Gloriand the good Knighte of the Frayrie, and Mallabron, who were right priuie and wel-beloued with King Oberon, and when they ſaw the Kinge make ſuch ſorrow, they were ſore diſmayed and abaſhed, and Sir Gloriand ſaide. Sir, what man is liuinge in this world, that hath diſpleaſed you or done any thing againſt you? Gloriand, (quoth the Kinge) the diſpleaſure that I haue is for the faire Ladie Eſcleremond, wife vnto Duke Huon of Bourdeaux my verie good Fréend, ſhe is as now led out of the Citie of Mayence, and brought vnto a great fire, wherein the Emperour Tirrey will burne her, and other three Hundred poore Priſoners to bee hanged, and I may not ayd nor ſuccour them, and I am right ſorrie thereof for the loue of Huon, who is as now paſſed the Sea, and is in the way returning home-ward, and hee hath had ſuch aduentures, that there is no humane bodie could ſuffer, nor beare the paines and trauailes that hee hath endured, nor the maruailous aduentures that hee hath borne, and he hath had ſo many Battailes, that it were great maruaile and woonderfull to heare them rehearſed. And now whereas hee thought to haue had reſt, and to haue found his Wife the faire Ladie Eſcleremond aliue, who ſhall now be burnt except ſhee bee ſhortly aided and ſuccoured, I am ſure that hee will die for the ſorrowe and griefe that hee will haue at his heart.
               When Gloriand and Mallabron had well hearde and vnderſtood Kinge Oberon, they kneeled downe before the King, and ſayde. Sir, wee deſire you to ſuccour this noble Ladie, for the loue of her good Huſband your deare Fréend Huon. Gloriand, (quoth the noble Kinge Oberon) that will I not doe, but I am well content, that haſtely you goe and deliuer the good Ladie, and the other Priſoners that be with her, and ſay in my behalfe to the Emperour Tirrey, that hee be not ſo hardy as to doe any ill to the Ladie, or to any of her companie, but ſay that I will and commaund, that he reſpite their liues vntill the holy Feaſt of Eaſter be paſſed, and that the Ladie and the other Priſoners he cauſe to be returned againe into the Citie of Mayence, and that the Ladie be ſet in a Chamber at her libertie and pleaſure,

and let her be bathed and waſhed and newe arrayed, and lette her haue foure noble Ladies to ſe
                     •
                  ue and accompanie her, and that ſhe haue meat and drinke as good and as plentifull, as though ſhe were his owne proper Daughter, in like wiſe lette all the other Priſoners be ſerued, and ſay that I will and commaund that hée doth thus vntill the time that Eaſter be paſſed, and ſhew him that he bee not ſo hardy to breake or treſpaſſe againſt my commaundement. Then Gloriand and Mallabron tooke leaue of the Kinge, and of all other that were there, and then they wiſhed themſelues in the place, whereas the Ladie and the other priſoners were, where the Lady as then was vppon her knees before the fire ſore wéeping and complayning, and abiding the houre of her death, the which had beene néere vnto her, if ſhe had not béen ſhortly ſuccoured, for they were about to haue bound her to the ſtake. When Gloriand and Mallabron came braying in the ayre like thunder, & they were not ſéen of no perſon but alonely of the Ladie, and when they were come and ſawe the fire a kindling, they tooke the tenne Villaines that would haue caſt the Ladie into the fire, they tooke them, and caſt them all Ten into the flaming fire, whereas they were ſhortly burnt, and beſide them there were diuers other burnt, whereof ſuch as were there had ſo great feare; that none durſt abide there: then the two Knights came to the Ladie and loozed her, and ſayd. Madame be of good comfort, wée are two Knights ſent hether from king Oberon, to ſuccour and to bring you out of the perill and danger that you be in. Sirs, (quoth the Ladie) it is not the firſt time that the noble King Oberon hath ſuccoured vs both mee and my huſband, God of his grace rewarde him. Madame, (quoth Gloriand) bee merrie and make ioy, for your good huſband Huon is come on this ſide of the Sea, whome you ſhall ſée within ſhort time. When the good Ladie had well vnderſtood Gloriand, ſhee had ſuch ioy, that of a great ſpace ſhe could ſpeake no word ſhee was ſo rauiſhed, but at laſt ſhe ſaid. Sir, I ought greatly to loue you for bringing me ſuch tidings: and then they ſayde vnto her. Madame, reſt you héere a ſeaſon, vntill wee haue deliuered the other Priſoners, whome we ſée yonder leading toward their deaths, and

ſhortly we ſhall returne againe vnto you.
               Therewith they departed from the Ladie, and left her vpon her knées holding vp her handes vnto Heauen, and deuoutly rendring thankes to our Lord Ieſus Chriſt, for the ſuccor and aide that he had ſent her. Then Gloriand and Mallabron came to the Gallowes, and there vnloozed the thrée Hundred Priſoners, and ſ
                     •
                  ew diuers of them that were ſent thether to doe execution, whereof all they that were there preſent had great maruaile, and did woonder thereat, when they ſaw their company ſlaine and could not ſée them that did it, but they thought that there were a Thouſand Knights, by reaſon of the great brute and noyſe that the two Knights of the Fayrie made, whereof they had ſuch feare, that they fled away and ranne to the Emperour, who was ſore diſmayed and abaſhed of that aduenture, for it was alſo ſhewed vnto him, that the Ladie was reſcued, and they could not tell by whom, but they ſayd that they heard a great brute and noyſe: then alſo the Emperour ſaw, how the people came running towards him flying from the Gallowes, and they ſhewed to him all that they had ſéen and heard, wherof the Emperour and all his Lordes had great feare and were ſore abaſhed. Ah Sir, (quoth the Duke of Auſtrich) it hadde beene better for you to haue beleeued Duke Hildebert your Coozen: knowe ſurely, that you haue greatly diſpleaſed our Lord Ieſus Chriſt, ſince that you would doe ſuch cruell iuſtice in the holy time of Lent. Thus after theſe two Knights of the Fayrie hadde reſcued the good Ladie and the other Priſoners, they tooke them and the Ladie and brought them vnto the Emperour, and ſhewed themſelues openly, and when they were in the preſence of the Emperour and the Priſoners with them, and the Emperour ſaw that there were but twoo Knightes armed vppon horſe-backe, hee ſet little by them, and ſaid. How are you ſo bolde and ſo hardy, to deliuer and to take out of my mens handes thoſe that are condemned to die by iuſtice? and beſides that you haue ſlaine many of my men, and nowe bringe them into my preſence whom I haue condemned to die: wherefore I will that you well know, that before I eat or drinke you and all they ſhalbe hanged, and the Ladie Eſcleremond burned,

nor I ſhall not depart from hence vntill I haue ſeen you all dye the death.
               Then Gloriand and Mallabron lifted vp their viſors, and ſhewed their faces, and they ſéemed vnto all them that ſawe them, that they neuer ſawe before two ſo faire Knightes in all their liues. Then Gloriand ſayde vnto the Emperour: Sir, of you nor of your threatninges wee make thereof but little account: but Sir, knowe for troth, that the noble King Oberon commandeth you by vs, in as much as you feare your life, that you bee not ſo hardy, any further to doe any ill or iniurie, nor commaund to bee done vnto this noble Ladie that is heere preſent, nor to theſe other Priſoners, vntill Eaſter day bee paſt. And alſo Kinge Oberon commaundeth you, that you doe keepe this Ladie in your houſe, cloathed and apparelled, and as well gouerned, and to bee accompanied with Ladies and Damſels to ſerue her honourably, as well as if ſhe were your owne proper Daughter, and that in like wiſe theſe Priſoners to be newly arrayed and ordered, aſwell as other Knights of your houſe, and Sir, we warne and charge you, that in this that wee haue ſayd, that you do not the contrarie for any thing that may fall, for if you do otherwiſe, there is no mortall man ſhall ſaue your life: thus the right noble Kinge Oberon commaundeth you to doe, who is Soueraigne Lord and Gouernor of all the Realme of the Fayrie.
               When the Emperour Tirrey had well heard theſe Knightes of the Fayrie thus ſpeake vnto him, and ſawe howe they were armed with their Swordes in their handes, taynted with the bloud of his Almaynes, hee had great feare and beheld his Barons, and ſayde. Sirs, I pray you to giue me ſome good counſaile in this ſerious buſineſſe, wee haue well heard much ſpeaking of King Oberon, and of his great Acts and déeds: wherefore I feare him much, yée may wel ſée what two of his knights haue done, they haue reſcued them that I haue condemned to die, and ſlaine diuers of my men. Alſo you heare, what word he ſendeth me by his two Knights, that I ſhould keepe this ladie and the other Priſoners honourably, and that I ſhould not be ſo hardy, to put them to any danger vntill Eaſter be paſſed.

Then an ancient knight ſayd: Sir, know for troth that King Oberon is puiſſant and wiſe, for there is nothing in the world but that he knoweth it, and alſo as often as hée liſt, hee can bee whereas he will wiſh himſelfe, and with as great number of people as hee liſt: and therefore Sir beléeue ſurely, that if you doe otherwiſe then he hath commaunded you to doe, theſe twoo knightes of his that be héere preſent, haue puiſſance ſufficient to deſtroy you, and Kinge Oberon to ſit ſtill at home: therefore Sir mine aduiſe is, that you anſweare theſe two knights, that all that Kinge Oberon hath commaunded you to doe by them, that you will doe it ſurely: and then all the other Lordes gaue the Emperour the ſame counſaile. When the Emperour had well heard and vnderſtood his Lordes and Barons, he turned him vnto the two Knightes of the Fayrie, and ſaid. Sirs, yée ſhall ſalute me to King Oberon and ſay, that as for me, I ſhall doe euerie thing as hee hath commaunded me to doe to the beſt of my power. Sir Emperour, (quoth Gloriand) if you will doe as you ſay, the king will take you for his Fréend, & therevppon we commend you to God.
               Thus the two knights departed, ſo that the Emperour nor none other perſon knew not where they were become, whereof euerie man had great maruaile and were ſore abaſhed. And thus Gloriand and Mallabron within a while came to the City of Momur, whereas they found king Oberon, to whome they ſhewed all that they had done. Well, (quoth king Oberon) as now the Lady Eſcleremond and the other Priſoners are at their eaſe and well ſerued, but before a Moneth be paſſed, they ſhall dearely ab
                     •
                  y the eaſe that they bee in nowe, for the Emperour hateth them ſo ſore, becauſe of the malice that he beareth vnto Huon of Bourdeaux, that he will ſet them all againe into Priſon in great pouertie and miſerie, and when Eaſter is paſſed, hee will burne the Ladie Eſcleremond, and hange vp all the Priſoners except they bee reſcued againe. Sir, (quoth Gloriand) I cannot beléeue that the Emperour dare doe it, or thinke ſo to doe. Gloriand, (quoth the noble kinge Oberon) know ſurely, that the great hate that is rooted in the heart of the Emperour, ſhall conſtraine and vrge him thus to d
                     •
                  e. Nowe let vs leaue

ſpeaking of the noble king Oberon, and ſpeake of the Emperour Tirrey.
               
            
            
               Chap. CXXXIIII.
               
                  ¶How the Emperour Tirrey made the noble Ladie Eſcleremond to be well ſerued and apparelled, and all the other Priſoners, but about three Weekes after, hee made the noble Ladie and the ſayd Priſoners to be put againe into priſon, whereas they were in great miſerie.
               
               
                  
                     NOwe ſheweth the Hiſtorie, that after the two knightes of the Fayrie were departed, and vaniſhed away out of the preſence of the Emperour, and that the Emperor was returned into the Citie of Mayence, with the ladie Eſcleremond and with the other Priſoners, whereof the Burgeſſes, Ladies, and Damſels of the citie had great ioy of their good aduenture, and the Emperour had them into his Pallaice, and deliuered vnto them Chambers well dreſt and hanged as it appertained thereunto, and the noble Ducheſſe Eſcleremond hadde foure ladies to ſerue her, and ſhe was bathed and waſhed, and new apparelled, as well and as richly as though ſhee had beene the Emperours owne proper Daughter, ſo that within a ſhort ſpace ſhe came againe to her beautie, and to be as faire and well fauoured as euer ſhe was, and in like wiſe ſo did all the other Priſoners, who were kept alſo in faire and rich Chambers and new apparelled, and had their eaſe and pleaſures as other knights of the Emperors Court had. But aſſoone as thrée weekes were paſſed, the great hate that the Emperour had vnto the noble ladie and to the other Priſoners, conſtrained him to take from them the ioy and eaſe that they were in: and turned the ſame into pitifull weepinges and great lamentations. And the Emperour Tirrey ſware, that for all kinge Oberon, or for any thinge that

he could doe, he would neuer be in peace in his heart, vntill he had ſet all the companie againe intd priſon, and beſides that, he ſware that Eaſter ſhould not bee no ſooner paſt, but that the Ladie Eſcleremond ſhould bee burnt and all the other priſoners hanged, and vppon them to take vengeance in the deſpite of Huon of Bourdeaux, who had done him ſo much trouble that hee could not forget it.
               Then hee commaunded to take againe the Ducheſſe Eſcleremond, and to put her and all the other priſoners into the priſon againe, the which was done according to his commandement. Then the Ducheſſe Eſcleremond and all the other Priſoners were right ſorrowfull, and were in great feare, and ſaide each to other. Alas now our deathes approach, and when that the Ladie ſawe that ſhe was ſet againe in priſon, ſhe began ſore to weepe and complaine for the Duke Huon her Huſband. Too longe (quoth ſhee) you tarie, for I ſée none other way but that my death approacheth, for you ſhall not come in time, well may I curſe the houre that euer I was borne, for in all my life I haue had but ſorrowe and heauineſſe and dolours in ſupportable, better it had been for mee to haue béen dead, then to ſpend my life in this darke Priſon, right deuoutly ſhee called vppon our Lorde Ieſus Chriſt to haue pittie and compaſſion of her. Thus was this noble Ducheſſe ſet againe in priſon, and alſo the thrée Hundred Priſoners, whereas they ſuffered great famine and pouertie, for other thing had they not to liue by, but Barley bread and cleare water. Now we will leaue to ſpeake of them, and ſpeake of Duke Huon, who was arriued at Marſellis.
               
            
            
               Chap. CXXXV.
               
                  ¶ How Huon departed from Marſellis, and came to his Ʋncle the good Abbot of Cluny in habite diſguiſed, and vnto him diſcouered himſelfe, whereof the Abbot had great ioy, and ſo had Clariet his Daughter.
               
               
                  
                  
                     AS yee haue heard heere before, howe Huon was at Marſellis, and after that hee had iourned there foure dayes, hee made him readie to depart, & bought Mules and horſes for himſelfe, and for Barnard and for his companie, and then hee charged his Somers, and vppon one of them hee truſſed the Griffens foote, the which was great and horrible, and couered it becauſe euerie man ſhoulde not ſée it. When hee was readie and euerie thing truſſed, hee departed from Marſellis, and roade ſo by his iourneys, that hee paſſed by Prouence, and came vnto Maſconoys, and vppon a Thurſday at night he arriued at the Towne of Tournous. And when they had ſupped, hée called Barnard his Coozen, and ſayd. Coozen, I pray you to ſtay héere, for I wil goe to ſée mine Vncle the good Abbot of Cluny, and Clariet my Daughter, whome I ſore deſire to ſée, and ſhortly I ſhall returne againe vnto you, I will goe priuily diſguiſed, to the entent that I will not bee knowne. Sir, (quoth Barnard) ſéeing that it is your pleaſure, we muſt be content. Then they went to bed, and in the Morning Huon aroſe vp, and apparelled himſelfe like a Pilgrim, with a ſtaffe in his hand and a bag about his necke, and with great boots vppon his Legges, hee hadde a great beard and long haire: wherefore hee ſéemed well a Pilgrime that came out from a farre Countrey, and ſo he had done indéede.
               When Barnard, and his company ſawe him ſo apparelled, they laughed and ſaide. Sir, it appeareth well by your manners, that you are eſcaped out of ſome good place, it ſéemeth to vs, that if you will ſhake your ſtaffe, you will make the money to auoyd out of mens purſes, you are ſo bold a beggar. When Huon heard them, hee laughed, and tooke leaue of them, and departed all alone with his bagge about his necke, ſo afoote hée went vntill he came vnto Cluny, and then he came vnto the Abbey gate, and called the Porter vnto him, and ſayd. Fréend, I pray you to let mée enter, then hée opened the wicket and beheld

                  Huon, who ſéemed to him to be a tal and a goodly man, and ſayd. Pilgrime, enter when you pleaſe. Then Huon entred in at the wicket, and ſayde vnto the Porter. Fréende, I come ſtraight from beyond the great Sea, and haue kiſſed the holy Sepulchre, and haue ſuffered much paine and pouertie, and becauſe before this time I haue béene héere with the Abbot of this place, therefore I thought that I would not paſſe by without ſpeaking with him, I pray you to ſhewe mee that courteſie, that I may ſpeake with him, for hée will ſoone know mée. Sir, (quoth the Porter) it ſéemeth vnto mee by your manners, that you ſéeme to be a man of a good place: therefore I giue you leaue to goe into the houſe at your pleaſure, and you ſhall finde our good Abbot in his Hall, whereas hee is communing with his Brethren, certainly, I knowe well that you ſhall bee welcome vnto him, if hee haue of you any knowledge, for a more noble man, courteous, and liberall you ſhall not find vpon this ſide of the Sea. Fréend, (quoth Huon) your courteſie may auaile you.
               Then Huon went into the Hall, whereas hee found the Abbot with his Brethren, and then hee ſaluted the Abbot and all his Couent. Fréend, (quoth the Abbot) you are welcome, I pray you to ſhewe mée from whence you come? Sir, (quoth Huon) I ſhall ſhew you the troth, I come now from beyond the Sea, from the holy City of Ieruſalem, whereas I haue kiſſed the holy Sepulchre, and where our Lord Ieſus Chriſt was quicke and dead, I haue béen in thoſe parts more then Seauen yéeres, and the cauſe why I am come hether to ſée you is this, I found there a young Knight of mine age, named Huon of Bourdeaux, and he ſayd that he is your Nephew, and when he ſaw that I would depart from thence to come into his Countrey, he humbly prayed mée to recommend him vnto you: and therefore I am come vnto you to doe his meſſuage, for he and I hath been together in diuers Battailes, and great amitie haue béen betweene vs. When the good Abbot had well heard and vnderſtood the Pilgrim, many teares fell from his eyes and trickled downe his chéekes, when he heard his Nephew Huon named, and ſaide. Fréende, I pray you (if it bee true as you ſay) to

ſhew mée the troth if you haue ſéen my Nephew Huon, for it is he that I loue beſt in all this world, and deſire moſt to ſée him, and I pray you to ſhewe vnto mée what is his minde, either to returne hether or elſe to abide there ſtill? I would to God that I were in debt to pay a thouſand Markes of gould, ſo that hee were as now héere in this Hall. Sir, (quoth Huon) your Nephew whome you deſire ſo much to ſée, before a Moneth be paſt he will (by the grace of God) bee héere with you, and Sir, hee ſhewed mée at my departing from him, that he hath a Daughter whom you haue nouriſhed and brought vp, and he charged me greatly that I ſhould deſire of you to ſée her before I departed from you, he knoweth not whether ſhe bee aliue or dead, I woulde gladly ſée her if it were your pleaſure. Fréend, (quoth the Abbot) right gladly you ſhall ſée her, I ſhall cauſe her to come hether, and then you may ſée her at your eaſe, and I dare well ſay vnto you, that in all the world you ſhall find no fairer nor a ſweeter creature, nor more wiſer of her age nor better learned, and yet ſhe is but Ten yeares of age.
               When Huon vnderſtood the Abbot, you may well know that hee hadde great ioy at his heart priuily, and thanked our Lord Ieſus Chriſt. Then the Abbot called vnto him a right notable Knight named Sir Emerie, and commaunded him to goe and fetch thether his Néece Clariet, the Knight went into the chamber, whereas the faire Ladie was with other foure noble Ladies, who had brought her vp: then Sir Emerie ſaluted the Ladie and the other that were with her. When the young Ladie perceiued Sir Emerie, ſhe aroſe vp and rendred to him his ſalutation, and right humbly ſaying. Sir Knight I am ioyfull of your commig, I pray you to ſhewe mee of your newes and tidinges. Certainly faire Ladie, (quoth the Knight) hether is come a Pilgrim, who is come from beyond the Sea, and hee hath ſhewed vnto the Abbot your Vncle tidinges of your Father Duke Huon: therefore your Vncle deſireth you to come and ſpeake with him. When the Ladie heard ſpeaking of her Father, with all her heart ſhe deſired to knowe ſome certaine tidinges, and then ſhee and her Damſels departed out of the Chamber, and came into the Hall to the Abbot her Vncle, accompanied

with twoo notable Knightes, then ſhee entred into the Hall richly apparelled, no man could deſcribe her beautie, for ſhee was ſo well fourmed, that nature her ſelfe could not amend her, her ſkinne was as white as the flower in the meadowe, and coloured like the red Roſe, her haunches lowe, and her pappes ſomewhat ryſing, her throat ſmooth and cleare, her chinne vaunted, her mouth as vermeill as a Roſe, her téeth ſmall and well ranged and white, her face white and well coloured mingled white and red, her eyes ſmiling, her chéere amourous to behoulde, her noſe ſtraight, her fore-head white, her haire yellowe, and her eares gentle and cloſe, I cannot deuiſe the tenth part of her excellent beautie, none could regard her nor looke vppon her but that praiſed and loued her, all her beautie and ſweete demeanour, and great humilitie that was in her, if I ſhoulde héere deſcribe it, it would bee ouer-long to rehearſe.
               When Huon had well ſéene his Daughter Clariet who was ſo faire, hee gladly behelde her without making of any knowledge. Then the Abbot tooke his Néece by the hand, and ledde her vnto Huon, and ſaid. Pilgrim, how ſay you by her, ſhee hath not beene ſore trauailed nor much come in the Sunne, I haue kept her a long time, and if ſhe be garniſhed with beauty, in like wiſe ſo ſhe is with witte and bountie, ſhee is Daughter vnto Duke Huon of Bourdeaux, the man that I moſt loue in this world, I woulde to God that I did ſée him as I doe you nowe, but if God ſend mee life and health, this Ladie ſhall bee richly maried, I will giue her goods that ſhe ſhalbe rich and puiſſant. Sir, (quoth Huon) I pray to our Lord Ieſus Chriſt to giue her good fortune, and that ſhee may bee ſo maried, that her bloud thereby may be lifted vp and exalted: then the faire Ladie Clariet ſayd vnto Huon. Sir Pilgrim, I pray you to ſhewe me, if you know any tidings of my Father Duke Huon of Bourdeaux. Faire Ladie, (quoth Huon) hee and I together haue beene a long time beyond the Sea, and Companions together, and we ſought the Souldan of Babilon that nowe is, it is not hee that was ſet there by Huon, after that he had ſlaine the great Admirall Gaudiſe, it is another, who ſince that time conquered both

the Citie and the Countrey of Egipt, many aduentures Huon and I haue ſuffered, but at the end wee diſcomfited the Souldan, and his men are ſlaine and deſtroyed. Pilgrim, (quoth the faire Ladie Clariet) I require you to ſhew me if you know, whether my deare Father will returne hether again or no? the which is the thing in the world that I moſt deſire? Faire Ladie, (quoth he) I anſweare you, that before twoo Moneths bee paſſed, you ſhall ſée him héere in good health. I pray vnto our Lord God (quoth the Ladie) that it may be ſo, that he may deliuer my Mother out of the priſon, whereas ſhee is in great pouertie and miſerie.
               When Huon had well heard and vnderſtood his Daughter, he would no longer hide himſelfe, but ſayd. My right deare Daughter, before Auguſt be paſſed, I ſhall deliuer her or die in the paine, for I ſhall make ſuch warre againſt the Emperour Tirrey, that yet before I die I ſhall ſtrike off his head from his bodie, whatſoeuer fall thereof. When the Ladie heard Huon, how he ſayd that hee was her Father, ſhee changed colour, and bluſhed as ruddie as a Roſe, and thought to her ſelfe by the words that he ſpake, that hee was her Father, whereof ſhe was right ioyfull, and ſaid. Ah Sir, I pray you if you bee Duke Huon of Bourdeaux my Father, to ſhew me. My right deare Daughter, beléeue it ſurely, for I will no longer hide it from you. When the Ladie heard that he was her Father, ſhe clipped him and Twentie times kiſſed him. Then the Abbot came and embraced him and ſayd. My right deare Nephewe, the ioy that my heart hath of your comming, is to mee ſo acceptable, that I cannot tell whether I dreame or not that I ſée you heere, and then againe hee embraced him, making the greateſt ioy in the world. Alſo there was Clariet his Daughter, who embraced and kiſſed him: then all that were in the houſe came thether to make great chéere and feaſting. Faire Nephewe, (quoth the Abbot) I am ſore abaſhed that you be returned with ſo ſmall a companie. Good Vncle, (quoth Huon) it could bee none otherwiſe, I haue had ſuch fortunes vppon the Sea, that the moſt part of my men are dead and periſhed, & ſome by maladie, and ſome are returned into their owne Countreys, and

eſpecially they that went with me are abiding at the Rocke of the Adamant, and there all be dead by famine, and they that were my Guides to haue brought mee vnto Euphame, are in like wiſe dead there.
               Then Duke Huon beganne to ſhewe vnto the Abbot all the aduentures that he had, ſince he departed from the noble Citie of Bourdeaux, there were ſome that heard it, that tooke it for a mocke and a lye, he ſhewed of ſo many great maruailes, they thought that the moſt part of them were lyes, and one ſaide to another: Great aduantage haue theſe Vagabounds to lye, becauſe they finde no man to ſay them nay, and if any man ſay nay, their anſweare is readie to ſay, go and ſée: then the good Abbot ſayd. Faire Nephew, if I were of the age to beare armour, gladly I would goe with you to ayde you to deſtroy this Emperour, who hath done you ſo much ill, I ſhall ſend for ſuch a number of men of warre, and pay them with my Treaſure, the which I haue long time gathered together, and ſhall ayde you to make ſuch war, that it ſhall alwayes be had in remembrance, or elſe I would die in the paine and all they that ſhould goe with me, and to cauſe him to make you amends, of all the ils and dammages that he hath done vnto you, yet ſomewhat I haue done alreadie, for it is not long ſince, that one of the Emperours Nephewes were ſlaine by my men, and all they that were with him ſlaine or taken, for Nephewe, I haue gathered together a great Treaſure, that I may therewith entertaine a hundred Thouſand men for two yeares, without ſelling or laying to pledge any foote of Land appertaining to my Church, but as now I am ſo old that I cannot ride out, for I am a hundred and fourteene yeares of age: and therefore ſéeing that I cannot goe with you, I ſhall abandon vnto you all my Treaſure, and take thereof as much as it ſhall pleaſe you. Sir, (quoth Huon) you make me ſo great an offer, that once before I die, I truſt to render vnto you the double value, by the grace of God.
            
            
               
               Chap. CXXXVI.
               
                  ¶How Duke Huon of Bourdeaux ſhewed to his Vncle the Abbot of Cluny, all the aduentures that hee had, ſince he departed from the noble Citie of Bourdeaux: and how he gaue the Abbot the Apple of youth, whereby the good Abbot became againe to his beautie, that hee had when hee was but of Thirtie yeares of age.
               
               
                  
                     WHen Duke Huon of Bourdeaux
                   had well vnderſtood the good Abbot his Vncle, and ſawe the faire offer and ſeruice that he had offered vnto him, he ſaide. Sir, of your courteſie and Larges, and all the good that you haue done vnto me and to my Daughter Clariet, God reward you for it: true it is, after that I had fought with the Griffens, I came vnto a faire Fountaine, and there by was a Trée growing charged full of faire fruit, the Trée was called the Trée of youth, of the which I gathered three Apples, whereof you ſhall haue one and ſhall eate it, and aſſoone as you haue eaten thereof, thereby you ſhall become as young and as ſtrong and luſty, as you were when you were of the age of Thirty yeares. Then there was a Monke in the houſe, called Dan Iohan Saliuet, who beganne to laugh, and haſted him to ſpeake and ſayde. Ah Sir, what is it that you ſay, theſe two Thouſand yeares there was neuer man at the Tree of youth, therefore this tale is not to be beléeued, and when Huon heard the Monke, he waxed red for anger, and lifted vp his ſtaffe, and would haue ſtriken therewith the Monke, and if he had not ſkipt backe, and ſayd. Ah thou falſe Monke, thou lyeſt falſely, I haue been there, and that thou ſhalt ſée the proofe thereof, whether I ſay true or not. Then the Abbot came betwe
                     •
                  ne them and ſtopped the ſtroake, and ſayd vnto Huon. 
                  
                     〈…〉
                   
                  
                     •
                  ight deare Nephewe, appeaſe your ſelfe, and then hee

ſayd to the Monke. Ah thou rude Groome, by the faith that I owe vnto my Lord Saint Bennet, for thy words thou ſhalt bee ſore puniſhed, then he cauſed the Monke to be ſet in priſon, and then the Abbot ſayd vnto Huon. Sir, I pray you to be no longer diſpleaſed. Then Huon tooke one of his Apples, and gaue it to his good Vncle the Abbot, and ſayd. Sir, take this Apple, the which I gathered of the Trée of youth, I gathered therof thrée, and one I gaue to the Admirall of Perſia, and another I kept for my ſelfe, the which I giue you, and I woulde haue gathered moe, but I was forbidden by an Angell ſent from our Lord Ieſus Chriſt: and Sir, knowe for troth, that the Admirall of Perſia before I gaue him the Apple, he was of the age of Six-ſcore yeares and more, but aſſoone as hee had eaten thereof, he became as faire and as ſtrong, as when he was of Thirtie yeares of age, and hee is as now one of the faireſt Princes in the world. By the which Miracle, he and all his people of his Realme did forſake the falſe and deteſtable Law of Mahomet, and tooke vpon them the beliefe of our Lord Ieſus Chriſt, and were chriſtened, and they that woulde not were hewen all to péeces, and after that for the loue that he bare vnto mée, hée paſſed the Sea with mee with great puiſſance, and wee entred into the Souldans Lande, whereas wee diſcomfited him in plaine Battaile.
               When the good Abbot had well heard and vnderſtood his Nephew, he had great ioy, and tooke the Apple, and made thereon the ſigne of the Croſſe, and did eat it vp euerie whit, whereby incontinent in the ſight of all them that were there preſent, he became into his firſt youth, as he was when hee was but of the age of Thirtie yeares, his white beard fell away and a new beard came, his iawes that were leane and pale, the fleſh grew againe new quicke fleſh, ſo that he became a faire young man, and well fourniſhed of bodie and members, a fairer man could no man ſée, nor lighter, nor luſtier, whereof hée had ſuch ioy at his heart, that he ran and embraced Huon, and kiſſed him more then Tenne times. When they that were there preſent ſaw that great maruaile, they were greatly abaſhed, & ſaid one to another, that Huon was worthy to be beléeued, for out of ſuch a

Princes mouth (quoth they) neuer yſſued a lye, there was much ioy made, the Tables were ſet and they went to dinner, there ſatte the Abbot and Huon and Clariet his Daughter: Of their Seruice and meates I will make no rehearſall, for they were richly ſerued. After that they had dyned and grace ſayd, all the Monkes of the Couent came and knéeled downe before Huon, and humbly required him of pardon for Damp Iohan Saliuer, who was too haſty to ſpeake, and all was through negligence of youth and ill aduiſed. When Duke Huon ſaw all the Monkes before him vppon their knées, deſiring him to pardon the Monke of his folly, hee ſayd vnto them. Sirs, I am content to fulfill your deſires, for I am not come hether to trouble any man. When the good Abbot had well heard Huon his Nephew pardon his Monke, hee thanked him and ſaid. Sir, by Saint Bennet, if you had not pardoned him, he ſhould not haue come out of priſon this yeare. Then the Monkes went to the Priſon, and they ſhewed vnto the Monke that was in priſon, what maruailes were done in his abſence, and howe their Abbot who was a Hundred and fourtéene yeares of age, was now become of the age of Thirtie yeares. Sirs, (quoth hée) I am glad of my deliuerance, but I cannot beléeue that it is ſo as you ſay, nor I will not beléeue it vntill I ſée it: then hee went into the Hall, whereas the Abbot and Huon were together, and when hee ſawe the good Abbot young againe, then hee kneeled downe and cried Huon mercie, and 
                     •
                  equired him of pardon, the which Huon graunted.
               Then there was great ioy, and the Abbot ſayd. Nephewe, ſend for men of warre on all ſides, and I ſhall pay their wages to the number of twentie Thouſand men, for I haue gould and ſiluer ynough, and let vs ſend for all our Fréends, and we ſhall bee a great number of men able to fight with the Emperour, who hath wrongfully and without cauſe diſenherited you, and keepeth your Wife in priſon, whereof my heart is ſo ſorrowfull that I can no longer endure it. Sir, (quoth Huon) if I can finde any other way to come to peace with the Emperour, then my Speare and ſhéeld and no man ſlaine, I would thinke then that I had well ſped, for if I might doe ſo much with the Emperour,

that he would render vnto me my Landes and Signiories, and my Wife and men, and that thereby I might become his Liege-man, I would then thinke that I had made an honourable end, for I haue done him great dammage. Faire Nephewe, (quoth the Abbot) I woulde faine knowe by what manner you coulde bring this matter about. Vncle, (quoth Huon) this night I will ſtudie vppon the matter, the which I truſt in our Lord Ieſus Chriſt to bringe to a good and proſperous end.
            
            
               Chap. CXXXVII.
               
                  ¶ How Huon of Bourdeaux departed from Cluny, and went to the noble Citie of Mayence vppon a Friday: and how he came nere vnto the Emperours Oratorie.
               
               
                  
                     After that Huon and the good Abbot had deuiſed together of diuers things, Huon wrote a Letter vnto his men being at Tournous, that they ſhould come vnto him to the Abbey of Cluny, hee ſent a Gentleman of the Abbey to fetch them, and when hée was come to Tournous, and had deliuered his Letters vnto Barnard, they made them readie, and truſſed their Somers and departed from thence, and they road ſo longe, that they came in at the gates of the Abbey of Cluny, the ſame time Huon and the Abbot were leaning out at a window, the Abbot ſaw fiftéene Somers charged, and ſeauen Mules and Mulets, whereof he had great maruaile of whence they were, and ſaid to Huon. Faire Nephew, can you tell vnto whome appertaine theſe Somers, or what be they that bringeth them? Sir, (quoth Huon) know for troth that I haue conquered them, and they are mine, and yonder is Barnard that doth conduct them, who hath had much paine and trouble before hee could find mee. Faire Nephewe, (quoth the Abbot) great ioye I haue at my heart, that hee hath

ſought you ſo long to find you at the laſt, nor I could not haue ſent a more noble man, you ought greatly to loue him, and alſo he is our Kinſman, and alwayes hee hath beene vnto you true and faithfull. Sir, in him I haue found all that you ſay: and Sir, the great Somer that you ſée yonder with twoo great Coffers well banded, they be full of precious ſtones, and Iewels more woorth then foure good Cities, I will leaue them héere with you to keepe for the marriage of my Daughter, and with thoſe words hee kiſſed her. Deare Nephew, (quoth the good Abbot) and beſides that you will giue her, I ſhall depart with her largely of my Treaſure.
               Therewith Barnard came thether and all the other of his companie, and when the Abbot perceiued Barnard, he came vnto him right ioyfully with his armes abroad and clipped and kiſſed him, and made vnto him great feaſt and chéere and to all his companie. Then Duke Huon and the good Abbot his Vncle, and the faire Ladie Clariet his Daughter, went into their Chamber and diſcharged the Somers, and opened euerie Coffer. When the Abbot had ſéen the riches that were in them, hee was neuer ſo abaſhed and ſayd. Ah Duke Huon faire Nephewe, I thinke you haue brought hether riches to buy therewith the whole Realme of Fraunce. Then Duke Huon tooke a Coller of gould full of precious ſtones, that the clearneſſe of them illumined all the houſe, and Huon did put the Coller about his Daughters necke, and kiſſed her mouth and ſayd. My deare and louing Daughter, I giue you this Coller, I neuer gaue you any thing before, it is ſo rich that the ſtones therein are woorth a Realme or a Duchy. When the Ladie ſaw the rich Coller, ſhée was right ioyfull, and kneeled downe before her Father, and humbly thanked him: then Huon ſhewed all his Treaſure vnto his good Vncle the Abbot, and when all had beene ſéene and viewed, the Abbot did put them into the Coffers. Then Huon apparelled himſelfe with rich apparell, and he ſeemed then to be a Prince of high degrée, he was ſo faire to behold, that all ſuch as ſawe him had great pleaſure to behould him, there hee made good chéere and feaſting for the ſpace of right dayes, and vppon the ninth day in the Morning, he departed

from thence priuily, and tooke Barnard with him without the knowledge of any perſon except the Abbot, vnto whom he ſayde. Faire Vncle, I and Barnard will depart, and I require you to let no man liuing know of my departing, as long as you can keepe it ſecret, vntill you doe héere from mee ſome tidings. Sir, it ſhall bee done, (quoth the Abbot) and I commend you to the ſauegard of our Lord Ieſus Chriſt, and I beſéech him humbly that you may haue peace with the Emperour Tirrey.
               
               Then Huon and Barnard departed before any man were riſing, and they tooke their way towards the Citie of Mayence, and reſted not vntill they came to Coleyne, and the next Morning they road vntill they came within a League of the Citie of Mayence, and then they entred into a wood, & there they alighted. Then Huon apparelled himſelfe like a Pilgrim in habite hoſe and ſhooes, and he tooke a hearbe and rubbed therewith his Viſage, in ſuch ſort, that hee ſéemed that hee had beene in the Sunne Ten yeares, ſo that he was vnknowne, and Barnard that was with him coulde not knowe him by the face, and then Barnard laughed: then he tooke his ſtaffe and ſcrippe, and ſaide vnto Barnard. Sir, goe your way before into the Citie with our horſes, and take none acquaintance of mee though you ſée me, and take vp ſome ſmall lodging, ſo Barnard went on before, and Huon faire and eaſily went after him, and ſo entred into the Citie, and hee had with him the Thirtie rich ſtones in his boſome. When hee was entred into the Citie, hee reſted not vntill he came to the Pallaice, and as hee went vp the ſtayres, he met the Steward of the Emperours houſe, vnto whome hée ſayd. Sir, I pray you in the honour of our Lord Ieſus Chriſt to giue mee ſome meate, for I am ſo hungrie that I can ſcarce goe vppon my Legges, nor I haue no monney to buy mee one morſell of bread. When the Steward had well heard and vnderſtood the Pilgrim, hee beheld him well, and ſawe howe his ſtaffe ſhaked in his hand, the which he thought had béene with féebleneſſe and pouertie, and hadde of him great pitie and compaſſion, and demaunded of him from whence hee came? Sir, (quoth Huon) I come ſtraight from the holy Sepulchre, and I

haue endured much pouertie and miſerie. Fréend, (quoth the Steward) I pray you to tarie for me héere a little ſeaſon, vntil I haue been in the Priſon to carie meat vnto the Ducheſſe Eſcleremond, and to the other Priſoners, who crye out through famine and rage that they be in, for if they bee longe in this caſe that they bee in now, they cannot endure it, for the Emperour hath taken ſuch an inward hate againſt her, and againſt them that are in priſon with her, that he hath made promiſe, that aſſoone as Eaſter is paſſed the Ladie ſhall be burnt, and the other Priſoners al hanged, and this day is Shroue Thurſday, ſo that they haue to liue but fiue dayes, and I am right ſorrie for the noble Ladie, that our Emperour will put her to death without a iuſt cauſe.
               When Huon had well heard that, hee hadde no member nor ioynt but that trembled, and he caſt downe his Viſage, and beganne pitifully to wéepe, and ſuffered the Steward to paſſe and ſpake no woorde vnto him, but returned into the Towne, and went and lodged in the Towne right heauie and ſorrowfull: howbeit, he was right ioyfull, in that his Wife was aliue, for he greatly feared that ſhe had been dead. He lodged in a notable Burgeſſes houſe, who receiued him wel for the loue of God, but whatſoeuer he had there he could neither eat nor drinke, for the ſorrowe and gréefe that he had at his heart: then hee ſayde vnto his Hoſt. Sir, to Morrowe is good Friday, the which day I thinke the Emperour will giue great Almes. Fréend, (quoth his Hoſt) you may ſurely beléeue, that the Emperour will giue as to morrow great Almes, hee will giue of his goods ſo largely vnto all poore men, that if they come vnto him that day they ſhall bee all ſatiſfied, you ſhall not finde a Prince that doth giue greater Almes, and of one thing I aduertiſe you: the Emperour hath one cuſtome, that the firſt poore Pilgrim that commeth vnto him to morrowe ſhalbee happie, for there is nothing in the world be it neuer ſo deare, but if hee demaund it of the Emperour, it ſhall not bee denied him, it muſt bee at the ſame houre and time that the Emperour goeth vnto his Chappell to ſay his Oriſons. When Huon had well vnderſtood his Hoſt, he beganne to reioyce, and thought within himſelfe, that

if hee could in any wiſe, hee would bee the firſt that ſhould demaund Almes of the Emperour, but that ſhould be neither gold nor ſiluer, it ſhould bee his Wife and his men that hee hath in Priſon: and alſo if he may he will aſke therewith his Landes and Signiories.
               Then the Hoſt went to his reſt, and Huon abode in his Chamber alone, and ſlept not of all the night, but thought how he might deliuer his Wife, and the other Priſoners that were with her, and all the night he was at his prayers, humbly deſiring our Lord God to counſaile and to ayd him to recouer his good Wife Eſcleremond. Early in the Morning hee aroſe and made him readie, and tooke his ſcrippe and ſtaffe, and went ſtraight to the Pallaice, and ſat down vpon the greeces whereas the Emperour ſhould paſſe: at which time the Emperour was newe ryſen, and there were many other Pilgrimes that were there abiding for the Emperours comming, and euerie man coueted to haue the firſt guift, but Huon did ſo much by his ſubtiltie, that hee was the firſt that entred into the Chappell, and none other perceiued him, and he did hide himſelfe cloſely in a corner néere vnto the Emperours Oratorie, and there hee ſat ſtill without any word ſpeaking, abiding there for the comming of the Emperour.
            
            
               Chap. CXXXVIII.
               
                  ¶ How Duke Huon of Bourdeaux did ſo much with the Emperor Tirrey, that he had peace with him, and his Wife rendred vnto him, and all his Landes and Signiories: and how the Emperour brought him vnto the Abbey of Cluny, whereas they found the good Abbot in armour, not knowing any thing of the Peace that was made.
               
               
                  
                  
                     NOwe ſheweth the Hiſtorie, that anon after that Huon was entred into the Chappell, the Emperour came in and kneeled downe before the Aulter, and made his prayers, and many poore men were there abiding the end of his prayers, and no man ſaw Huon whereas hee was hidden cloſely in a corner hard by the Emperours Oratorie. When the Emperour had made his prayers, hee aroſe and turned him to haue gone into his Oratorie, and Huon who had great deſire to bee the firſt, and to haue the firſt guift of the Emperour, hee drewe out of his bagge a rich ſtone, the which was of ſuch vertue, that whoſoeuer did beare it about him could not bee ouercome with his enemie, nor coulde not be drowned nor burnt, the ſtone had ſuch great vertue, that none could eſteeme the value thereof: and beſides that it caſt ſuch clearneſſe in the Chappell, that the Emperour was abaſhed thereat, nor hee knewe not from whence that light ſhould come. Then hee beheld Huon, and Huon did holde the ſtone in his hande, and ſhewed it vnto the Emperour: and when the Emperour ſawe the rich ſtone, he greatly deſired to haue it, and aduaunced himſelfe, and tooke it out of the Pilgrimes hand, who preſented it vnto him. When the Emperour had the ſtone in his hand, he had great ioy at his heart, for he was cunning in the deſcrying of ſtones, and ſware to himſelfe, that the Pilgrim ſhould neuer haue it againe for any thing that he could doe, but he thought within himſelfe that if he would ſell it, hee would giue him as much gould and ſiluer as hée could reaſonably demaund, or elſe he thought to kéepe it ſtill whatſoeuer fell thereof: and then the Emperour ſayde vnto Huon. Pilgrim, I pray thee to ſhewe vnto mee where thou haſt gotten this rich and bountifull ſtone? Sir, (quoth Huon) I haue brought it from beyond the Sea. Fréend, (quoth the Emperour) wilt thou ſell it, and I ſhall giue thée for it whatſoeuer thou wilt haue? and to bee in the more ſuertie to beare away my guift that I will giue thee for it, I ſhall cauſe thée to bee conducted

into thine owne Countrey whereſoeuer it bee. Sir, (quoth Huon) I will giue it vnto you with a good heart, ſo that it bee true that mine Hoſt hath ſhewed vnto mee this day, for he hath ſhewed vnto me that your cuſtome is, that the firſt perſon Pilgrim that commeth vnto you vppon this day being good Friday, ſhould haue of you a guift ſuch as hee would demaund, after that you haue made your prayers to our Lord God. Pilgrim, (quoth the Emperour) he that ſhewed thée that, ſayd that which is true: and therefore whatſoeuer thou demaundeſt, either Borough, Towne or Citie, or what thing ſoeuer it be, I promiſe faithfully to giue thée, whoſoeuer bee diſpleaſed therewith I graunt it to thée, therefore demaund whatſoeuer thou wilt.
               Sir, (quoth Huon) of your grace and faire guift, I moſt hartely thanke you: therefore Sir, with a good heart I giue you that ſtone, the which I deliuered vnto you but euen now, in the recompence of the courteſie and guift that you haue graunted vnto mée, the which ſhall be neither gould nor ſiluer: and Sir, becauſe I know certainely, that the renowme is ouer all the world, that you are a iuſt and a true noble man, and that which you promiſe you will vphold and kéepe, and neuer ſwarue from your promiſe, and becauſe that I know ſurely, that the promiſe that you haue made vnto mee you will vphold, of whatſoeuer guift I deſire to haue. Fréend, (quoth the Emperour) I will that you well knowe, that if you demaund foure of my beſt Cities, I ſhall giue you them, ſéeing I haue made that promiſe, and if God bee pleaſed I ſhall not goe from my promiſe, for I had rather that one of my handes were cut off, then I ſhould be found falſe in my wordes: and therefore demaund, and ſurely you ſhall haue your demand without any deniall. Sir, (quoth Huon) I hartely thanke you, and would haue kiſſed his féete, but the Emperor would not ſuffer him but tooke him vp. Sir, (quoth Huon) firſt, and before all other thinges I deſire of you pardon, of all the ill déedes and treſpaſſes that I or my men haue done againſt you, and if you haue in your Priſon either men or women appertaining vnto mee, or of my lineage, that you will deliuer them all vnto mee: and alſo if you haue any

thing of mine, either Towne or Citie, Borough or Caſtle, I require you by the promiſe that you haue made vnto mee, to render them vnto me quite: Sir, any other thinge I demaund not. Pilgrim, (quoth the Emperour) make no doubt to haue that which I haue promiſed vnto you: therefore I graunt all your deſire, but I require you humbly to ſhew vnto mee what man you bée, and of what Countrey, and of what Lineage, ſeeing you haue deſired of me ſuch a guift? Sir, (quoth Huon) I am hee that ſometime was Duke of Bourdeaux, whome you haue ſo much hated, I come now from beyond the Sea, whereas I haue endured much paine and pouertie, I thanke our Lord Ieſus Chriſt that I haue done ſo much, that I am nowe agreed with you, and I ſhall haue againe the Ducheſſe Eſcleremond my louing Wife, and my men, and my Landes and Signiories, if you will bee as good as your word, and vphold your promiſe.
               When the Emperour had well heard and vnderſtood Huon, all his bloud beganne to change, and hee was a great ſpace before he ſpake any word, hee was ſo ſore abaſhed, but at the laſt hee ſayd. Ah Huon, are you hee by whome I haue ſuffered ſo many illes and dammages, and haue ſlaine ſo many of my Nephewes and other of my men? I would not haue thought that you would haue beene ſo hardy, to haue ſhewed your ſelfe before mée, nor to haue come into my preſence, you haue well ouercome me and enchaunted mee, I had rather haue loſt foure of my beſt Cities, yea▪ and all my Countrey burnt and deſtroyed, and my ſelfe baniſhed out of mine owne Countrey for thrée yeares, rather then you ſhould haue thus come to my preſence: but ſéeing that it is thus, knowe for troth, that which I haue promiſed vnto you I ſhall vphold and keepe, and from hencefoorth in the honour of the paſſion of our Lord Ieſus Chriſt, and of this good day, vppon the which hee was crucified and put to death, I pardon you all mine ill will and good will, I ſhall not bee periured, your Wife, your Landes and Signiories, and your men, I ſhall render them into your hands, ſpeake thereof who liſte, otherwiſe it ſhall not bee, nor I will neuer doe the contrarie. Then Huon knéeled downe before the Emperour,

and right humbly thanked him, and deſired him to forgiue him all his treſpaſſes. Huon, (quoth the Emperour) God forgiue thée, and as for me, with a good heart I doe pardon you. Then the Emperour tooke Huon by the hande, and tooke him vp and kiſſed him verie kindlye, in token of good peace and amitie. Sir, (quoth Huon) great grace haue I found in you ſéeing you kéepe and vphold your promiſe: but Sir, if it pleaſe our Lord God, your guerdon ſhall be double. Huon, (quoth the Emperour) I require you to ſhew me of your newes and aduentures that you haue had ſince you departed from the Citie of Bourdeaux. Sir, (quoth Huon) with a good will after that your diuine Seruice is done, and the paſſion of our Lord Ieſus Chriſt read. Huon, (quoth the Emperour) I giue you good thankes for that you ſay. Then the Emperor tooke Huon by the hand, and led him into his Oratorie with him, whereas they heard the diuine Seruice, whereof many Knightes and Lordes were ſore abaſhed, and had great maruaile what Pilgrim it was that the Emperour did ſo much honour vnto. After that the diuine Seruice was done, the Emperor returned into his Pallaice holding Huon by the hande, and dinner was made radie, and they waſhed their handes and ſat downe to dinner: and when dinner was done, and the Tables taken vp, then in the Emperours preſence, and of all the other Lordes there, Huon ſhewed all his aduentures.
               Firſt, hee ſhewed howe hee had paſſed the Gulfe and ſpoken with Iudas: and afterward howe by fortune of the Sea he arriued at the Caſtle of the Adamant, and how his Companie dyed there by famine: and declared the beautie of the Caſtle, and of the great riches therein: and afterward how hee was caried from thence by a Griffen to a great Rocke, and how he ſlew fiue young Griffens, and the old Griffen that brought him thether, whereof he hath left at Cluny the foote of the ſame: then he ſhewed of the Fountaine, and of the Trée of youth, and howe hee gathered thereof thrée faire Apples, and more hee would haue gathered, but that our Lord God commaunded him by his Angell, that he ſhould not be ſo hardy as to gather any more. And after that he ſhewed, howe that he paſſed the Gulfe of Perſia in

                  
                     •
                  reat perrill and daunger, and ſayd furthermore. Sir, when I was paſſed that Gulfe, I gathered many precious ſtones, that which I haue giuen you was one of them, the which ſtone is of great vertue: and then I came to the great Citie of Thauris in Perſia, whereas I found a noble Admirall an old auncient Knight, and he ſhewed to me great courteſies, and I gaue him one of mine Apples to eat, and aſſoone as hee had eaten thereof, he became to be as young as he was when he was but of Thirtie yeares of age, and I thinke that from thence hether cannot be found a fairer Prince, and hee was before of Six-ſcore and Seauen yeares of age: and Sir, becauſe I deſire with all my heart to haue your good grace, and that good peace and firme may bee had betwéene you and mee, I will giue you the third Apple, the which I kept for my ſelfe, by the which if you doe eat it, you ſhall become againe as young and as luſty and as ſtronge, as you were when you were but of the age of Thirtie yeares.
               The Emperour, when hee heard that the Apple that Huon would giue him to eat, ſhould cauſe him to returne to his yong age againe, hee was ſo ioyfull, that hee neuer made ſuch chéere before in all his life to any man as he did then vnto Huon, and ſayde, howe that hee would bee his Fréend for euer, and neuer faile him, and ſayd. Fréend, I abandon my bodie and goods at your pleaſure, and I giue you two good Cities to encreaſe your Signiorie, and beſides that I promiſe you, if you haue any buſineſſe to doe, I ſhall ſuccour you with fortie Thouſand men, and ſhall ayde you as the Father ſhould doe the Sonne. Therewith Huon would haue kneeled downe to haue thanked the Emperour, but hee would not ſuffer him: and then Huon tooke the Apple out of his bagge, and deliuered it vnto the Emperour, the Emperour who was ſore deſirous to knowe if hee ſhould waxe young againe, by reaſon of eating of the Apple, he called vnto him his Lordes and Barons, to the entent that they ſhould ſée that maruaile, and when the Emperour had the Apple in his hand, hee put it into his mouth, and did eate it euerie whit, and as hee was eating thereof, his age chaunged into youth, and by that time hee had eaten all the Apple, his white

beard fell off, and the ſkinne chaunged like a man of Thirtie yeares of age, and alſo his face and all his bodie that before was all wrinkled and rugged and pale, became then as white and as ruddy, and felt himſelfe as light and as freſh, and a
                     •
                   quicke to doe any thing and as ſtrong, as he was when he was of the age of Thirtie yeares, whereof all that were there preſent had great maruaile, and were right ioyfull of that aduenture, that was fallen vnto the Emperour whome they loued, then they ſayd. Sir, ſuch a guift was neuer giuen to any Emperour or King, well you ought to praiſe our Lord God, whatſoeuer loſſe you haue hadde or receiued, that euer you were acquainted with Duke Huon.
               
            
            
               Chap. CXXXIX.
               
                  ¶ Howe the Emperour made good cheere vnto Duke Huon of Bourdeaux.
                  
               
               
                  
                     WHen the Emperour ſaw himſelfe waxe young againe, he was ſo ioyfull that hee wiſt not what to doe, then hee clipped and kiſſed Huon more then Ten times, ſaying. My right deare Fréend, I pray you to forgiue mée all the illes and dammages that I haue done vnto you, and for the paine and ſorrow that I haue cauſed your noble Wife and men to ſuffer: then the Emperour called vnto him two of his Lordes, and ſayd vnto them. Sirs, I will that all the poore people that be in my Chappell this day bee newly apparelled, and to haue meat and drinke ſufficient, for the loue of the paſſion of our Lord Ieſus Chriſt, who this day hath done mee that grace that I am returned from age to youth. Sir, (quoth they) your commaundement ſhall bee done: then they went and executed his pleaſure. Then Duke Huon approached vnto the Emperour, and ſayd. Sir, I humbly deſire your grace to deliuer my Wife Eſcleremond, and my men out of Priſon.

Sir, (quoth the Emperour) it is good reaſon that I doe it: then he ſent for the Iaylour, who had the Ladie and the other Priſoners in his kéeping, and commaunded him that the Ladie Eſcleremond and the other Priſoners ſhould bee brought into the Hall, the Iaylour went to the Priſon and Huon with him, and when they came thether, Huon went to the dore and cryed out aloud, and ſayd. Ah my right ſwéete Siſter, I beléeue that you haue béen but ill lodged héere, I haue great feare that by reaſon of the paines that you haue endured, you cannot long continue, certainly if you die I ſhall neuer haue ioy at my heart. When the Ducheſſe Eſcleremond hadde well heard the voice of him that ſpake at the dore, ſhée ſtood ſtill and ſtudied what voice it might bee, for ſhée thought within her ſelfe▪ that ſhe had heard that voice before that time, and when ſhe had muzed a little while, ſhe thought that it ſhould be the voice of Huon her Huſband, whereof ſhe had ſuch ioy and mirth at her heart, that of a great ſeaſon ſhee could not ſpeake but fell in a ſwound in the Priſon: and when ſhee reuiued and came againe to her ſelfe, ſhee cryed out and ſayde. Ah my right deare Lord and Huſband, long haue you left me in paine and miſerie, all alone in this ſtinking and horrible Priſon, in the hands of them that loue you nothing, and haue ſuffered much paine, cold, and hunger▪ and haue endured great pouertie, and in great feare of death and deſperation.
               When Huon had w
                     •
                  ll heard and vnderſtood his déere Wife, who ſpake ſo pitiouſly, (ſorrow and gréefe ſo cloſed his heart) that hee had no power to ſpeake one word, and the teares fell from his eyes, and trickled downe his chéekes for the pitie that he had of his louing Wife Eſcleremond: and alſo the Iaylor for verie pitie th
                     •
                  t hee had was conſtrained to wéepe, and ſo went downe into the Priſon and brought the Ladie vp: and then Huon and ſhe beheld each other, and could ſpeake no word of a great ſpace, but renue and embraced and kiſſed each other, and ſo fell downe to the ground both in a traunce, and they lay vntill other Knightes came thether, fearing that they had beene dead, there was none but that wept for pitie. Then the Emperour came thether himſelfe, and ſore wept and repented himſelfe

of the illes that he had done to the Ladie and made her 
                     •
                  o ſuffer: and then the Knightes and Lordes reuiued them, then they clipped and kiſſed together, and Huon ſayd. Faire Ladie I require you to pardon mee in that I haue taried ſo long from you, and haue left you in ſuch pouertie, paine, and daunger of death, and haue eſcaped, for the which I humbly thanke our Lord God of his grace. Sir, (quoth ſhee) we ought greatly to thanke almightie God, when hee hath ſent vs that grace to ſée each other, and to come together againe, and that you haue peace with the Emperour. Then the Iaylour went to all the Priſons, and tooke out all Huons men and brought 
                     •
                  hem vnto him, and they had great ioy when they ſaw their Lord & Maiſter in ſauegard, and thanked our Lord God, and humbly ſaluted Huon, and ſayd. Sir, bleſſed bee the houre of your comming, whereby wee are deliuered from the paines, trauailes, and pouerties that we haue been in. My right deare Freends, (quoth Huon) thus goeth the world, you and I are bound to thanke our Lord God for that hee ſendeth vnto vs. Then the Emperour tooke Huon by the one hand, and Eſcleremond by the other, and ledde them into his Pallaice, whereas the Tables were ſet, and there ſat downe together the Emperour and Huon and the Ducheſſe, and all the Priſoners at another Table, and were all richly ſerued: Of their meats and Seruices, and ioy that they made, I will make thereof but ſmall rehearſall. And when they had all dyned, the Emperour ordained Lad
                     •
                  es and Damſels to ſerue the Duches Eſcleremond
                  ▪ and ordained Chambers for the Duke and her, and for all the other, they were there ſerued of all thinges that they deſired, and they had new apparell according to their degrées.
               Anon the newes and tidinges were knowne in the Citie, of the Peace made betwéene Huon and the Emperour, and how hee had his Wife the Ducheſſe Eſcleremond rendred vnto him, and his men deliuered out of priſon, whereof B
                        •
                     rnar
                        •
                     
                   (as hee was in the Towne hearkening for newes) was right ioyfull, and went in haſt vnto the Pallaice, whereas he found Huon in his Chamber with his Wife the faire Eſ
                        •
                     leremond and aſſoone as hee ſawe the Ducheſſe, the water fell from his eyes for ioy:

then he ſaluted Huon and the Ducheſſe, and the Ladie knew him incontinent and ſaid. Ah ſir Barnard, well I ought to loue and cheriſh you, that yée haue ſo ſought for my Lord and huſband, as that now at laſt through your tedious trauaile you haue found him and brought him hether. Madame quoth he, I haue done nothing but what I was bound in duty to doe, I am ſory for the great paines and trauaile that my Lord hath ſuffered, and then hée ſhewed ſuch newes as he knew, whereof many great Lords and knights had great ioy to heare him for ſhe maruayles that he diſcourſed vnto them. Then when they had béene there the ſpace of Eight dayes, and that their men were well refreſhed, the Emperour aſſembled all his Lords & ſaid▪ Sirs it is my will, to lead and conduct Duke Huon and the Duches to Bourdeaux, and to ſet them in poſſeſſion of their Lands and Signiories, and I will haue Ten Thowſand men to goe with mee and them, and to bring mee againe hether to Mayence, according to his commaundement the men were made readie, and when the Emperour had ordained for Huons eſtate as it appertained for him, and his Wife and his men, and when euerie thing was readie, they all mounted vpon their horſes, and the Ducheſſe had a rich Littour, ſo they departed from the Citie of Mayence, and ceaſed not till they came within twoo Leagues of the Abbey of Cluny. The good Abbot, who knew nothing of the agréement made betwéene the Emperour and Huon, had gathered together of men of warre about twentie Thouſand, and they were lodged in the Towne of Cluny, and the Abbot was aduertiſed of the Emperours comming into thoſe parts, and he heard no newes of Huon, whereof he was right ſorrowfull and ſore diſpleaſed, and thought that the Emperour hadde taken Huon Priſoner: then hee yſſued out of the Towne, and ranged his men in good order of Battaile, without the Towne in a faireplaine, and there abiding for the Emperour whome he ſaw comming.
            
            
               
               Chap. CXL.
               
                  ¶ How the Emperour arriued at Cluny, and how the Abbot ſet vpon him, and of the peace that was there made, and how the Emperour conueyed Huon to Bourdeaux, and rendred to him all his Lands, and of the parting of them and the Emperour, and how Huon made his prouiſion to goe to king Oberon.
                  
               
               
                  
                     WHen the Emperour ſawe the Towne of Cluny, he demaunded of Huon if he could tell him to whome that towne appertayned. Sir quoth he, it belongeth to an Vncle of mine who is Abbot thereof, and wée muſt paſſe that way, and alſo I muſt néedes ſpeake with him before I goe to Bourdeaux. The ſame time the Abbot, who was then mounted on a puiſſant and ſtrong Courſer well armed at all points, ſawe the Emperour comming towards Cluny, and then he ſaid to his men. Sirs, thinke this day to doe well and valiantly, for yonder before vs we may ſée the Emperour our enemie comming, wherefore wée cannot eſcape the Battaile, I am ſure he hath taken Huon my Nephew, but by the faith that I owe to my Lord and to Saint Bennet my Patron, that taking ſhalbe déerely bought: then they couched their ſpeares and ſpurred their horſes, and came running towards the Emperour: and when the Emperour ſaw them, hee called Huon and ſaid. Sir, yonder yée may ſée men of warre all armed come running againſt vs, I wot not what they meane to doe, but they ſéeme to be our enemies as far as I can perceiue, and they are a great number, and therfore they are to be doubted and feared. Sir quoth Huon, it is mine Vncle the Abbot of Cluny, who hath rayſed vp his men to ſuccour me, for he is not aduertiſed of the Peace made betwéen you and mée, ſurely he thinketh that you haue taken me priſoner, and therewith the Abbot daſhed in amongeſt the Emperours

Companie, and the firſt that he met he ran him cleane through with his ſpeare, and ſo he ſerued the ſecond, third, & fourth, and when his ſpeare was broken, hee drew out his ſwoord wherewith he beat downe the Almaines that it was maruaile to behould him, and then came in his men, and they did ſuch deeds of armes, that perforce the Almaines were faine to retire backe, and many were ſlaine and deſtroyed, and caſt downe to the earth.
               When the Emperour ſaw that, hee was in great rage, and ſayd vnto Huon. Sir, you are greatly to blame, to ſuffer your Vncles men to ſlay mine. Sir, (quoth Huon) I am right ſorrie for that they haue done, I am readie to make you amendes in whatſoeuer it ſhall pleaſe you: therewith Duke Huon road vnto the good Abbot his Vncle, and in great diſpleaſure ſayd. Vncle, you haue done great euill, and when the Abbot ſaw and perceiued Huon, he was right ioyfull, and hee embraced him, and ſaid. Faire Nephew, I thought that the Emperour had taken you Priſoner, and would haue put you to death, I knew not that you had Peace with him: then he made his men to retire backe from the Almaines, and then hee and Huon together came vnto the Emperour, and the Abbot ſaluted him, and ſaid. Sir, I pray you to pardon me, in that I haue thus come againſt you, for certainly, I had thought that you would haue hanged and ſlaine my Nephew Duke Huon of Bourdeaux, nor I knew not that there was any Peace betwéene you: therefore Sir, I require you to pardon mée, and I offer my ſelfe to make you amends by the aduice of your counſaile. Sir, (quoth the Emperour) I pardon you for the loue that I beare vnto Duke Huon of Bourdeaux, whome I take for my faithfull and ſpeciall fréend.
               Thus as yée haue heard the Peace was made betwéene the Emperour and the Abbot of Cluny. Then they road together vntill they came vnto Cluny, where the Emperour was receiued with great ioy. When the good Abbot hadde receiued the Emperour and lodged him in the Abbey, then he came vnto the Ducheſſe Eſcleremond, and embraced and kiſſed her, and ſayde. My right déere Néece, your comming vnto mee hether is greatly

acceptable, well I am pleaſed to ſée you whole and in good health, and I am ſore diſpleaſed for the great euils and pouerties that you haue endured, if I might amend it, but ſince it is the will and pleaſure of our Lord Ieſus Chriſt, both you and wée all ought to be content, bleſſed bée his name. Good Vncle, (quoth the Ducheſſe) greatly wee ought to thanke and to cheriſh you, for you haue béen Father and refuge of my Daughter Clariet, whome I deſire greatly to ſée: then the good Abbot led the Duches Eſcleremond into the chamber, wheras her Daughter Clariet was, who came and knéeled downe before her Mother, and when the Ducheſſe her Mother ſawe her, it was no maruaile though ſhee was ioyfull at her heart, for when ſhee ſawe her ſo faire, and ſo well educated, you may well thinke that her ioy excéeded all other, ſhe embraced and kiſſed her more then Twentie times, and ſayd. My déere Daughter, ſince I ſawe you laſt I haue endured great pouertie and miſerie, but thankes bée giuen to our Lord Ieſus Chriſt, and to his ſwéete Mother, your Father and I are come together in ſauegard, and haue Peace with the Emperour: then they went into the Chamber, whereas their dinner was prepared readie for them, and there dyned together with great conſolation, and all that dinner time the Ducheſſe could not caſt her eyes from the regarding of her Daughter Clariet, for the great beautie that ſhe ſaw and perceiued in her, and when they had dyned, the Lords and Knightes, and Squiers came to ſée the Ladies as they were accuſtomed to doe, and as they were deuiſing together, Huon entred into the Chamber and the good Abbot his Vncle with him, and they ſayd vnto the Ducheſſe. Faire Ladie you muſt come vnto the Emperour, and bring your Daughter with you, for he deſireth greatly to ſée her: then the Ladie (who was readie to doe her Huſbands commaundement) went into the Hall and her Daughter with her, whereas they found the Emperour, who receiued them with great ioy, and tooke the yong Lady Clariet in his armes and kiſſed her ſwéetly, and ſayd. My right déere Daughter, your comming hether is to me right acceptable, god performe in you that which wanteth, as for beautie you want not. Huon, (quoth the Emperour) great thanks

you ought to render vnto our Lord Ieſus Chriſt, that hee is ſo fréendly vnto you, as to ſend you ſuch a Child as this Ladie that is héere before mee, for I thinke that of beautie, this day there is no Ladie nor Damſell that is liuing in this world, that is able to compare with your Daughter. Sir, (quoth Huon) I pray vnto our Lord God to performe in her that which ſhee wanteth: great pleaſure had the Emperor to behold the Damſell, and ſo had all other Lords, Ladies, and Damſels that were there preſent.
               Thus as yée haue heard the Emperour was receiued at Cluny, and was greatly feaſted by the Abbot there, for aſſoone as the Emperour was come thether, the good Abbot ſent ouer all the Countrey for Ladies and Damſels to feaſt the Emperour, and there they were thrée dayes with great Iuſts and ſports, and when they departed, there was neither Ladie nor Damſell, but that the Emperour gaue her ſome guift: the fourth day after that the Emperour had heard Seruice, and his baggage and cariage readie, then he and Duke Huon, and the Ducheſſe Eſcleremond, and Clariet her Daughter departed from Cluny, and with them the good Abbot, who brought them vnto the Citie of Bourdeaux, for he loued ſo well Huon and the Ducheſſe, and Clariet whome he had brought vp, that he would not abandon them ſo ſoone. Huon ſent Barnard before vnto the Citie of Bourdeaux, ſignifying vnto them of the Citie of the Emperours comming and his, and of the Peace made between the Emperour and him. Barnard departed, and was well receiued at Bourdeaux: then he aſſembled together all the Burgeſſes of the Citie, and ſhewed vnto them of the Emperors comming thether, and with him Duke Huon, and the Ducheſſe Eſcleremond, and Clariet their Daughter, and of the Peace that was made between the Emperour and Duke Huon, this newes was ſent incontinent to Blaye and to Geronnill, and ouer all the Countrey of Burdeloys, and then all the noble men aſwell as Burgeſſes came haſtely vnto the Citie of Bourdeaux, for to receiue their rightfull Lord Duke Huon, and when they were there aſſembled, they mounted vppon their horſes, and road foorth to meete the Emperour and Duke Huon their naturall Lord, they were together about

ſixe Thouſand horſes: when they approached néere vnto the Emperour, they ſaluted him, vnto whome the Emperour ſayd openly. All yée Sirs, noble men and Burgeſſes, that haue before this time made vnto mee fealtie and homage, I deliuer you quite into the handes of your right naturall Lord, as you haue beene before time, and I quit clearely your homages and fealties done vnto mée: then they all thanked the Emperour of his good iuſtice and reaſon, that hee had alwayes done vnto them in the ſeaſon whiles they were vnder him, the Emperour was right ioyfull that they ſo praiſed him before Duke Huon, and then they came vnto Duke Huon, and to the Duches Eſcleremond his Wife, and to Clariet their Daughter, and did vnto them their reuerence accordingly. Thus they came vnto the Citie of Bourdeaux, whereas they were ioyfully receceiued, and a cloath of eſtate was borne before the Emperour, vnder the which he road, ſtill holding Huon by the hand vntill they came vnto the Pallaice, the ſtréets were ſtrewed with gréene hearbs and ruſhes, and hanged richly, the windowes garniſhed with Ladies and Damſels, Burgeſſes and Maydens, melodiouſly ſinging, whereof the Emperour was right ioyfull, the Children running in the Stréetes and crying noel, noel, for the great ioy and mirth that they had of the comming of their Lord and Ladie.
               When they were come vnto the Pallaice, they alighted and went to their Chambers readie appointed for them, if I ſhould rehearſe the ioyes, and ſports, and ſolemnities that was made at the noble Citie of Bourdeaux, it would bee too tedious and ouer-long to declare it, for the feaſt and chéere was ſuch, that no man as then liuing had ſéen any ſuch, the which endured for the ſpace of Eight dayes, during the which time, the Emperour declared vnto them of that Countrey, the Peace that was made betwéen him and Duke Huon, and how hee would deliuer all his Landes and Signiories into his handes, and clearely acquit euerie man of their fealtie & homage to him made, whereof euerie man was ioyfull, and vppon the Ninth daye that the Emperour ſhould depart, he called Duke Huon vnto him, and ſayd. My right déere Fréend, he that I loue beſt in this world,

if any warre or buſineſſe happen to fall vnto you, let mée haue knowledge thereof, and I ſhall ſend you fortie Thouſand men at armes, and my ſelfe in perſon to come to ayde and ſuccour you. Sir, (quoth Huon) of the courteſie that you offer mee I hartely thanke you, and alwayes I ſhall repute my ſelfe as your true Seruant and faithfull Fréend. Then the Emperor went to the Ducheſſe Eſcleremond, and tooke his leaue of her, and of the faire Ladie Clariet her Daughter, and embraced and kiſſed them at his departing, and ſo hee did all the other Ladies and Damſels, and gaue euerie one of them ſome guift, hee gaue rich guiftes vnto the Ducheſſe and to her Daughter, and then he tooke his leaue and mounted vppon his Horſe and ſo yſſued out of the Citie of Bourdeaux, and Duke Huon and the good abbot of Cluny conuayed him about twoo Leagues: then they tooke their leaue of the Emperour and of his Lords and Knightes, and returned vnto the noble Citie of Bourdeaux. Then after that Huon had ſoiourned there about Eight dayes, he road vnto Geronnill and to Blames, and vnto all other townes and Caſtles, where he was receiued with great ioy and mirth, and ſet Officers in them: then hee returned againe vnto the Citie of Bourdeaux to the Ducheſſe Eſcleremond his Wife, and after that he had taried there about a Moneth, Duke Huon deuiſed with his Wife in the preſence of the good Abbot his Vncle, and of Barnard his Coozen, and ſayd. My right déere wife, hee that remembreth not the goodneſſe done vnto him, may bee reputed as vngratefull, I ſay it, becauſe you know well that King Oberon hath done vnto vs great good, and hath deliuered vs out of many great perils of death, and as you ſawe but lately by the twoo Knightes that reſcued you from the death, and from the daunger that you were in, and you knowe well that the laſt time that Kinge Oberon departed from Bourdeaux, hee gaue mee all his Realme of the Fayrie, and the puiſſance that he hath there, and he made mée to promiſe him, that after that Foure yeares were paſſed, that I ſhould come vnto him, and that he would then put me in poſſeſſion of his Realme, and hée ſaide that if I failed my day, hée would vtterly deſtroy me, you know well what hath fallen vnto me (before this) by breaking

of his Commaundement: and therefore déere Lady and Wife, it is neceſſarie that I goe vnto him, and I ſhall leaue with you Barnard, who ſhall haue the kéeping of my Landes and of you, and as for my Daughter, I will leaue her with the Abbot héere mine Vncle, who I deſire héere before you, that hee will kéepe and gouerne my Daughter Clariet, and with him I will leaue all my riches and precious ſtones that I brought with mée, to the entent to marrie her, ſo that it be to a man of great valour, but I will not that ſhee bee maried vnto any perſon for riches, but a perſon that is worthy and valiant I would ſhould haue her, for ſhe hath and ſhall haue riches ynough for her ſelfe, and for a man of great authoritie. Faire Nephew, (quoth the Abbot) your going ſhall be diſpleaſing vnto me, if I might amend it, if God will, no man liuinge ſhall haue your Daughter my Néece in marriage, except hee bée a man of a high Parentage, and garniſhed with vertues and good manners, and as for your riches, pearles, and Iewels, ſhee ſhall not néede to haue any thereof, for I haue Treaſure and riches ynough to marrie her nobly.
            
            
               Chap. CXLI.
               
                  ¶ How Duke Huon deuiſed with the Ducheſſe his Wife of his departing, and how ſhee ſayd that ſhe would goe with him: And how hee left his Daughter and Land and Signiories in the keeping of his Ʋncle the good Abbot of Cluny, and of Barnard his Coozen.
               
               
                  
                     WHen the Ducheſſe Eſcleremond
                   had well heard her Huſband the Duke make his deuiſes, to goe vnto Kinge Oberon, you may well beléeue that ſhe had great dolour and gréefe at her heart: and then all wéeping ſhée kneeled downe before her Huſband, and ſaid. My right deare Lord, and if God will, you ſhall not goe

on foote but that I will goe with you, if you take any ill or annoyance I will haue my part, and if you haue any good aduenture I will haue my part with you, for your long abſence hath béen right hard for mée to endure. Faire Ladie, (quoth Huon) I pray you to forbeare your going, and abide héere with your Daughter, for the Voyage ſhall bée ſore for you to doe: here I ſhall leaue Barnard my Coozen, and mine Vncle the good Abbot, and they ſhalbe vnto you as Fathers. Sir, (quoth ſhe) I ſhall haue many ſorowes to abide héere without you, I had rather to endure whatſoeuer God ſhall ſend vs together, then to abide héere without your companye. Thus yée haue heard héere before, that for any excuſe or reaſon that Huon could ſhew vnto the Ducheſſe his Wife, he could not turne her from her opinion, but that ſhee woulde in any wiſe goe with him. When Huon ſaw that, he ſayd. My right déere Ladie, ſince it is your pleaſure to go with mée, and to be content whatſoeuer God doth ſend vs either good or euill, your companie pleaſeth mée well, and I am right ioyfull thereof. When the good Abbot and Barnard had well heard and vnderſtood the will and pleaſure of Duke Huon, and of the Ducheſſe Eſcleremond his Wife, they were ſore diſpleaſed therewith, if they could in any wiſe haue letted them, but they could not turne him for any thing that they could doe: then Huon ſayd vnto the good Abbot. Faire Vncle, I leaue with you my Landes, Signiories, and my Daughter vntill I returne againe, the which ſhall bée as ſhortly as I may. But of force now I am driuen, to goe and take poſſeſſion of the Realme that Kinge Oberon hath giuen to mée: Therefore faire Vncle and Coozen Barnard, vnto you I recommend my Daughter whome I loue entirely, and all my Landes and Signiories, I leaue all in your kéeping vntill my returne, and with you mine Vncle I leaue all my precious ſtones and Treaſure, for the mariage of my Daughter whom I leaue in your kéeping. Faire Nephew, (quoth the good Abbot) ſéeing that it is your pleaſure, I ſhall kéepe her as well as though ſhe were mine owne Child. Good Vncle, (quoth Huon) I pray you that the Griffens foote that I brought with me, may bée ſent vnto the young Kinge Lewis of Fraunce, and

ſalute him from mee, and preſent it vnto him to doe therewith his pleaſure. Sir, (quoth the good Abbot) before Eaſter bee come your Meſſuage ſhall bee done, and that being done, the young King was ioyfull thereof, and cauſed it to bée hanged in his Pallaice: and afterward by King Phillip it was hanged in the holy Chappell, whereas it is vntill this day. Now let vs leaue ſpeaking of the Griffens foote, and returne to our former matter.
            
            
               Chap. CXLII.
               
                  ¶ How Huon tooke leaue of his Daughter, and of the good Abbot his Vncle, and of Barnard his Cozen, and entred into the Riuer of Gerone, and the Ducheſſe with him: and of the ſtrange Fortunes that they had.
               
               
                  
                     WHen the good Abbot and Barnard had well vnderſtood Huon, and hadde heard his will and pleaſure, they anſweared, that as for his Lands and Signiories, and for his Daughter hee ſhould not need to care: but they ſayd, that it greatly diſpleaſed them the Voyage that they were in minde to doe, but ſince it was his pl
                     •
                  aſure ſo to doe, it was reaſon that they ſhould bee content: and then hee ordained that Barnard ſhoulde make readie a little Ship, apparelled and garniſhed with victuals and other things neceſſarie, and that another great Shippe to be made readie at the mouth of the Sea, to enter into it when they were out of the Riuer of Gerone, the which thinge was done. Then hee tooke ſixe Knightes and a Dozen Seruants of his owne, and when Huon ſaw euerie thing readie, and had ſhewed his Enterprize vnto his men, and to the men of his Countrey, and that euery thing was readie fourniſhed: then hee tooke his Daughter in in his armes, and kiſſed her more then Ten times, and in like wiſe ſo did Eſcleremond her Mother, and her heart was ſo cloſed

with ſorrow and gréefe, that ſhee could ſpeake no word, for the departing from her Daughter, you may well thinke that great was the ſorrow there at their departing, for he that had beene there, and ſeene the dolour and pitifull complaints that the Ladie Clariet made, for the departing of her Father and Mother, with whome ſhee had not beene no long ſeaſon, there is not ſo hard a he
                     •
                  rt, but that needs he muſt haue taken part of her ſorrow, for there was neuer ſéene ſo heauie a departing.
               Then Huon all wéeping embraced the good Abbot his Vncle, who gaue Huon at his departing a hollowed ſtoole, the which afterward did good ſeruice vnto Huon and to Eſcleremond. Alſo Huon tooke leaue of Barnard his Cozen, then the Ducheſſe ſayde vnto the Abbot and to Barnard. Sirs, vnto you twoo I due recommend my Daughter. Thus Huon departed, and they went to the Poſterne, and there they found readie their little Shippe, and they entred into it, and ſo made ſayle downe along the Riuer of Gerone, and when they came to the mouth of the Sea, they tooke their great Shippe, and ſo made ſayle and had good wind, ſo that ſhortly they were farre off from any land, and were in the hye Sea for the ſpace of Sixe dayes, and vppon the Seauenth day a wind aroſe with ſuch an horrible Tempeſt, that they were driuen into the great Spaniſh Sea, and were ſo far from any land, that they wyſt not where they were, and euer the Tempeſt encreaſed in ſuch wiſe, that there was neuer none ſuch ſeen nor heard of before, the waues were like Mountaines, and like to haue ſwallowed vp the ſhip, ſo that ſometime there entred into the Shippe a Tunne of water at once.
            
            
               Chap. CXLIII.
               
                  ¶ How Huon loſt all his men, and the Ship brake in peeces
                        •
                      and how hee and the Ducheſſe ſaued themſelues vpon a board, and came and arriued at the Caſtle of the Monkes.
               
               
                  
                  
                     WHen Duke Huon of Bourdeaux, and the Ducheſſe Eſcleremond his Wife ſawe theſe great and ſuddaine tempeſts, they were in great feare of death: & they greatly complained for their Daughter Clariet, whome they had left at Bourdeaux. Then Huon, who had with him in his bagge Nine of his déere precious ſtones, hée drew out two of them, and knew the vertue and bountie of them, and gaue his wife one of them and ſayd. My déere and louing Wife, hold this ſtone in your hand and haue no feare, for the vertue of the ſtone will not let you periſh, nor me neither: he that had heard the cryes and lamentations that the Marriners made, would haue had pittie and compaſſion of them, for they ſaw well that they ſhould all periſh. And Huon and Eſcleremond were vpon their knees ſore weeping, holding each other by the hande, humbly praying to our Lord Ieſus Chriſt to haue pittie and compaſſion of them, and to bringe them vnto ſome Port in ſauegard of their liues: great and horrible was the Tempeſt and long endured, ſo that the healme, Ma
                     •
                  , and ſayles burſt all to péeces: and when the Shippe was without a ſterne to guide it, the great waues entred into it, ſo that the Shippe was full of water, whereby it was conſtrayned to ſinke into the Sea, in ſuch ſort, that it was all couered with water, and all that were within were drowned and periſhed, except Huon and Eſcleremond, who ſatte together vpon a Table floating vpon the Sea, ſo that by the grace of our Lord God, and by the great bountie and vertue of the precious ſtones that were vppon them, they were ſaued. And when they ſaw their Shippe all to péeces, and their men drowned and periſhed, and themſelues floating vppon the Sea, whereof Huon hadde ſuch ſorrowe and gree
                     •
                  e at his heart, that great pittie it was to ſée him, and ſaide. Ah good Lord, why was I euer borne into this world, when I am ſo vnfortunate, that I can haue no men to ſerue mée, but at laſt they end their liues in my ſeruice miſerably? Ah my God, why doeſt then

ſuffer mée ſo longe to liue? Then the Ducheſſe comforted him as much as ſhée could, and ſaid. Ah Sir, leaue your ſorrowe, and pray vnto our Lord God for his mercie and his grace, and to haue pittie and compaſſion of vs, that wée might arriue at ſome good Port.
               Thus the noble Ducheſſe Eſcleremond comforted Duke Huon her Huſband, howbeit, ſhee was in as great feare, and not without a cauſe: and thus they floated vppon the Sea, greatly bewailing the death of their men, whome they ſawe periſh before their eyes. Then Huon as farre off as he might ſée, he ſaw a Caſtle ſtanding vppon a Rocke, the which ſéemed darke and blacke: and then hee lauded and praiſed our Lord God, praying him humbly to bring them thether in ſauegard. Then the Sea was peaceable, and the Tempeſt ceaſed, and the winde freſh, the which draue them in a ſhort ſpace vnto the Port vnder the Rocke: and when they were neere to the land, Huon and the Ducheſſe waded vnto the lande, holding each other by the hand. When they were vppon the drie land, they kneeled downe and lifted vp their eyes vnto Heauen, and made their deuoute prayers vnto our Lord Ieſus Chriſt, deſiringe him to haue pitie and compaſſion of the Soules of their men that they ſawe drowned and periſhed: then they aroſe vp and ſaw a litle path way lying ſtraight towardes the Caſtle, and they entred into it, and when they were néere vnto the Caſtle, they ſawe a great Riuer running round about it, and ſawe that the Caſtle was of maruailous great beautie, thinkinge that they neuer ſawe none ſuch before, the Towers were couered with gliſtering gould, ſhining ſo bright as though the Sunne did ſhine thereon: Alſo they ſawe an auncient Church adioyning to the Caſtle, with a goodly Steeple full of bels, the which beganne to ſound, whereof Huon had great maruaile, for he ſawe neither man nor woman comming nor going, and when hee had well regarded the Caſtle, hee came vnto the gate, and ſaw how that there were thrée bridges to paſſe before he could enter. When Huon ſaw that, hee ſayd. Ah good Lord, in all my life I neuer ſawe ſo faire a Caſtle, hee that is Lord thereof ſéemeth to bee a great and a noble man, for if there were within it but Fortie

men to keepe it, and garniſhed with victuals, it would neuer be wonne for any man liuing. So long Huon beheld this Caſtle, that he had forgotten his ſorrow, the Caſtle pleaſed him ſo well, and ſayd vnto the Ducheſſe his Wife. Madame, I beléeue ſurely that this is the Caſtle of Momur, appertaining vnto King Oberon, wee may well thanke our Lord God that hee hath brought vs hether, we ſhall ſée him, you knowe well that hée hath promiſed to giue mee his Realme and all his dignitie. Sir, (quoth the Ducheſſe) I haue heard ſay before this, that Momur is a great and a noble Citie, and full of people of all ſorts: wherefore, you may well perceiue that this is not that Citie, it may well bee that this Caſtle is his. Madame, (quoth Huon) the King hath that puiſſance, that he may make Citie or Caſtle at his pleaſure. Sir, (quoth ſhee) I beleeue it well. Then Huon tooke his way to the gate, and as hee went deuiſing with the Ducheſſe Eſcleremond his wife, hee ſawe before him foure Monkes in white apparell: & when they came vnto him, they ſayd. Sir, Duke of Bourdeaux, of your comming we are right ioyfull, for a more noble man came not heere of a long ſeaſon. God bleſſe you and the Ducheſſe your Wife. Sirs, (quoth Huon) God ſaue you, I pray you to ſhew me what you be? and who hath ſhewed you my name, and who is Lord and Gouernor of this Caſtle? Sir, (quoth one of the Monkes) this Caſtle is ours, and heere is no Gouernour but I and my Brethren, wee make none anſweare vnto any Lorde liuing: therefore if it pleaſe you to enter, wée ſhall make you as good feaſt and chéere as wée can, if it pleaſe you to tarie Eight or fifteene dayes you ſhall bee welcome, and when you depart, wee ſhall giue you to carie with you meate and drinke, ſufficient to ſerue you and your Wife for Fifteene dayes, and you ſhall haue neede thereof, before you finde out Kinge Oberon. Sirs, (quoth Duke Huon) of your courteſie I moſt hartely thanke you.
               Then Huon entred into the Caſtle with them, and came into a great Hall, well garniſhed and adorned with rich Pillers of white Marble, vawted aboue, and richly painted with go
                     •
                  ld and Azure, and ſet full of rith precious ſtones, the which

caſt a great light, for by reaſon of the precious ſtones, at midnight it was as bright as at noone dayes. Huon and Eſcleremond thought that they neuer ſawe ſo rich a thing. Madame, (quoth Huon) this place is delectable: then they were brought into a rich Chamber, whereas the Tables were ſet, and garniſhed with euerie thinge that a man coulde wiſh for. Then there came in many Seruants, ſome brought in the Baſons of gould adorned with precious ſtones, and ſome brought in the Towell and water, and they gaue the water vnto Huon and Eſcleremond to waſh their handes: then they ſatte downe at the Table▪ and did eate and drinke at their pleaſure, for they had their meat and drinke at their wiſh. When they hadde eaten at their pleaſure, and the cloathes taken vp, then there were Spices brought, and Huon did eate thereof, but Eſcleremond would not ſo much as taft thereof: then they were brought into a Garden to ſport them, and when they were there, they thought that they had been in Paradice, for the ſweetneſſe of flowers and fruites vppon euerie Trée, and they heard diuers kind of birdes ſing melodiouſly. Sirs, (quoth Huon vnto the the Monkes) well you ought to thanke our Lord Ieſus Chriſt, that he hath giuen you ſuch a place to ſerue him in: and Sirs, I pray you when it is midnight, awake me, to the entent that I may ryſe to go and heare your Seruice when you doe it. Sir, (quoth one of them) I ſhall awake you when the time is, that you may come and héere vs. Sir, (quoth Huon) therein ſhall you doe me great pleaſure.
               Then Duke Huon and ye Duches Eſcleremond were brought into a rich Chamber, well fourniſhed with cloathes of gold and ſilke, wherein was a rich and ſumptuous bedde, wherein Huon and the Ducheſſe his Wife lay together: the Chamber was faire and rich, for all the night it was as cleare as though the Chamber had been full of Torches, by reaſon of the ſhining of the precious ſtones, for there was no bench nor Poſt, but that were ſet full of riche ſtones, the riches of that Chamber coulde not 
                     •
                  e deſcribed, and therein was painted with gold and azure all the Battailes of Troy. And in this riche Chamber and bed they ſlept, vntill the houre of midnight was come: and then

all the Monkes aroſe, and the bels began to ring to Seruice, then there came a Monke vnto Huon, and awaked him, and ſayde. Sir, it is nowe time that you ariſe, for it is paſt midnight, make you readie to come and heare our Seruice. Then Huon aroſe, and called vp the Ducheſſe Eſcleremond his Wife, then ſhee aroſe, and thus they made them readie and went vnto the Church, the which was paued with a white Marble, powdered with flower deluces of gould, intermedled with red Roſes, and the Vault was checkered with Amber and Chriſtall, and at euerie point a rich ſtone, whereby there was ſuch clearneſſe, that there néeded no Candle light.
               When Duke Huon and the Ducheſſe Eſcleremond had well ſéene and beheld the great beautie and riches of the Church, they were ſore abaſhed, and made the ſigne of the Croſſe vpon their fore-heads, for the maruailes that they ſawe there: then they entred into the Quier, and knéeled downe before the hye Aulter, and made their prayers vnto our Lord God, deſiring him to be their ſauegard, and to conduct them ſurely vnto King Oberon. Then the Abbot beganne Seruice, and read the firſt Leſſon, and when he was in the halfe thereof, he held his peace, and departed cleane out of the Church, then the Priour began another Leſſon, and in like wiſe left it in the middeſt and departed out of the Church, thus euerie Monke did one after another, and there were twoo and Thirtie Monkes, and in the middeſt of euerie Leſſon and Pſalme, they departed out of the Church one after another. When Duke Huon ſaw and heard that, he was ſore diſmayed and abaſhed, and ſware that before the laſt Monke departed, hee would knowe the cauſe why they did ſo: and then hee went vnto the laſt Monke, who woulde haue gone out of the Church, and Huon tooke the hallowed ſtole that hee had in his boſome, and did caſt it about the Monkes necke, & held it faſt with both his handes. When the Monke ſaw how hee was holden, hee was ſorrowfull and angrie, and did what he could to haue eſcaped, but he could not: and when he ſaw that he could not eſcape, he embraced Huon, and prayed him humbly to lette him goe after his Brethren. Certainely, (quoth Huon) out of my hands you ſhall not eſcape, vntill you

haue ſhewed mée why you ſing your Seruice after the manner that you doe, and euer to leaue the one halfe vnſonge, and why the Abbot and the other Monkes doe depart one after another, without any word ſpeaking vnto mée, and except you ſhew me the troth, with my ſword I ſhall ſtrike thy head to the braines. Then ſimply the Monke fained to wéepe, and prayed Huon to ſuffer him to depart, and ſayd. Sir, I am he that yeſternight brought you to your Chamber and made your bed. Then Huon (who had his Sword in the one hand, and the ſtole in the other hand) ſaide: Except thou ſheweſt vnto mee my demaund ſhortly, I ſhall ſtrike off thy head. When the Monke heard that, hee was in great feare, and ſtood ſtill as though hee would giue none anſweare. And when Huon ſaw that, hee lifted vp his Swoorde to haue ſtriken him, but then incontinent the Monke ioyned his handes and cryed for mercie, and promiſed him to ſhew him the troth of his demaund.
            
            
               Chap. CXLIIII.
               
                  ¶ How Duke Huon made ſēblance to haue ſlaine the Monke, holding him faſt with the ſtole, to the entent that he ſhould ſhew vnto him the troth.
               
               
                  
                     THen Huon put vp his ſword, and the Monke beganne to ſpeake, and ſaide. Sir, know for troth, that all we that bee héere are of ye euill Angels, that were chaced out of Paradiſe with Lucifer, who by his pride would compare with God, hee made vs beléeue, that we ſhould be as good as God himſelfe, and wee beléeued him, but as for vs that be héere in this houſe, God was with vs diſpleaſed, and thereby wee were condemned to bee conuerſant abroad in the world, among men and women when we liſt, and ſome be in the likenes of Beares, and ſome like wary woolues, and thus wee ſhall bee vntill the day of iudgment, and ſome other

there be that be Tempters of men and women, deſiring to bring them to damnation, and ſome there bee in the ayre, and followeth the Thunderinges and Tempeſts, and ſome bée vppon the Sea, and drowne many a man, and periſh the ſhippes, whereof but lately you were in ieopardy, for if it had not béene for the great vertue and bountie that is in the precious ſtones, that you and your Wife beare about you, both you and your Wife had been periſhed for euer. And other there bee that are in the bottome of hell, whereas they torment the poore Soules, and there is Lucifer, and they that be moſt euill with him, and though they were once faire, now they bee foule and miſfigured, and they ſhall neuer depart from thence, but wee that bee héere yet, wée hope to come vnto Saluation, but thus we ſhall bee as longe as it pleaſeth God. Then Huon demaunded the cauſe, why they beganne the Leſſons in their Seruice, and to leaue it in the middeſt, and euerie Monke to depart ſo one after another. Sir, (quoth the Monke) our Lord Ieſus Chriſt as yet hath not giuen vs that dignitie nor power, to make an end of our diuine ſeruice, but we haue that grace in this world, that we haue all our deſires, and to bee conuerſant among the people as well as they of the Fayrie, there is nothing but by wiſhing wee can haue it incontinent, and when wee will it is in our power to make Towne or Caſtle ſet vppon hye Rockes cloſed in with Riuers bearing ſhippes, and we haue Minſtrils, Hals, and Chambers, garniſhed and ordained as you haue ſéen héere within. Alſo wee haue wine and victuals, and fiſhe and fleſh at our pleaſure, this Caſtle and Church that you ſée, was yeſternight made by the Fayrie, but one houre before that you came hether, heere was neither Tower nor wall, nor water nor Rocke, and nothing but a faire great meadowe, the which you ſhall ſoone perceiue: and Sir, we be thoſe that haue the conduct of all the Fayrie in the world.
               Now Sir, I haue ſhewed vnto you what we bée and all our ſecrets, the which was neuer ſhewed before vnto any mortall man, whereby I ſhall ſuffer of our Abbot ſuch puniſhment, that there was neuer ſo ill aduenture that fell vnto mée before: therefore Sir, now I haue ſhewed vnto you euerie thing, ſuffer

mee to depart vnto my companie. Monke, (quoth Huon) I will not let thée go, vntill thou haſt ſhewed vnto me, by what manner of way I may goe vntill I haue found Kinge Oberon: thus Huon and the Monke talked together, vntill it was faire day light. Then Huon looked round about him, and ſaw neither Caſtle nor Church, Rocke nor Riuer, but hee ſawe that they were in a faire meadowe, whereof Huon and Eſcleremond were ſore abaſhed, and bleſſed them, hauing great maruaile of that they had ſéen: then the Monke deſired Huon to let him go. Monke, (quoth Huon) to drawe or to ſtruggle cannot auaile thee, for thou ſhalt not eſcape out of my handes, vntill thou haſt ſhewed me the Citie of Momur whereas King Oberon is. Huon, (quoth the Monke) I am content to doe it, but firſt, I pray thée to take from my necke the ſtole. Monke, (quoth Huon) thy reaſoning cannot auaile thée, for thou ſhalt not eſcape from me, vntill thou haſt ſet both me and my Wife néere vnto the Citie of Momur, for thou ſhalt goe with vs foote by foote. Well, (quoth the Monke) ſince it is thus, I am content to fulfill your pleaſure, but one thinge I ſay vnto you, you neuer did a wiſer deed, then that you would not let me goe away, for if the ſtole were not, wherewith you doe hold me, and the precious ſtones that you haue about you, you ſhold neuer haue departed from hence, I thought to haue beguiled you, ſo that you might haue let mée gone my wayes whether I would goe. Monke, (quoth Huon) if I can, you ſhall not depart from me, vntill you haue ſet mee and my Wife within the Citie of Momur. Sir, (quoth the Monke) that will I not doe, nor I cannot doe it though I would, but I ſhall ſette you both vppon the Mount of Hircama, and from thence you may well ſée vnto the Citie of Momur, and all the countrey of the Fayrie, and then I will returne vnto my companie, who by this time are paſſed the great Sea of T
                        •
                     rta
                        •
                     y. Monke, (quoth Huon) I am content, ſo that thou wilt ſette vs in that place, whereas wée may ſee the Citie of Momur.
               
            
            
               
               Chap. CXLV.
               
                  ¶ How the Monke bare Huon and Eſcleremond ouer hils and Ʋalleys in the ayre, vntill hee came into the Countrey of Kinge Oberon.
                  
               
               
                  
                     THen the Monke tooke Huon
                   vppon the one arme, and Eſcleremond vpon the other, but alwayes Huon held the ſtoale ſtill about the Monkes necke, to the entent that the Monke ſhoulde not beguile him, and thus by the Fayrie and enchauntment, the Monke bare Huon and Eſcleremond vnto a hye Rocke to reſt them, and from thence hee bare them as faſt as the bird flyeth in the ayre, at laſt they alighted in a faire meadowe: then the Monke ſaid. Sir, in an euill houre I met with you, for you haue cauſed me to ſuffer great paine, and nowe Sir, I can goe no further, for you are now in the Land of King Oberon whereas wée haue no puiſſance, but firſt I will bring you vnto your lodging whereas you ſhall reſt: then before them they ſawe a Caſtle newly made, the which was ſo faire, rich, and ſtrong, that if I ſhould deſcribe it to the vttermoſt, it would be ouer-long to rehearſe. Then the Monke tooke his leaue of Huon, and of the Ducheſſe Eſcleremond his Wife, and left them in the Caſtle that hee had made. Huon ſuffered him to goe, and thanked him of his curteſie, the Monke ſuddainly vaniſhed away they wiſt not whether, and then Huon and his louing Wife entred into the Caſtle, and came into a rich Chamber well fourniſhed, and there they found a Table ſette with diuers meates and drinkes, but there was no man to ſpeake vnto: then they ſat downe at the Table, and did eat and drinke at their pleaſure, and then they went from thence, and when they were gone a little way, they looked behind them, and ſaw neither Towne nor Caſtle, wherof they were ſore abaſhed, and recommended themſelues vnto

our Lord God: then they went foorth into the meadow, and could ſee neither Towne nor Caſtle, Houſe nor Village, nor man to demaund the way of: and they went ſo long, that they came to the foote of a Mountaine, whereon they mounted with great paine and trauaile, and when they were vppon the toppe of the hill, they reſted them, and then within a little ſeaſon, Huon ſawe appeare before him a great Citie, and vpon the one ſide thereof a faire and rich Pallaice, the wals and Towers of the Citie and the Pallaice, were al of white Marble polliſhed, the which did ſhine ſo bright againſt the Sunne, as though it had been all of Chriſtall: then Huon ſaid vnto his Wife. Madame, yonder before vs we may ſée the noble Citie of Momur whereas King Oberon is. Sir, (quoth Eſcleremond) our Lord God hath done vnto vs a great grace, in that hee hath brought vs hether in the ſauegard of our perſons.
               Then they went foorth vntill they came néere vnto the Citie of Momur, and before the Citie they ſawe a maruailous great Riuer and verie déepe, and two bowe ſhoots in largeneſſe, and it was maruailous pleaſant to behould, and when they came to the Riuer-ſide, they founde there a man with a little Veſſel, awaiting vppon all them that woulde come vnto the Citie to paſſe them ouer. Then Huon and Eſcleremond his Wife entred into the little Shippe, and ſaluted the Guider thereof, but hee woulde giue them none aunſweare, but maruailouſly behelde them, and when they were ouer, the Marriner who was named Clarimodes, and he was Sonne to a Damſell of the Fayrie, then he demaunded of Huon, what he and his Wife were, and ſayd, mée thinkes you be none of the Fayrie, wherefore I am not content that I haue paſſed you ouer. Then Huon gaue him none aunſweare, but went foorth and entred into the Citie, and as they paſſed, they were greatly regarded of them within the Citie, and ſayd one to another, it is great maruaile to ſée theſe two perſons enter into this Citie, for King Oberon (who lyeth ſicke in his bedde) gaue great charge vnto Clarimodes, that no ſtraunger ſhould paſſe the Riuer to enter into this Citie. Huon heard them, and was thereof right ſorrowfull, when he heard that the King lay ſicke in his bedde, ſo he paſſed

foorth and came vnto the Pallaice, euery man there beheld him and his Wife, and had great maruaile to ſée any mortall perſons to enter into that Pallaice, and they were thereof abaſhed and wiſt not what to thinke. At the ſame time, Mall
                        •
                     bron and Gloriand were walking together in the hall, they ſaw Huon and Eſcleremond entring into the Hall, and incontinent they knew them, and came vnto them and embraced them, and ſayd. Ah noble Duke Huon and Ducheſſe Eſcleremond, you are welcome, of your comminge wee are right ioyfull: then Mallabron went from them, and went into the Chamber whereas the King lay ſicke, and ſayd. Right déere Sir, your good Fréend Huon and Eſcleremond his Wife, are come into your Hall. When the King heard that Huon and Eſcleremond were come, for the great ioy that he had, he quickly aroſe out of his bedde. Therewith Gloriand, Huon, and Eſcleremond entred into the chamber where King Oberon was: and when the King ſaw them, he came vnto them, and ſayde. My right déere Fréende Huon, and you my déere Loue Eſcleremond, of your comming I am right ioyfull, then hee embraced and kiſſed them both more then Tenne times, and ſayde. Huon, my right déere Freend, for the great truth and nobleneſſe that I find in you, I ſhall make you King of all the Fayrie, and your Wife Eſcleremond ſhall be Lady and Quéene of the ſame, and beſides that, I will giue vnto you all my dignitie.
               When the Kinge had well ſaluted them, then hee ſat downe vppon a Couch, and made Huon and Eſcleremond to ſit downe before him, and then hee commaunded Gloriand, that incontinent he ſhould fetch vnto him his bowe, and when hee had it in his hand, hee tooke an arrow and did ſhoot therewith: then incontinent it ſéemed that all the world had arriued in the Town and Pallaice, there came thether ſo many Knights and Ladies of the Fayrie, that all the Towne and Pallaice was full: and when they were all aſſembled together in the Pallaice, Kinge Oberon commaunded to carrie him into the great Hall in his rich Couch, then he commanded ſilence to be kept among them all, and then he ſayd. Lordes and Ladie that bée héere aſſembled, all yée knowe, that euerie mortall thing cannot long endure,

I ſpeake it for my owne ſelfe, becauſe I am Sonne to a mortall man, and was engendred vppon the Ladie of the prime Iſle, who can neuer die becauſe ſhee is one of the Fayrie, engendred of a man of the Fayrie, and Daughter to a woman of the Fayrie, and whereas it is ſo, that Iulius Caeſar was a mortall man, therefore it behooueth me to paſſe out of this world by the commandement of our Lord God, who hath ordained that it ſhould be ſo. And becauſe of my loue, during the time that I haue béen conuerſant héere with you, therefore I will not leaue you without a Lorde, but firſt in my life dayes I will puruay you of one, who ſhall bee Duke Huon, whome I loue well and déerely, and alſo I will that his Wife the Ducheſſe Eſcleremond ſhall abide with him, for in no wiſe I will ſeperate them aſunder: therefore I ordaine, that Huon who is héere preſent, be your King and Lord, and Eſcleremond your Que
                     •
                  ne and Ladie, and from hencefoorth I put my Realme and dignitie into his handes, and I will that hee vſe it as I haue done in my life time, howbeit, King Arthur hath ſore preſſed vppon mee to haue my Realme and dignitie, but I will that none ſhall haue it but alonely Huon of Bourdeaux, who is héere preſent, and whome I will crowne King in all your preſence.
            
            
               Chap. CXLVI.
               
                  ¶ How the noble Kinge Oberon crowned Huon and Eſcleremond, and gaue them all his Realme and dignitie that he hadde in the Land of the Fayrie, and made the Peace betweene Huon and King Arthur.
                  
               
               
                  
                     WHen the people of the Fayrie both Knightes and Ladies, had well heard and vnderſtood King Oberon, they were right ſorrowfull, in that hee ſhould leaue them, and ſayd. Sir, ſince it is your pleaſure, and that it is your will, o
                     •
                   reaſon wee muſt bee content to receiue Huon of

                  Bourdeaux for our kinge, and Madame Eſcleremond his Wife for our Quéene. When the King vnderſtood his Lordes and people, then he cauſed to be brought thether two Crownes, the one was ſet vppon Huons head, and the other vppon Eſcleremonds head: then Oberon ſent for his Horne. Napkin, and Cup, and the good Armour, & hee deliuered them vnto Huon, to doe with them his pleaſure, great ioy and feaſting was made in the Pallaice, by the Knights & Ladies of the Fayrie. Then king Huon looked out at a window, and ſawe vpon the Mountaine that he paſſed ouer at his comming thether, a great number of Tents and Pauillions: and hée ſayd vnto King Oberon. Sir, vppon yonder Mountaine I ſee a great number of men aſſembled, and many Tentes and Pauillions picht vp. Huon, (quoth king Oberon) know for troth, that it is kinge Arthur, who meeneth to haue my Realme and dignitie, but hee cometh too late, for the promiſe that you made vnto me you haue kept, therefore he fayleth and commeth too late: for if you hadde not come, I had giuen him my Realme and dignity, I know well, that hee will be heere ſoone to ſee me, and hee will be ſorrowfull and angrie of your comming hether, but if I can I ſhall doe ſo much, that you ſhall bee both in peace and reſt, for good reaſon it is that he doe obay you.
               Therewith kinge Arthur and all his Chiualrie entred into the Citie of Momur, and came & alighted at the Pallaice, and with him his Siſter Quéene Morguele Fay, and Tranſeline their Néece, they came and ſaluted king Oberon, who receiued them with great ioye, and ſayde. Great kinge Arthur, you are welcome, and Morgue your Siſter and Tranſeline your Néece, and Sir, 
                     ••
                  ray you to ſhewe mée, what faire Childe is that I ſée there before your Siſter Morgue? Sir, (quoth Arthur) hee is called Marlyn, and is Sonne to Ogier the Dane, who hath wedded my Siſter Morgue, and I haue left him in my Countrey, to rule it vntill I returne. Sir, (quoth king Oberon) the child ſhall haue good fortune, hee ſhall bee in his time feared and redoubted▪ for Ogier his Father is a good and a valiant knight: And noble kinge Arthur, you are welcome, and of your comming I am right ioyfull, I haue ſent for you, to ſhewe you the

pleaſure of our Lord God, that I ſhall depart out of this world, and to the entent that you ſhould be content, in that I haue giuen you heretofore in the Fayrie ſo much dignitie and puiſſance, wherewith I deſire you to be contented, for behold here Duke Huon of Bourdeaux, and his Wife the Ducheſſe Eſcleremond, vnto whome I haue giuen my Realme and my dignity, to vſe it as I haue done héeretofore: and therefore I pray and commaund you, that you will obay him as Kinge and Soueraigne of all the Fayrie, and you to liue together with good loue and peace.
               When King Arthur heard King Oberon, he anſweared fiercely, and ſayd. Sir, I haue well heard you, and you know well, that your Realme and dignity you gaue me after your deceaſe, and now I ſée well, that you haue giuen it to Duke Huon: Sir lette him goe into his owne Countrey, and vnto his Citie of Bourdeaux, whereas hee hath left his Daughter Clariet, and let him goe and marrie her, for as heere he hath nothing to doe, I hadde rather to bee cleane exiled for euer and chaced out of my Realme, then I ſhould obay him or doe vnto him any homage, for he ſhall haue nothing to doe ouer mee, without hee winne it with the point of the Sworde. When Kinge Huon hadde well heard King Arthur of Brittaine, he anſweared fiercely, and ſaid. King Arthur, knowe for troth, for all your wordes and threatninges I will not ſpare to ſay vnto you, that whether you will or not, it must behooue you to obay and to be vnder me, ſince it is the pleaſure of my Lord Kinge Oberon heere preſent, or elſe you may depart, and go and dwell in the Countrey of Brittaine. Then King Oberon ſeeing appearance of great war to bee mooued betwéene theſe two Kinges, hee ſpake and ſayde, that hee would haue their euill will layd downe, and neuer to haue war betwéen them: and ſayd vnto King Arthur. Sir, I will that you hould your peace, for if you ſpeake one worde more againſt Huon the Soueraigne King of the Fayrie, that hee would condemne him perpetually to be a warre-wolfe in thoſe parts, and there to end his dayes inpaine and miſerie, but if hee will beléeue him, hee woulde agrée them together: then Kinge Arthur ſtood ſtill and would ſpeake no word. Then Morgue and Tranſeline
                  
fell downe vpon their knées, and deſired King Oberon to haue pitie of King Arthur, and to pardon him of all his ill will, and after that Morgue had ſpoken, then Kinge Arthur kneeled downe, and ſayd. Right déere Sir, I pray you to pardon mée, in that I haue ſpoken ſo much againſt your pleaſure. Arthur, (quoth Kinge Oberon) I will that you well knowe, that if it were not for the loue of your Siſter, who hath deſired mee to pardon you, I would haue ſhewed you the power that I haue in the Fayrie, the which from hencefoorth I giue vnto Duke Huon of Bourdeaux, and all the dignitie and puiſſance that I haue vſed in all my life. Then Duke Huon thanked Kinge Oberon right humbly of his courteſie.
            
            
               Chap. CXLVII.
               
                  ¶ Of the Ordinances that the noble King Oberon made before he dyed.
               
               
                  
                     WHen King Oberon had depoſed himſelfe of his Realme and dignitie, and that he had put all his puiſſance into the hands of Huon, then he ſayd vnto King Arthur. Sir, becauſe I deſire with all my heart, that after my deceaſe Huon and you ſhoulde liue together in good peace and loue: I giue you all my Realme of Boulquant, and all the Realme that S
                        •
                     billa holdeth of me, to do therewith at your pleaſure, and of all the Fayries that bee in the plaine of Tartary, I will that you haue ſo much puiſſance there, as Huon hath héere. Prouided, that héere before me you make homage vnto him, and that good peace and loue may be betwéene you. Then Arthur, Morgue, and Tranſeline, and all the other Lordes and Ladies that were there, thanked King Oberon and ſayd, how that they neuer heard nor ſaw ſo rich a guift giuen before, as that Kinge Oberon had giuen vnto Kinge Arthur. Then King Arthur in the preſence of King Oberon, came

and made homage, and kiſſed Duke Huon, then Kinge Oberon and all the other hadde thereof great ioy, becauſe of the Peace made betwéene thoſe two Kinges, and great feaſting and ioy was made in the Pallaice: for all the moſt noble Lordes and Ladies of the Fayrie were there aſſembled, there was great ſolemnitie made.
               Thus as they were in this great ioy, kinge Oberon féeling that his laſt end approached, for hee knewe the day and houre, then (ſéeing that in his life time he had prouided a King for his Realme) he humbly thanked our Lord God, of the graces that he had giuen him in this world: then hee called before him Huon of Bourdeaux, and kinge Arthur, Gloriand, and Mallabron, and ſayd. Sirs, I aduertiſe you, that longe I ſhall not abide among you, therefore Huon, for your bountie and nobleneſſe wherewith you haue béene alwayes indued, I haue choſen you among other to haue the kéeping and Signiorie, and the miniſtration of all the Fayrie, as well of the Countrey of warrewolues, as of other thinges ſecret reſerued, and not to bee ſhewed to any mortall men: and alſo I haue giuen you my dignitie and puiſſance, to doe therewith as I haue done in my time, & becauſe I haue thus choſen you, therefore I will, that when I depart out of this world, that you doe make a newe Abbey of Monkes, the which I will bee ſet in the meadowe héere before this Citie, becauſe all my dayes I haue loued this Citie, and I will that in the Church of the ſame Abbey, you doe burie my bodie as richly as you ſhall thinke conuenient, and I recommend vnto you all ſuch as haue well ſerued me, and I will that you retaine them into you Seruice. When King Oberon had ſayd as much as pleaſed him, Huon anſweared & ſayd. Déere Sir, of the great goodneſſe and honour that you haue done vnto me, I thanke you, and all that you haue ordained or will do, by the grace of God it ſhall be done, in ſuch wiſe, that my ſoule ſhall beare no charge for it at the day of Iudgement. When the Lordes and Ladies that were there aſſembled heard the words of king Oberon, and ſaw well that his laſt end approached néere, ſhe cryes and clamours that were there made was great maruaile to heare, and eſpecially there was ſuch wéepings

and lamentations in the Citie, that great pittie it was to heare it, for they were aduertized that kinge Oberon drewe néere vnto his laſt end, who lay in his rich Couch in the middeſt of his Pallaice, making his prayers vnto our Lord God, and holding Huon by the hand, and at the laſt, hee ſayd. My right déere Fréend Huon, pray for mee, and then hee made the ſigne of the Croſſe, and recommending his Soule vnto God, the which incontinent was borne into Paradice, by a great multitude of Angels ſent from God, who at their departing made ſuch ſhining and clearneſſe in the Pallaice, that there was neuer none ſuch ſeene before, and therewith there was ſo ſweet a ſm
                     •
                  ll, that euerie man thought that they had been rauiſhed into Paradice, whereby they knewe ſurely that kinge Oberons Soule was ſaued.
               When king Huon, and king Arthur, and Quéene Eſcleremond, Morguele Fay, and Tranſeline, and king Carahew, Gloriand, and Mallabron, and all other knightes and Ladies, knew that king Oberon was dead, there is no humane tong can tell the cries, wéepings, and complaints that were made there for the death of king Oberon: 
                  
                     •
                  hen his bodie was taken, and borne to the place where his Sepulcher was deuiſed, the which king Huon cauſed to be made right richly, and ſounded there an Abbey as king Oberon had deuiſed. After the Buriall, they returned to the Pallaice, whereas the Tables were ſet, and there ſat thrée crowned kinges, and two excellent Quéens full of great beautie, at the vpper end of the Table ſat king Huon, and next vnto him king Arthur, and then king Carahew and the two Quéens, and the other Ladies departed, and went and dyned in their Chambers, and they were all ſerued of euerie thinge that was neceſſarie. And after dinner and grace ſayd, king Arthur, and king Carahew tooke their leaue of king Huon, and of Queene Eſcleremond, and ſo departed euerie man into his owne Countrey, and Morgue and Tranſeline tarried a certaine ſpace with Quéene Eſcleremond in great ioy and ſolace. Now let vs leaue ſpeaking of kinge Huon and Quéene Eſcleremond, who tarried ſtill in the Fayrie, and ſhall do vntill the day of Iudgment, and 
                     •
                  et vs returne vnto our former matter, and ſpeake of faire Clariet
                  
Daughter vnto King Huon, who was at the noble Citie of Bourdeaux.
               
            
            
               Chap. CXLVIII.
               
                  ¶ How the Kinge of Hungary, and the Kinge of England, and Florence Sonne vnto the Kinge of Aragon, deſired to haue in mariage the faire Ladie Clariet, and how ſhee was betrayed by Brohart
                     ▪ and howe Sir Barnard was drowned, and of the euils that the Traytour Brohart did vnto the faire Ladie Clariet, and how he dyed at the laſt.
               
               
                  
                     YE haue heard heere before, how King Huon and Quéen Eſcleremond when they departed from the Citie of Bourdeaux, they left their Daughter in the kéeping of the good Abbot of Cluny her Vncle, who grew and dayly amended, in ſuch ſort, that when ſhee came to the age of Fifteene yeares, for her excellent beautie her renowme was ſo great in euerie Country, that there was neyther King nor Duke but deſired to haue her in mariage, ſo that the Abbot and Barnard her cozen, hadde great buſineſſe to giue each of them their anſweare to be content. One was the King of England, another the king of Hungarie, and the other was Florence Son vnto the king of Aragon, but eſpecially the kinge of Hungarie would haue hadde her: the good Abbot anſweared the king of Hungaries Ambaſſadours, and ſo to all the other, that vntill he had heard ſome newes from Duke Huon her Father, hee coulde not agree to any marriage for her: but if they woulde returne againe by the Feaſt of Saint Iohn next following, then he would be content, to hold a day of communication of marriage in the Towne of Blay, whereto the kinge of Hungarie was content, and ſo were all the other Ambaſſadours. And when the day came, the good Abbot tooke his way vnto Blay, to bee there againſt the comming of the Kinges of England,

Hungarie, and Florence Sonne to the king of Aragon: the good Abbot left the Ladie Clariet in the keeping of Barnard her coozen, who loued her entirely, and when the Abbot was come vnto Blay, hee made the Towne to bee hanged richly for the comming of the ſayde kinges. And the third day after the Abbot came thether, firſt came to the Towne the king of England, who anon after he was alighted and ſomewhat reſted, he leapt vppon his horſe againe, and went a hunting into the landes, then afterward came the kinge of Hungarie, in goodly array, he alighted at the Pallaice, whereas the Abbot receiued him with great ioy, then afterward entred Florence with a noble companie. The Abbot did ſalute them all one after another, ſaying, how that he and the whole Towne were at their commaundement, and they thanked him.
               There was a falſe Traytour borne in Bourdeaux, who had heard all the concluſion that the Abbot hadde taken with theſe Princes, and that was, that they ſhould ſée the Ladie, and hee that pleaſed her beſt, ſhould haue her in marriage, this Traytour that heard that concluſion, thought within himſelfe, that he would let that matter if he could, and haue her himſelfe: this Traytours name was Brohart, he departed from Blay, ſore deſiring to attaine to his falſe Enterprize, hée tooke a little Ship, and ſayled incontinent vnto Bourdeaux, then in haſt he went on ſhoare, and fayned himſelfe as though he had great buſineſſe to doe, ſo hée came to the Pallaice, whereas he found the faire Ladie Clariet and Barnard leaning in a window deuiſing together. Then Brohart ſaluted Barnard and the Ladie all ſmiling. Brohart, (quoth Barnard) the matter muſt bee good that I ſée you come ſmiling, I pray you to ſhew vnto mee how doth the good Abbot of Cluny my Coozen, and how hath he receiued the Princes that be come to Blay? Barnard, (quoth the Traytour) know for troth, that in all your life you neuer ſaw ſuch nobleneſſe as is nowe in the Towne of Blay: and therefore Sir, haſtily before the matter goeth any further, the good Abbot of Cluny (who is Vncle to my Ladie héere preſent) ſendeth you word by mée, that incontinent aſſoone as night commeth, that priuily my Ladie Clariet be made readie, and apparelled and diſguiſed like a

man, and you and I to bringe her vnto Blay to her Vncle the Abbot of Cluny, and that to morrowe about noone you ordaine Damſels to come after, and to bringe with them all her riche roabes and apparell, to array her therein when time ſhall bee, and that wee take with vs ſome of her apparel to put on when ſhee comes there, vntil all her other apparell commeth, and the cauſe why that her Vncle ſendeth now for her ſo priuily, is that ſhe ſhould ſee all them that deſireth her in marriage, for out of the Chamber whereas ſhee ſhalbe in, ſhee ſhall ſee them all one after another out at a ſecret windowe. When Barnard heard the vnhappie Traytour, wéening that all that he had ſayd had béen true, becauſe he was a man of credence, therefore he beléeued his wordes. Alas, why did he ſo? for a more vild Traytour there was not from thence to Rome, his Father and his Brethren were ſo all, but Barnard beléeued him, becauſe hee went with the Abbot: then Barnard ſayd vnto Clariet. Ladie, you muſt make you readie, to depart aſſone as night cometh, and you muſt be apparelled as Brohart hath ſhewed, to the entent that you bee not perceiued, vntill you come to Blay to your Vncle the Abbot. Barnard, (quoth the Ladie) ſince it is the pleaſure of mine Vncle and of you, it is great reaſon that I doe it, then ſhe went into her chamber, and apparelled her with her priuie Damſels, and they laughed at her when they ſaw her in mans apparell, and the cruell Traytour did ſo much, that hee got a little Shippe, and brought it readie to the Poſterne of the Pallaice, and he had gotten ready a great ſtone, and tyed thereto a cord, then he came vnto Barnard, and ſayd. Sir, it is full time to depart, that we may bée at Blay before it bee midnight. Then Barnard came to the Ladie, whome hee founde readie to depart, and ſaide all ſmiling. Faire Ladie, you reſemble well to bee a gentle Squier, Barnard put his sword about him, and tooke the Ladie by the arme and ſayd. Come on Companion, it is time wée goe. Brohart went on before, and Barnard and the Ladie went after arme in arme, and ſo went on to the Poſterne ſo primly, that no man perceiued them, then Brohart entred into the Shippe firſt, and tooke Clariet by the hand, and led her to the end of the Shippe, and then Barnar
                        •
                     
                   entred, Brohart
                  
ſoftly did let the ſtone ſlip into the water, and held the cord ſtill in his hand, and ſayd vnto Barnard. Sir, I doe this, becauſe the Shippe ſhall not goe too faſt, vntill we bee paſt the middle of the ſtreame, and ſayde vnto Barnard. Sir, holde you this cord in your hand, vntill we be paſt the hye ſtreame, and then wee ſhall drawe it vp againe. Barnard (who thought none ill) did as the Traytour ſaide: then they tooke the healme in their handes, and ſo departed a long the Riuer of Gerone.
               
            
            
               Chap. CXLIX.
               
                  ¶ when the Traytour Brohart drowned Barnard, and of theyr aduentures, and how Brohart was ſlaine.
               
               
                  
                     WHen Brohart ſaw that they were farre off from the Towne, and that the night was darke, he came vnto Barnard and ſayd. Sir, quickly drawe vp the ſtone by the corde out of the water, then Barnard ſtouped downe low to drawe it vp, and Brohart tooke Barnard by one of his legges before hee was aware, and with all his ſtrength hee tumbled him ouer the ſhip-board into the water, whereas hee was drowned: the which was great pitie, for a more truer Knight could not be found. When the faire Ladie Clariet ſaw that Brohart had caſt Barnard ouer the ſhip-board, ſhee gaue a great crie, and ſhee came vnto Brohart and drewe him by the haire. When that the Traytour ſaw that the Ladie tare his haire, hee tooke her by the armes ſo fiercely, that hee caſt her to the bottome of the Shippe, and did beat her cruelly, & ſayd, that her cryes and wéepings could not ayd her, for whether ſhe would or not hee would haue his pleaſure of her. When the Ladie heard the falſe Traytour, ſhee was in great feare and beganne ſore to tremble, making her prayers to our Lord God, to defend her from diſhonour, and to bring her out of the handes of that falſe Traytour her enemie,

then the vnhappie Traytour came vnto her and ſayd, that it were better for her to fulfill his pleaſure with good will and loue, rather then by force, or elſe he would caſt her into the Riuer of Gerone. Oh falſe Traytour, (quoth ſhe) as long as thou liueſt thou ſhalt neuer haue ioy nor pleaſure of my bodie: then the falſe murderer did beat the Ladie that pitie it was to ſée, and ſo he left her in a manner lying dead.
               When he ſaw that it would bee no better, hee was wearie and ſo fell a ſleepe, the Ship went forth by force of the ſtreame, and by that time it was faire day, ſo farre the ſhippe went that night, that they were néere to the end of the Riuer of Gerone, and the Ladie ſore wéeping, beheld the Traytour how he ſlept, and ſaw lying by him a loafe of bread, the famine that ſhe was in conſtrained her to take and to eat it, for ſhe had ſuch famine that ſhe could forbeare it no longer, then ſhe made her prayers all wéeping to our Lord God, requiring him to kéepe and defend her virginitie, and to preſerue her from that falſe Tirant who had betrayed her. So farre went the Shippe, that it entred into the Sea, the winde was great, and they had neither healme nor ſayle to aide themſelues withall, then the winde tooke them, and draue them to a little Port vnder a hye Rocke in a little Iſle: then Brohart awoake, and was glad when hee ſawe that they were arriued neere to the Land, for hee knewe right well the countrey, and then he ſayd to the Ladie. Thou 
                     •
                  eeſt well that thou haſt no puiſſance to goe againſt my will, the which thou muſt néeds fulfill, for thou canſt not haue any ſuccour of any man or woman liuing, nor all thy defence cannot auaile thee, thou ſéeſt well wee bee in an Iſle whereas the Sea goeth round about it, wherefore I haue great doubt that wee ſhall neuer depart from hence: therefore diſmay you not, for as now I will doe thée no hurt. This théefe when he ſawe that he was in this Iſle, he began to curſe God, and the houre that euer he ſaw Clariet, for the falſe Traytour ſawe well that he ſhould die there by famine and rage, for there was no ſhippe to enter into the Sea, therefore he had then no mind to doe any harme to the Ladie, the which was by the grace of God, who woulde not that the Ladie ſhoulde bee diſhonored: and when

ſhee ſaw that they were ſo neere the land, ſore wéeping ſhee yſſued out of the boat, and ranne vp the Rocke. Nowe God defend her, for the ſame time there was vppon the Mountaine ſixe Théeues, who lay to eſpy the Marchaunts, and they had a little Galley lying in a little corner of the Rocke néere to them, and had couered it with bowes and gréen leaues. When Brohart ſaw the Damſell runne away, he cryed as loud as he could and ſayd. By God Madame, your flying ſhall not auaile you, for whether thou wilt or not, this night I will haue my pleaſure of thée, the ſixe Théeues who were vppon the Mountaine eating of their meate, when they heard Brohart crying after the Damſell, they were ſore abaſhed, and were in great feare that they had béen eſpyed.
               Then the Damſell who ranne vppon the Mountaine, when ſhee ſawe them, ſhee ſayd. Ah Sirs, I pray you haue pittie of me, and ayd and ſuccour mee againſt this falſe Traytour, this night paſſed hee did ſteale me away out of the Citie of Bourdeaux, and I am Daughter to noble Duke Huon. When theſe Théeues heard the Damſell, they aroſe vp all, and thought that it hadde béene ſome fayned matter to haue beguiled them: but when they ſawe Brohart follow the Ladie, then the Maiſter of the Theeues ſtept foorth and ſayd. Howe is it that thou art ſo hardy to come vppon vs, thou art come hether to eſpie vs, but we ſhall neuer be accuſed by thée, thou art but ill come to this bridale. When the Traytour Brohart ſaw the ſixe Théeues, he was ſore abaſhed, and ſaw well that hée ſhould bee faine to defend himſelfe, then he drew out his ſword, and ſtrake the Maiſter Théefe ſuch a blow vppon the head, that hee claue him to the téeth: and when the other fiue Théeues ſaw their Maiſter ſlaine, they were right ſorrowfull and angrie, then they aſſailed Brohart on all ſides, and hee defended himſelfe ſo well, that before he was ſtriken to the earth, he ſlew foure of them, and in the meane time whiles they fought, the Ladie Clariet came to the place whereas the Théeues had béen, and there ſhee ſound meat and drinke plentie: and when ſhe ſaw the meat, ſhe was right ioyfull and thanked God thereof, and did eat and drinke at her pleaſure, and ſhe ſaw that the Théeues had caſt Brohart
                  
to the earth, whereof ſhe was ioyfull: howbeit, ſhee knew not what companie ſhee was come into, nor in whoſe handes ſhee was arriued in. When the Théeues hadde caſt Brohart to the earth, they made him ſhew where hee had taken the Damſell, and he ſhewed them all the matter, and how hee had taken her to the entent to haue diſhonoured her, and to haue hadde her to his Wife, and to haue caried her into ſome ſtrange place vnknowne. When the Théeues heard what Brohart had ſaid, they ſayde. Oh thou vntrue and falſe Traytour, there is no torment in the world ſo cruell, but that thou haſt deſerued a worſe paine, and therefore by vs thy deſert ſhall be rewarded, then they tooke him and bound faſt his féet, and hanged him vp by the féete vppon a Trée, then they made a fire, and vnder his head they made a great ſmoak, and ſo made him to die in great dolour and paine: thus ended the Traytour Brohart miſerably his dayes. Then the two Théeues came to the place whereas Clariet was, and they demaunded of her eſtate, and ſhee ſhewed them all the manner, and how ſhee was taken by the Traytour Brohart, and ſhee declared vnto them what ſhe was: then the Théeues cauſed her to put off her cloathes that ſhe was in, and to put on her other rich apparell, and when they ſawe her 
                     〈◊〉
                   apparelled, they thought that no Ladie nor Damſell in the world could paſſe her in beautie, for ſhee was come againe to her beautie, and ſhe thought her ſelfe well aſſured, becauſe ſhee was deliuered from the falſe Traitour Brohart. When one of theſe twoo Théeues ſaw the great beautie of this Damſell, he ſayde vnto his fellowe: this night I will haue my pleaſure of her, the other ſayd, that he would not ſuffer that, and ſayd how he was the firſt that ouerthrew Brohart, who had ſtollen her away: then the other drewe out his dagger, and ſtrake his fellow into the bodie to the hart, and when he felt himſelfe ſtriken to the death, he tooke courage on him, and drewe his Sword, and ſtrake the other vpon the head to the braines, and ſo he fell downe dead, and the other that was wounded to the death, fell downe in like wiſe by his fellow dead, and ſo thereby the faire Ladie Clariet was left there all alone. When ſhe ſaw her ſelfe ſo all alone in the Iſle, whereas no habitation was, ſhée began

then pitiouſly to wéepe and complaine, ſaying. Oh good Lord, I pray thee by thy grace to haue pittie of me, and I require thée humbly whereſoeuer I goe, to ſaue and defend my virginitie, and ayd mee that I may come to ſauegard. Now let vs leaue ſpeaking of the faire Clariet, and returne to ſpeake of the Kings and Princes that were at Blay, abiding the comming thether of the faire Ladie Clariet.
               
            
            
               Chap. CL.
               
                  ¶ Of the great ſorrow that was made at Blay, by the Abbot of Cluny, and by the Princes of the noble Citie of Bourdeaux, for the faire Ladie Clariet that was ſtollen away: and of the ſorow that was made, when they ſaw Barnard brought in dead by Six men. And of the puniſhment that was done to the Lineage of the Traytour Brohart.
                  
               
               
                  
                     WHen theſe Kinges and Princes were arriued at Blay, and had ſpoken with the good Abbot of Cluny, they concluded betwen them thrée that the Ladie Clariet ſhould be ſent for, and he that ſhe would fréely chooſe, ſhould bee her Huſband, for each of them thought themſelues moſt faire, & thought that there could not bee found thrée goodlyer young Princes then they were, but eſpecially Florence Sonne to the Kinge of Aragon was the moſt faireſt. And the ſame time that they were determined, to ſend to the Citie of Bourdeaux for the Ladie Clariet there came thether the Knightes, Squiers, Ladies, and Damſels appointed by Brohart, thinking to haue found there the faire Clariet, and they brought her roabes and Iewels to apparell her withall, (as Brohart had deuiſed) they came & alighted at the Pallaice, the Abbot of Cluny being at the gate, and ſéeing the Ladies and Damſels comming, thought that it had béen his Néece the faire Ladie Clariet, he went incontinent vnto them, and demanded

where his Néece Clariet was. Sir, (quoth the Knightes) we thinke to find her héere with you, for yeſternight late the Lady departed from the Citie of Bourdeaux to come to you, and Brohart came for her, who with Sir Barnard went with her, and they commaunded vs that we ſhould not faile to be héere with you at this houre: then they ſhewed all the manner howe Brohart came, and what hee had ſayd vnto them. And when the good Abbot of Cluny heard them, hee fell ſuddainly to the earth in a ſwound, ſo that all that were there preſent thought that he had béen dead, then at laſt he reuiued, and caſt out a great crye and ſayd. Ah my right déere Néece, I ought to bee ſorrowfull thus to looſe you in this manner, I would to our Lord God that I were vnder the earth, for I woulde liue no longer in this world. Ah thou falſe Traytour Brohart, thy kindred did neuer good: Oh Barnard, where is become your nobleneſſe? yet I cannot beléeue that you bee any thinge culpable. Anon theſe newes were knowne in the Towne, ſo that all the Kinges and Princes were aduertiſed of the matter, and they came haſtely 
                     〈◊〉
                   the Pallaice, whereas they found the Abbot in ſore wée
                  
                     •
                  inges, whome they had ſlaine, if it had not béene for the good renowne that they knew to bee in him, therefore they forbare him: then euerie man mounted vppon their horſes and roade towardes the Citie Bourdeaux, whereas they founde the Burgeſſes and the common people in great cryes and wéepings, bewaylinge for the noble Duke Huon and the Ducheſſe Eſcleremond his Wife, and for Clariet their Daughter, who was loſt and betrayed by Brohart.
               
               When the Abbot of Cluny and the other Princes were entred into Bourdeaux, and ſaw ſuch ſorrow made there, they all 
                     〈◊〉
                   to wéeping, and as they were in this ſorrowe, there came thether Siremen, bringing with them Sir Barnard dead, who they had found drowned in the Riuer of Gerone, if the ſorrowe was great before, then it was more renewed when they ſawe Barnard dead: if I ſhould rehearſe the ſorrowe that was made that day in the Citie of Bourdeaux, aſwell of the Princes as of the Abbot and common people, it ſhould be too long to rehearſe. Then the Kinges and Princes, well aduertiſed of the Lineage

and Parents yſſued of the bloud of Brohart, and how alwayes they haue been full of treaſon, they were ſearched out in euery place of the Citie, as well men as women and Children, there were found out to the number of Thrée-ſcore and ten perſons, and they were all taken and caſt into the Riuer of Gerone, to the entent that none ſhould bee left aliue of that kindred, and neuer more to be had in remembrance. After this was done, the Kinges and Princes departed out of the Citie, and road into their owne Countreys, right ſorrowfull and ſore diſpleaſed for the looſing of the Ladie Clariet, and the Abbot abode ſtill at Burdeaux, and buried Barnard, who were ſore complayned for of the people. Now let vs leaue ſpeaking of them, and returne to the faire Ladie Clariet, who was all alone vppon the Mountaine.
            
            
               Chap. CLI.
               
                  ¶ How the Ladie Clariet all alone came to the Sea-ſide, whereas arriued the King of Granado in a Shippe, who tooke away Clariet, and of other matters.
               
               
                  
                     NOwe ſheweth the Hiſtorie, that after the Théeues were ſlaine and Brohart dead, the Ladie Clariet abode alone vpon the Mountaine with the dead men, ſhee wept pitiouſly, and ſayd. Ah good Lord, in what houre was I borne in, alas, what ill hap and deſtiny haue I▪ it had béene better for mee neuer to haue béene borne, for I ſée well that héere I muſt dye: Alas, I wot not whether to goe, for in this Iſle is neither man nor woman, to whome I may goe for any refuge. Thus ſore complayning, the Ladie went downe the Mountaine, and by that time the Shippe that ſhe came in was floated away, and as ſhee looked into the Sea, ſhee ſawe a great Shippe comming towards the Port, for freſh water and for wood: and when ſhee ſawe that,

ſhe was right ioyfull and thanked our Lord Ieſus Chriſt, and ſhe thought that they had béene Chriſtian men, but they were Sarazins & Paynims, and with them was a King, who was their Lord and Soueraigne, he was king of Granado, and was returning into his Countrey, but hee had ſuch fortune vppon the Sea, that hee was conſtrained to come thether: then they caſt anchor an
                     •
                   tooke land, and the King when hee ſaw the Ladie vppon the Sea-ſide, hee demaunded of her what ſhee was, and of what Countrey▪ Sir, (quoth ſhée) ſéeing you will know of mine eſtate, I ſhall ſhew you: then the Ladie ſhewed before all them that were there preſent, how ſhee was Daughter to Duke Huon of Bourdeaux, and ſhewed all the aduenture that was fallen vnto her. When the Sarazin Kinge heard that, hee was right ioyfull, and ſayd. Faire Ladie, it is happie for you that I haue found you, for I haue no Wife, you ſhall be my Wife, and ly with me this night, but firſt you muſt denie your Lawe, and beléeue vppon the Law of Mahomet vppon whome I doe beléeue. When the faire Ladie heard the Paynim King, ſhee ſayd. God forbid that I ſhould leaue the Law of Ieſus Chriſt to beléeue in the Law of Mahomet, I had rather haue all my members drawne one péece from another with wild horſes, then to be wedded wife to ſuch a kind of man as you bée.
               When the King heard the Damſell, that ſhee ſet ſo little by him, hee had great diſpleaſure thereat, and lifted vp his hand, and gaue her vppon the chéeke ſuch a blow, that the bloud ran out of her mouth and noſe, ſo that ſhe fell to the earth, whereof he was ſore blamed of his men, and hee ſaid vnto them. Why Sirs, did you not heare how ſhee deſpiſed our Law, and ſet no more by me then if I had béen but a boy? then he commaunded that they ſhould take and caſt her into the Sea, and he departed from her, in great diſpleaſure that ſhee anſweared him ſo rudely. Then the Sarazins came and tooke the Ladie rudely, and caried her into the Ship, and ſo ſaued her, but the King knewe not thereof. Then when the King came againe to the Shippe, they drew vp their anchors, and hoyſed vp ſayle, and had good wind, then as the King walked vp and downe in the Shippe,

he ſaw the Damſell within the Shippe, whereof hee was ſore abaſhed, for he thought that his men had drowned her, then he looked vppon her, and thought that hee neuer ſaw ſo faire a Ladie, and ſo he deſired her with all his heart, and ſayd vnto her. Faire Lady, now you be here, your deniall ſhall not auaile you, for this night you ſhall lye with mee. When the faire Ladie Clariet heard the Paynim King, deuoutly ſhe called vppon our Lord God, and humbly required him to preſerue her virginity, and to bringe her out of the handes of the Sarazins, and then ſhe knéeled down before the King, humbly deſiring him to haue pittie of her, and ſayd, how ſhe was content to follow his pleaſure, aſſoone as he came into his owne Countrey. Well quoth the King, whether you will or not you muſt ſuffer my pleaſure, for I will not depart from you vntill I haue lyne with you one night, and that I may hold you in mine armes: and when ſhée vnderſtood him, ſhée beganne ſore to weepe, deſiring God to aid and ſuccour her at that time, for otherwiſe ſhee ſawe well that ſhe was but loſt.
               Therewith there aroſe ſo great a wind and ſo horrible, that the Sea that was calme and peaceable, began to ariſe, and the wind was ſo great, that whether the Sarazins would or not, it behooued them to abandon their Shippe to the winde, whereof they were in ſuch feare, that the Kinge and all other had great doubt of their deathes, for their ſayles were all to torne with the wind, and néere hand the Shippe periſhed, they cryed and called vpon their God Mahomet for ſuccor and ayd. The King was in ſuch feare, that he had now no liſt to deſire the faire Ladie Clariet of her loue, who was ſore afrayd and pale for feare: this torment & Tempeſt endured all the night, and they were driuen the ſame night beyond 
                     Ʋalencia the great, and in the morning they ſaw the Towne of Tours, to the which Port the wind draue them: and when the Paynims ſaw that they were arriued there, they were right ſorrowfull, for they knew well that the Towne was chriſtened, they ſawe no way howe to eſchew it, but they had rather to 
                     •
                  e as ſlaues all their liues, then to be drowned in the Sea.
               The ſame time there was arriued at the ſame Port, a noble

Knight named Sir Peter of Aragon, and when hee ſawe the other Shippe comming to the Port by conſtraint of the winde, and ſaw well (without it were ſuccoured) the ſhippe ſhould be periſhed againſt the Rocke, whereby they within and all the riches ſhould de periſhed and drowned, then he cryed to the Galleys that lay in the Port, to goe and ſuccour that ſtrange ſhip, and then the Marriners went to the Sea and came to the Ship. When the Sarazins ſawe that, the were in great feare to bee ſlaine: then there came two Paynims to the Damſell, to haue taken her and to haue caſt her into the Sea. Then ſhee tooke the Maſk of the Ship in her armes, and held it ſo faſt, that they could not drawe her from it: then the Aragonoyſe began to approach to the Shippe, and caſt their hookes to ioyne together. The Ladie in the Shippe had great feare, the which was no maruaile, howbeit, ſhe was ioyfull, when ſhe knew that they that came were chriſtened, then the Aragonoys by the cordes and roapes entred into the ſhippe: and when Peter of Aragon and his companie were entred into the Shippe, he ſaw the Ladie ſore weeping, then hée demaunded of the Sarazins, where they had gotten that Princeſſe, right now (quoth hee) I ſawe, howe you would haue taken her and caſt her into the Sea, if I had not come haſtely: then one of them ſaid. Sir, wee bee of Granado, and fortune of the Sea hath driuen vs hether, we be readie to bee your ſlaues, or elſe to pay raunſome at your pleaſure. Paynims, (quoth Peter) all the gould in the world ſhall not ſaue your liues, none of you ſhall eſcape, then hée commanded that they ſhould bee all ſlaine, and that none ſhall eſcape aliue, the which was done incontinent, all were ſlaine except the King, of whome Peter of Aragon demaunded, why hee woulde haue drowned that noble Damſell, and where they had found her. Sir, (quoth the King) we know her not, nor what ſhe is, for we found her all alone vppon a Rocke in an Iſle within the Sea. And when I ſaw the great beautie and bounty that was in her, I coueted her, and cauſed her to be put into my Shippe, thinking to haue had my pleaſure of her, but ſhee woulde in no wiſe ſuffer mee, wherefore I was diſpleaſed with her. Well, (quoth Peter) you ſhall be ſlaine and goe after your men, without

you will beléeue in Ieſus Chriſt, and renounce the Lawe of Mahomet. Sir, (quoth the Paynim) I had rather to bee ſlaine all quicke, then to leaue my holy Lawe and to take that beléefe that you are of. When Peter heard him ſay ſo, hée gaue him with his ſword ſuch a ſtroake vpon the head, that he claue it to the téeth, and the King fell downe dead, whereof the Ladie Clariet was right ioyfull.
               Then Peter came vnto her, and demaunded what ſhe was, and where the Paynims had found her? Sir, (quoth the Ladie) I was borne in a part of Fraunce, in a Towne called Naunts in Brittaine, and my Father was of L
                        •
                     ſborne, and he had great deſire to ſée his Fréends, ſo he entred into a Shippe, and two of my brethren and my ſelfe, and diuers other Marchants together, and when wee hadde thought to haue entred into the Hauen at Liſborne, a great horrible winde tooke vs, ſo that we were faine to abandon our ſhippe, and to let it goe by the grace of God, and at the will of the winde and weather, then wee paſſed the ſtraights of Maurocco, and there our Shippe ranne againſt a Rocke and burſt all to péeces, ſo that my Father and all that were in the Shippe were drowned, and by the grace of God I ſat vppon a ſacke of woll, and held me faſt, and then the waues brought mee to the land-ſide, whereof I thanked God, and within an houre after, this heathen Kinge arriued there with his companie by fortune of the Sea, and ſo they tooke me into their Shippe, and the Kinge enforced himſelfe to haue had his pleaſure of mee, and then by fortune of another Tempeſt we arriued heere, whereas you haue ſlaine him and all his men. Faire Damſell, (quoth Peter of Aragon) you may thanke God that you bee come into my handes. Sir, (quoth ſhée) I know well that if you had not béene, I had béene loſt for euer: and therefore Sir, as long as God ſhall giue me life, I will be glad to ſerue you, as the moſt lowlieſt Chamberlaine in your houſe, and put my bodie and honeſtie into Gods handes and yours. Faire Damſell, (quoth Peter) as longe as I liue you ſhall not lacke, for by the grace of God, your bodie and your honour ſhall be well ſaued, and peraduenture you ſhall haue ſuch a Huſband, that you ſhall thinke your ſelfe right happie, our

lord God did vnto you a great grace when you fell into my handes.
               Then Peter of Aragon tooke the Damſell by the hande, and commaunded to hoyſe vp the ſayles, and to returne vnto Taragon a Citie betwéene Barſelona and Valencia the great, whereas then was the Kinge of Aragon, and ſo longe they ſayled night and day, that at the laſt they ſaw the Towers of Taragon, wherof they thanked God, and as they approached néere to the Citie, the Kinge of Aragon was in his Pallaice looking out at a window, then hee ſawe comming in the Sea ſixe Galleys and a great Ship, whereof he was abaſhed, and maruailed what it might be, for hee knew them not becauſe of the great Shippe, then they that knew them, came to the Kinge and ſayd, howe that it was his Coozen Peter of Aragon, who is come home in ſafetie thanked be God. Then the Kinge and his lordes with him went downe, and went to the Sea-ſide, whereas he found the noble man Peter of Aragon his Coozen, and all his company with him. Then the King embraced him, and ſaid: Coozen, you are right hartely welcome, I am ioyfull of your good aduenture. I pray you (Cozen) to ſhew me where haue you gotten this great Shippe, that ſéemeth to bee ſo rich? Then Peter ſhewed vnto him all the aduentures, and howe hee reſ
                     •
                  ued the Damſell out of the handes of the Sarazins, and he ſhewed her vnto the Kinge, and ſayd. Sir, I beleeue in this world there is not a fairer, ſwéeter, nor more gracious creature, nor none that ſéemeth more to be extract of a higher lineage. The Kinge beheld the Damſell, and ſhe knéeled downe before him. Faire Damſell, (quoth the King) I pray you to ſhewe mee what you bée, and of what lineage, and from whence you come? the Ladie who was in great feare to name her ſelfe truely, for feare leaſt ſhee ſhould be in ill handes, caſt downe her head preſently & began to wéepe, ſo that the teares fell from her eyes, and ſaid. Sir, I require you deſire no ſuch thing of me at this time, for I knowe not who is my Parents, nor of what lineage I am of. When the King vnderſtood the Damſell, and ſawe howe ſhee wept, hee had great pitie of her, and comforted her as much as hee could: then Peter ſhewed vnto the King all that the Damſell

had ſhewed him before, and ſhe was found by the Sarazins (quoth he) whome I haue ſlaine, ſhe was happie that ſhe fel in to my handes, for by the grace of God I ſhall ſée her well maried and ſet foorth.
               Then the Kinge and Peter went from the Shippes into the Towne, and cauſed the Damſell to bee brought after them, with twoo Gentlemen into Peters lodging, and as ſhee paſſed through the Towne, ſhe was regarded with Ladies and Damſels, and they all prayſed her beautie, ſaying one to another, that there was neuer a fairer Ladie borne, nor more likely to be come of a noble bloud. Great feaſting was made in the Citie, for the comming home of Peter of Aragon, and of the Damſell that he had brought with him. The ſame time, Florence the Kinges Sonne had béene a hunting, and came home, and when hee was in the Towne, and ſawe the ſtréets hanged, and the Ladies and Damſels and other making ſo great ioy and feaſting, he was abaſhed, and demaunded of a Burges, if there were any newe wedding, and wherefore it was that the people made ſo great ioy and feaſting? Sir, (quoth the Burges) the feaſt that is made now and the ioy, is for the comming home of Peter of Aragon, who hath béene ſo long out, for that God hath ſent him good aduenture, for hée hath wonne and conquered the great Shippe of Maliga, wherein was the King of Granado, great riches hee hath wonne, and hee hath ſlaine all the Sarazins that were in the Shippe. Then Florence reſted not, vntil he came to his Cozen Peter of Aragons lodging, and made him good cheere, and ſaide. Cozen, you are welcome home, and I am right ioyfull of your good aduenture. Sir, (quoth Peter) I thanke God I haue had good fortune, and Sir, I ſhall ſhew you one thing that I haue wonne, whereof I am moſt ioyfull: then he ſhewed him the Damſell, who was ſober and ſad, and ſhewed him how hée wanne her. When Florence ſaw the Ladie, his heart ſprang for ioy, and the more hee beheld her, the more fairer ſhe ſéemed: and the Damſell beheld him right humbly, and ſhe thought that ſhe neuer ſaw a fairer young man before, nor better made nor fourmed of all his members. Florence ſo behelde the Damſell, by reaſon whereof the dart of

loue ſtrake him to the heart, whereof the wounde coulde not be lightly healed, I may well ſay, that in all the world in that time could not be found againe two ſuch perſons, for the great beauty wherewith they were garniſhed could not be deſcribed, for God and nature had forgotten nothing in forming of them, ſwéetly they regarded each other, at that time if Florence had knowne, that ſhee had béene the faire Clariet of Bourdeaux, hee would haue married her incontinent, ſhe was greatly taken in the loue of Florence, and ſo was hee with her: then hee deſired with all his heart to knowe what ſhee was, for his heart gaue him that ſhe ſhould be come of ſome noble bloud, and ſayd vnto himſelfe, that hee deſired much to knowe it, and that in all the world there was nothing hee loued ſo well, and thought that without her loue hee could not long endure, thinking to deſire her to take him for her Louer, and that if ſhee refuſed him, that ſhort ſhould be his life, but thought to bee ſo bolde as to ſpeake to her.
               Thus Florence taken with the fire of loue, tooke the faire Damſell by the lilly white hand, and cauſed her to ſitte downe by him: then he drew her a little apart, to the entent that none ſhould heare him, and then hee ſayd. Faire Damſell, you bee welcome into theſe parts, I pray you to ſhew me what you be, and of what Lineage? Sir, (quoth the Damſell) little ſhall you winne when you know the certaine what I am, but ſince it pleaſeth you to know I ſhall ſhew you. Sir, know for troth, I am Daughter to a poore honeſt man of the Countrey, and in times paſt was one of the Chamberers with the Ducheſſe Eſcleremond of Bourdeaux, and Sir, by great treaſon I was ſtollen away, whereby ſince I haue ſuffered much pouertie, ſo that if God and this noble man Peter of Aragon had not reſcued me, I had beene loſt for euer, and therefore Sir, ſince I am poore and deſolate, I require you in the honor of our Lord God, that you will not require mee of any villanie againſt my bodie and honeſtie, neither in word nor deede, and ſir I beleue ſuerly no more ye thinke to doe, for I had rather be hewen all to péeces, then any creature ſhould haue pleaſure of my bodie without I were maried. Faire Damſell, (quoth hee) I ſweare by God

that mee created, that of mee nor of any other man liuing, you ſhall not be deſired againſt your honour, for I know no man liuing, that would require you of any diſhonour, or ſay any thing that ſhould not be agréeable vnto you, but I ſhall make him to die of an ill death, and I will that you know, that from hencefoorth I will bee your true Louer, and none ſhall make departure of vs two, and if it were ſo that my Father were dead, I would neuer haue other Wife but you. Sir, (quoth the Ladie) I pray you to forbeare ſpeaking of any ſuch wordes, for it were not méete for the Sonne of a King, ſo to debaſe himſelfe, as to ſet his loue vppon ſo poore a Mayd as I am, beware how you ſet your heart to loue, for if the Kinge your Father perceiue any thinge, that you ſhould ſet your loue vppon mee, he would ſoone put me to death, therewith ſhe caſt downe her head, and ſayd to her ſelfe. Ah good Lord, if this young Prince knewe ſurely what I were, it might well be that hee would haue mee in marriage, as yet in all my life, I neuer ſet my loue vppon any perſon, but this young man whome I neuer ſawe before, it maketh me to thinke that which I neuer thought before, that it maketh my bloud and all my members to tremble, I am in worſe caſe for his loue, then he is for me, therewith ſhee began ſore to wéepe. When Florence ſaw her, he was right ſorrowfull, and ſayde. Faire Damſell, I require you to take mee for your true and faithfull Seruant, otherwiſe I cannot ſée howe I ſhall liue long. Sir, (quoth ſhe) I am well content to graunt you my loue, ſo that your deed and thought be vppon goodneſſe and honour, for if I may perceiue in any manner, that your thought bee otherwiſe, you haue loſt my loue for euer. Faire Loue, (quoth Florence) haue no doubt thereof, that euer I ſhall haue any thought of villany againſt you. Thus as yée haue heard was the firſt acquaintance betwéene theſe two Louers, that is to ſay, the faire ladie Clariet Daughter to Duke Huon of Bourdeaux, and of Florence Sonne to the King of Aragon.
            
            
               
               Chap. CLII.
               
                  ¶ How the King forbad his Sonne Florence, that he ſhould not be ſo hardy as to fall acquainted with the faire Ladie Clariet, and how Florence promiſed the Kinge his Father, to deliuer into his handes the King of Nauarre Priſoner, in caſe that he would bee content at his returne, that he might haue the new found Damſell, the which thinge the King promiſed, but hee did it not, for he made the Damſell to be taken, and had drowned her, if Peter of Aragon had not beene, who reſcued and ſaued her from the death.
               
               
                  
                     WHen Florence had long deuiſed with the Damſell, he tooke his leaue of her, and of Peter of Aragon his Cozen, and then he returned to the King his Father, and the next day hee went againe to the Damſels lodging. So often he reſorted thether, that great brute ranne in the Pallaice, and alſo in the Towne, how that Florence was amorous of the Damſell, that Sir Peter of Aragon had brought thether, and the matter at the laſt was ſhewed to Kinge Garyn his Father, wherewith hee was ſo ſorrowfull, that hee was all in a rage, and ſayd within himſelfe. Ah good lord, this new found Damſell will winne my Sonne if ſhee can, and get him from me, I know well, that by reaſon of the great beautie that is in her, my Sonne will be enamoured of her, but by the God that I beléeue vppon, if I ſée that my Sonne either goe or come vnto her, (as it is ſayd he doth) that acquaintance ſhall be déerely bought, for with mine owne hands I ſhall ſlay her. Right ſorrowfull and angry was King Garyn with his Sonne Florence
                  ▪ and with the Damſell, then hee ſent for his Sonne, and when hee was before him, the King demaunded of him fiercely, from whence hee came▪ Sir, (quoth Florence) I haue béene a ſporting in my Cozen Peter of Aragons houſe, and haue paſſed the

time there with the newe come Damſell, the moſt faireſt that euer was borne, and the moſt gentleſt and beſt taught, right faire and ſwéet are her deuiſes. Florence, (quoth the King) I charge thée in as much as thou feareſt my diſpleaſure, that thou commeſt no more at her, beware that thou falleſt not enamoured of her, if thou doeſt, thou wert neuer ſo ill acquainted with any Loue, nor there neuer came ſo ill aduenture to the Damſell, if ſhee draw thée to loue her, for if I may know that thou goeſt thether any more, I ſhall ſette her in ſuch a priſon, whereas I ſhall cauſe her to end her dayes miſerably. Father, (quoth Florence) mée thinkes that you doe vs great wronge, to forbid vs to play and ſport together in all goodnes and honour, and God defend that I ſhoulde entend any wayes to deceiue her: Déere Father, remember that you haue béen young, therfore ſuffer that youth may paſſe their time in goodneſſe and honour with vs, as it hath done with you, nowe you are about Four-ſcore yeares or more, you ought to thinke of nothing but to ſerue God, and eat and drinke and ſléep, it ought not to trouble you, though our youth paſſe the time in good workes, you ought to bee content, that we loue by amours as you haue done before this, for to the Damſell I beare all honour, and I will loue her, howſoeuer it bee taken faire or foule, there is no man liuing that ſhall let mee as longe as life is in my bodie, ſhee is faire and gentle, and it is ſaid that I am faire, and that it were a méet couple for vs two to be ioyned together in mariage, and therefore Father, I praye you to blame mee no more nor the Damſell, for in all that I can doe, I am her Louer and ſhee is mine.
               When the King hadde well vnderſtood his Sonne, in great yre and diſpleaſure, he ſayd: Oh thou vngracious Son, little thou prizeſt or honoureſt me, in that thou wilt doe thus againſt my will: know for certaine, if I may liue but till to morrow in the morning, I ſhall make a departure of your twoo loues. When Florence heard his Father, he ſayd. My déere Lord and Father, if God will you ſhall not doe as you haue ſayd, for if you doe, with mine owne handes I ſhall ſlay my ſelfe, for I will not liue one day after. When the Kinge heard that, hee

was right ſorrowfull for feare of loozing of his Sonne, and ſtudied within himſelfe what to doe, then he ſaid. Faire Son, take thine armour, and goe and ſeeke aduentures as I haue done in my time, then I ſhall marrie thée to ſome Wife, ſuch a one as thou canſt finde in any Countrey, although ſhe be neuer ſo great or noble, I ſhall cauſe thee to haue her, i
                     •
                   thou wilt forſake and leaue this new found Damſell, for by her no wealth nor honour can come vnto thée, it ſhould bee a great euill vnto thee, that after my daies it ſhould bee ſaide, that a newe found Damſell ſhould bee Ladie and Queene of my Realme. Thou knoweſt well, howe thine Vncle the King of Nauarre maketh me great warre, for a debate that is lately fallen betwéene him and me, I knowe well that now at this Moneth of Aprill, hee wi
                     •
                  l come and inuade my Realme, and therefore good Sonne, ſeeke for ſome other Wife, and let this folly paſſe: then I ſhall make thée a Knight, & then helpe to aid and defend my Realme againſt the Kinge of Nauarre thine Vncle, thou art bigge and ſtrong inough to defend my Land. Good Father (quoth Florence) ſpeake no more vnto me, for I will neuer haue no other Wife but this faire Damſell, whome I loue entirely. Sonne quoth the King, thou abaſeſt thy ſelfe ouer lowe, nor there is no friend nor kindred that thou haſt, that will keepe any company with thée, but they will cleane flye from thée: therefore good Sonne, put away from thée this folly, beware, in as much as thou thinkeſt to haue my Realme after my deceaſe, and vppon the paine to bee baniſhed out of my Countrey, take not her againſt my will.
               Then the Kinge called vnto him his Cozen Peter of Aragon, and charged him, that if Florence his Sonne came any more to his lodging, that he ſhould incontinent tell him of it, for I promiſe (quoth hée) by the faith that I owe vnto our Lord God, if he come thether any more, I ſhall cauſe the Damſell that is in your houſe to be ſlaine. Florence was right ſorrowfull, when hee heard to the pleaſure of the Kinge his Father. Thus as the King rebuked his Sonne, there came in a Knight and kneeled downe, and ſayd. Sir, I haue brought you ill tidings, for the King of Nauarre is entred into your Realme, and ſetteth all

your Countrey in flame and fire, and néere to your Citie they be to the number of more then Thirtie Thouſand men, beſides the great Battaile that commeth after, wherein there is about thrée-ſcore Thouſand men, they exile your Countrey, and they ſlay men, women, and Children, they ſpare neither young nor old, it is great néed that you make haſt, and to bring your men together to reſiſt your enemies. When King Garyn heard the Meſſenger, he was right ſorrowfull, then hee called vnto him his Cozen Peter of Aragon, who was his chiefe Conſtable, and ſayd. Sir, make readie our men to reſiſt our enemies, then he called vnto him Florence his Sonne, and ſayd. Faire Sonne, take thine armour, and ſhew thy vertue againſt thine enemies, who waſte my Realme, and take vpon thée the chiefe charge, and lead mine Hoaſt, for I haue no puiſſance nor ſtrength to do it, becauſe of the great age that I am of, I haue liued ſo long that I can no more ride: therefore defend thou the Land that thou ſhalt hold after mee, and then thou doeſt as a wiſe man ſhould doe. Father, (quoth Florence) by the grace of God I will put no armour vppon my backe to defend your Land, except you will giue mee in marriage the faire Damſell that is in my Cozen Peter of Aragons houſe, if you will doe me that courteſie, and promiſe mée to doe it, I ſhall deliuer into your hands your enemy as Priſoner, to doe with him your pleaſure, otherwiſe looke not that I ſhall doe any thing. When the King ſaw that his Sonne would doe none otherwiſe, then he commaunded all his other men euerie man to arme himſelfe, and to goe and reſiſt his enemies: the which they did incontinent, and they yſſued out into the fields more then tenne Thouſand men, and Sir Peter of Aragon hadde the leading of them, and they were not out of the Towne aboue twoo Leagues, but they encountred their enemies, there were many ſpeares broken, and many a Knight beaten downe to the earth and ſlain, and their bodies lying without ſoules among the horſe féete, right valiantly did Sir Peter of Aragon behaue himſelfe that day: but hee had not ſtrength ynough ſufficient, for his enemies encreaſed, wherefore hee was conſtrained to retire backe towardes the Citie, howbeit, before he entred, he did great loſſe and dammage vnto

his enemies.
               When the Nauarnes ſawe the Aragons retire into the Citie, then they pitcht vp their Tents and Pauillions about the Towne, and when king Garyn ſaw his men returned, then he called his Sonne Florence, and ſaid. Sonne, take thine armour and ayd to defend the Land, the which appertaineth to thée after my deceaſe. Sir, (quoth Florence) that will I neuer doe, without firſt you promiſe me, to giue me the faire Damſel in marriage, by that couenant, that I ſhall deliuer into your hands as Priſoner mine Vncle the King of Nauarre. When the King his Father heard him, hee muzed a litttle, and ſayd. My Sonne, I graunt thee thy deſire, ſo that thou wilt deliuer me thine Vncle the kinge of Nauarre, to doe with him at my pleaſure, therefore take thine armour and make thée readie, thine armour is good, and thy ſwoorde is with the beſt, and if thou canſt do as thou ſayeſt, thou ſhalt haue the faire Damſell, howbeit, he ſayd to himſelfe priuily, that he had rather to looſe one of his handes, then a ſtranger ſhould be Quéen after him, for aſſoone as my Sonne (quoth hee) ſhall be yſſued out of the Citie, I ſhall cauſe the Damſell to be drowned in the Sea, for I will not ſuffer her to liue, although I ſhould bee diſenherited for it. Then Florence hearing his Father, promiſing to him to haue the Damſ
                     •
                  ll, he was right ioyfull: but he knew not the inward ill will of his Father, then hee ſayd. Sir, then I require you to ſend for my Loue hether, to the entent that ſhe may guird my ſword about mee, whereby I ſhall be the more bold and hardy when I come into the Battaile. The kinge did as his Sonne required, but the Sonne knewe not the Fathers thought, the Kinge ſent twoo knightes for the Damſell, and when ſhee came there, ſhee was greatly regarded of them that were there, for they had neuer ſéen a fairer, nor one that ſéemed to be extract of a hye generation. When Florence ſawe her in the Pallaice, his heart roſe vp, and he ranne vnto her and embraced and kiſſed her, and the Ladie ſuffered him with a good will: wherewith the king had at his heart ſuch ſorrow, that he had neere hand runne vppon them, but he forbare it, becauſe he ſaw his Son readie to goe againſt his enemies, then he helped

to arme his Sonne richly, and in like wiſe ſo did the faire Damſell.
               When king Garyn hadde made his Sonne readie, the Damſell did guird his Sword about him, then the king drew it out of the ſheath, and therewith made him knight, and then his horſe was brought vnto him, and hee leapt lightly vppon him, with his Speare in his hand, and helmet vppon his head, and ſhéelde about his necke. Then Florence ſayd vnto the kinge his Father. Sir, I leaue with you my Loue, whome I loue beſt in all this world, I leaue her in your kéeping, for if our Lord God giue me the grace that I may returne, I ſhall bring vnto you mine Vncle the king of Nauarre as a Priſoner. The king graunted vnto his Sonne all that he would deſire, but he knewe not the inward intention that hee was purpoſed to doe. Then the king commaunded Ten of his knights to ſée the guiding of the Damſell, and to honor her as much as they might, vntill his Sonne were out of the Citie, and then to drowne her in the Sea, to the entent that neuer more tidinges ſhould bee heard of her.
            
            
               Chap. CLIII.
               
                  ¶ How Florence went to fight with his enemies, and how Sir Peter of Aragon returned towards the Towne, to bring thether Priſoners: and howe hee reſcued the faire Damſell Clariet from drowning, and how afterward Kinge Garyn cauſed the Damſell to be cloſed vp in a priſon.
               
               
                  
                     WHen Florence was armed and mounted, hee tooke vp his horſe freſhly before the Damſell, and bleſſed him, and tooke his leaue of the kinge and of his Loue, and ſo departed and road to the gate: and all that ſawe him ſayde, howe they neuer ſawe ſo goodly a knight, nor more ſéeming to bee feared, then hee yſſued out of

the gate, and roade towardes the Tents of his enemies, with ten Thouſand good knights and hardy: the Ladies and Damſels went to the wals of the Citie to behold the young knight. When the Nauarnes ſaw him comming, there came againſt him more then fiftéene Thouſand men, and they came downe in a Valley by couert, to haue cutte him the way betwéene the Hoaſt and the Towne, but the valiant knight Sir Peter of Aragon (who was with Florence) eſpyed them, and ſo made haſt to be afore them: and when hee ſawe his time to ſet vppon his enemies, Florence (who was ſore deſirous to fulfill his promiſe to the king his Father) tooke his Speare, and encountred with a knight with ſuch vertue, that he ranne him cleane through, and with drawing out of his Speare, the Nauarnes fel downe dead, then Florence ſayd. God hath giuen mee a good beginning, then hee drewe out his ſword, and ſtrake another vppon the helmet, in ſuch ſort, that he claue his head to the teeth, and the third and fourth hee made dolorouſly to die, and hee neuer ceaſed vntill he had ſlaine Tenne of his enemies. Thus vnder the meadowes of Courtoys, was a horrible Battaile betwéen the Nauarnes and Aragons, where there was vpon both partes ſuch ſlaughter, that it was great maruaile to behold it. Anon Florence ſword was well knowne, for by the force of his armes he brake the great preaſſes, for vppon whom ſoeuer his ſtroke lighted, hee was either ſlaine or caſt to the earth, euerie man feared him ſo much, that none durſt abide nor approach néere vnto him.
               The ſame time that Florence was in the Battaile dooing of maruailes, the faire Damſell Clariet was vppon the wals of the Citie, with other Ladies and Damſels, regarding the hye Proweſſe that Florence did in the field, and the ioy that ſhe had thereof, was ſoone turned into ſorrow and wéepings, for king Garyn (who could not forget the mortall hate that he had to the Damſell) called vnto him Ten knightes of them that were ſecret with him, and ſayd. Sirs, this new found Damſell, with whome my Sonne Florence is in hot amours, ſhee diſpleaſeth me ſo much, that I cannot find in my heart to looke vppon her, my Sonne thinketh to haue her in marriage at his returne,

but as long as he liueth, hee ſhall neuer ſee her more whatſoeuer fall thereof, therefore goe your way, and take and caſt her into the Sea, amonge the greateſt waues that you can finde. When theſe knightes vnderſtood the King, who commaunded them to doe this murder, they were right ſorrowfull at their heartes, but they durſt not ſay nay, nor doe againſt his will, for if they had, they knewe well that they ſhould die, and they knew that there was neither mercie nor pitie in him: therefore they durſt make no ſemblance to the contrarie, they feared ſo much to diſpleaſe him. Then they went and tooke the Damſell whereas ſhee was. Sirs, (quoth ſhee) what will you doe with mee? wherefore doe you take mée? let mee goe, if you will haue any thing with mee, ſhew mée? They ſayd, Damſell ſpeake no more, for your end is come, you ſhall neuer ſee faire day more: and when ſhe ſaw that ſhe was ſo taken with Tenne men, who went threatning to ſlay her, then ſhee caſt out a great crie, and deſired God to ayd and ſuccour her. Then they bound the Damſels handes with a cord, in ſuch manner, that her white tender ſkinne burſt, and they bound her ſo ſore that the bloud dropped out at her nayles. Sirs, (quoth ſhe) I crie you mercie, little ſhall you winne to ſlay mee, you ſhall doe great ſin, ſeeing I haue not deſerued it. Madame, (quoth they) your wordes cannot auaile you, the Kinge will not that you ſhall make auaunt to haue his Sonne in mariage, for you ſhalbe drowned in the Sea whether you will or not, your wéeping ſhall not ayd you. Then foure Ribaulds tooke and bound her, and drew her by the haire of her head, and led her toward the Sea-ſide to haue drowned her, but often times it is ſayd, that which God will haue ſaued, cannot be periſhed.
               The ſame ſeaſon Florence was in the Battaile, whereas hee fought with his enemies, and Sir Peter of Aragon had taken many Priſoners, and hee came vnto Florence, and ſayd. Ah Sir, I require you to let vs returne to the Citie, and bee content with that you haue done this day, for yonder you may ſée comming al the whole Hoaſt of the Nauarnes, againſt whom it is not poſſible for vs to endure, for they are more then thréeſcore Thouſand men, and they all hate vs to the death, you

haue done ynough & ought to be content, if they take you, none can ſaue your life. Coozen, (quoth Florence) I pray you before I depart, let mee Iuſt once with mine Vncle the kinge of Nauarre, whome I haue promiſed to yéeld as Priſoner vnto the king my Father, and thereby I ſhall haue in mariage the faire Damſell my Loue, and for the loue of that faire Damſell I ſhal make many a Nauernoys to looſe their liues. Sir, (quoth Peter) ſince you deſire your owne death, I am right ſorrie thereof, but I will no longer tarie héere, for it is not poſſible for vs to tarie héere, without we will bee ſlaine wilfully, and I haue héere many Priſoners, I will go lead them into the Citie, and then I ſhall returne again vnto you, to the entent that if either I or you be taken Priſoner by them, wee may bee redéemed againe. Then Peter went to the Citie with all his Priſoners, and when he was come into the Citie, hee heard a great noiſe about the Market place, whereof hee had great maruaile, and went thether, and then hee ſawe there foure foule Villaines, drawing the faire Damſell Clariet towardes the Sea-ſide to drowne her. When he ſaw that, hee was neuer ſo ſorrowfull in all his life before, and incontinent did let goe his Priſoners, and drew out his ſword, and cryed vnto them that led the damſell. Ah yée falſe Théeues, let the Damſell go, whom I brought from beyond the Sea, yée did neuer ſuch folly in all your liues, and therewith hée ſtrake the firſt with his Sword, in ſuch ſort, that his head ſlewe from his bodie, and the ſecond hee claue to the téeth, and the third and fourth hee ſlewe. When the faire Ladie ſaw the Earle Peter, right pitifully ſhe beganne to crie, and ſaid. Sir, I require you to haue pitie of me, and help and ayde mee as you haue done before this time, neither Lorde nor Maiſter I haue none but you. Sir for Gods ſake vnbind me, and put me out of this paine that I am in. Then Peter went to the Damſell, and cut the cords aſunder wherewith ſhe was bound, and for the ſorrow that ſhe was in, ſhée fell downe in a ſwound: then Peter tooke her vp and ſayde. Faire Damſell, be of good chéere, for I ſhall helpe to ſaue you: the faire Ladie wept pitiouſly, and ſayd to her ſelfe. Ah Huon of Bourdeaux my déere Father, the great paines and pouerties that you were

woont to ſuffer, you haue left mee now Inheritour to the ſame, alas, I know not where you nor my Mother is, I beléeue that I ſhall neuer ſée you more. Then Peter of Aragon tooke the Damſell by the hand, and led her to his lodging in the Town, then he went to the Pallaice, whereas hee found Kinge Garyn, vnto whome he ſayd. Ah thou old doating foole, wherefore, or for what cauſe wouldeſt thou haue ſlaine the Damſell, and ſhe is none of yours, ſhe is mine, I wanne her vppon the Sea and ſaued her life, you can make no claime to her?
               Thus as Peter ſpake to the King, there entred into the Pallaice two Knights, and they ſayd to the King. Sir, before you is the Earle Peter your Coozen, who hath deliuered and reſcued the new-found Damſell, and hath ſlaine the Foure men that ſhould haue drowned her in the Sea. When King Garyn ſaw the Earle before him, he ſayd. Why wert thou ſo hardy, as to ſlay my men for dooing of my commaundement? Then hee cried to his men, and ſaide: Sirs, I charge you take this Villaine héere, who hath done mee this offence, for I ſhall neuer haue ioy at my heart, vntill I ſée him hanged a hye vppon a Rocke. Then his men ſtept forth to haue taken the Earle Peter, and when hee ſawe that he approached néere vnto him, hee drew his ſword, and claue the head of the firſt to the téeth, and he ſlew the ſecond, third, and fourth, he beat downe more to the earth, then ye other that fled away, ſo that there was none that durſt approach néere vnto him, for they were all vnarmed and hee well armed: then hée came to the King, and ſayd. Ah thou falſe old Dotard, full of ſin and out-rage, how dare you thinke to bee ſuch an out-rage? you are not worthy to beare a crown, your Sonne Florence ought to haue it, for a Traytour ought to hould no Realme, full déerely you ſhall abuy the ill will of the Damſell, and the more to make him abaſhed, hee made ſemblance to runne vppon the King with his ſword, who for feare of him ran into his Chamber, and ſhut faſt the dore after him, and the Earle Peter ſtanding without, ſore threatned the king, then the King ſaid. Coozen Peter, I crye you mercie, if I haue done euill, I am readie to make amendes at your pleaſure, I was ſore diſpleaſed with my Sonne, and therefore I thought

to be reuenged vpon her that hath cauſed all this, I ſhall make amendes, but by the grace of God my Sonne ſhall neuer haue her in marriage to die: therefore I will neuer conſent, that a new-found Damſell ſhould bée Inheritour of ſuch a Kingdome as the Realme of Aragon is. Then Sir Peter anſweared and ſayd: Sir beware, blame her no more, bee content with that you haue done alreadie, it may be that the Damſell is of as hy a Lineage as your Sonne, wherefore ſuch time may come that you may be déerely rewarded, peraduenture the Damſell was ſtollen away by ſome ill Tyrant, ſhee hath béen ill entertained with you, when you would ſo cruelly haue ſlaine her. Cozen, (quoth the Kinge) the matter is ill come to paſſe, for her ſake you haue ſlaine many of my men, the which I pardon you, but as for the Damſell, I will ſet her in priſon in a Tower, out of the which ſhe ſhall not depart, and I will ſhew my Sonne that ſhee is drowned in the Sea, and I will kéepe her in priſon till my Sonne hath forgotten her, or elſe hath taken another wife, then I will deliuer her, and ſend her into ſome other Countrey whereas ſhe ſhalbe better entertained.
               When the Earle Peter heard the King ſay ſo, he agréed to his ſaying, and thought that aduiſe to bee good, and was content with that he had ſaued her life, then the King opened the chamber dore, and ſo came into the Pallaice, then he ſent for the damſell, and then ſhee was ſet in priſon in a Tower, and the Kinge commaunded to a ſecret Seruant, that hee ſhoulde ſée that the Damſell ſhould want nothtng for her liuing, and charged him vppon paine of his life to kéepe the matter ſecret, and hee charged all thoſe that knewe thereof, in any wiſe to ſhewe Florence his Sonne nothinge of her. Then hee cloſed vp the dore with ſtone, to the entent that ſhee ſhoulde not yſſue out, and left nothing open, but a little windowe towards the Towne of Courtoys, wherein her meate was put, other windowes there were opening vppon the fields, the which gaue great ligght into the houſe. Thus the faire Ladie Clariet was cloſed vp into the Tower, whereas ſhee hadde good leaſure to wéepe and wayle. Now let vs leaue ſpeaking of the Ladie, and ſpeake of Florence who was in the Battaile.
            
            
               
               Chap. CLIIII.
               
                  ¶ How Florence diſcomfited his enemies, and tooke the King of Nauarre, and led him into the Towne, and deliuered him to the King his Father, and howe Florence deliuered him againe quit, becauſe that his Father ſhewed vnto him that the faire Damſell was drowned.
               
               
                  
                     YE haue well heard heere before, how the Earle Peter of Aragon departed from Florence, and returned into the Citie, for he could not cauſe Florence to leaue the battaile, whereas hee did maruailes, for the loue of the faire Ladie Clariet whome he truſted to wed: hee ſlew ſo many of his enemies, that ye fields were couered with the dead bodies. When the king of Nauarre his Vncle ſawe that, hee was right ſorrowfull to ſee his men ſo ſlaine, then hee came againſt Florence his Nephewe, and ſayd. Ah thou vnkind Nephewe, curſed bee you, I ſhall neuer haue ioy at my heart, as long as I ſee thee aliue, thou haſt done me this day great dammage, I had rather dye an ill death, then not to be reuenged of thée: wherefore I require thee to Iuſt with me, I challeng thy Land, the which ſhalbe mine, thou ſhalt neuer be Lord thereof. Florence anſweared and ſayd: I ſhall not refuſe the Iuſtes, then hee put vp his ſword, and tooke a great ſpeare, and ſo ran againſt the king his Vncle, and the king came againſt him, and they met together ſo rudely, that the Kinges Speare brake all to péeces, but Florence Speare was bigge, wherewith he ſtrake the kinge ſo rudely, that hee fell to the earth with his feete vpward, and he fell ſo ſodenly, that he lay in a traunce, and before hee could bee recouered Florence tooke him by the ventale of his helmet, and ſayd. Nauarre, before I ſleepe I ſhal deliuer you Priſoner into the handes of a faire Damſell, whome I loue entirely, for in all the world there is none like her in beautie, if

you refuſe thus to doe, with my Sworde I ſhall incontinent ſtrike off your head from the ſhoulders: the king ſayd, hee was content to fulfill his pleaſure and to yéeld himſelfe Priſoner. Then Florence tooke his Sworde from him, and made him to mount vppon his horſe, and to ride before him towardes the Towne, and deliuered him to the keeping of Tenne knightes, and Florence road after with his ſword in his hand all bloudie, the crie and noyſe beganne to bee great among the Nauarnes, they enforced them on all parts to haue reſcued their king, but they coulde not come in time, for by that time, Florence was within the gates of the Citie, whereas hee was right ioyfully receiued.
               When the Nauarnes ſawe howe they loſt their labour, and how their king was entred into the Citie, they were right ſorrowfull, and came before the Barriers and ſkirmiſhed, and wan but little, and ſo returned with ſmall profit, and ſorrowfull for the loſſe that they had receiued that day, for the fieldes were couered with dead men. Thus they returned to their Tents and Pauillions, and the Aragons entred into the Citie of Courtoys with great ioy, and when they were in the Citie, then Florence tooke the king of Nauarre his Vncle by the hand, and led him to the Pallaice, and there alighted and went into the Hall, whereas he found king Garyn his Father, who hadde great ioy of his comming. When he ſaw his Sonne Florence bring his enemie Priſoner, he embraced his Sonne, and ſayd. My right déere Sonne, I am right ioyfull of your comming. Father, (quoth Florence) I haue done ſo much by the ayd of our Lord Ieſus Chriſt, that I haue taken your enemie Priſoner, whom I render into your handes, to do with him at your pleaſure. Nowe I will that you kéepe your promiſe with mée, ſéeing I haue quit mine, now it is time that you deliuer vnto me the Damſell, whom I ſhall make Quéen and Ladie after your deceaſe. When the king vnderſtood his Sonne, he was all in a rage, and ſaid. Faire Sonne, leaue thy folly, and take ſuch a Wife according to thine eſtate, and thinke no more of that new Fondling: for know for troth, I haue cauſed her to be caſt into the Sea, whereas ſhee is drowned. Thou art a Foole to

thinke that I will ſuffer after my deceaſe, that a poore Caitiffe new-found, ſhould bee Ladie and Quéene crowned of ſuch a Realme, beware, in as much as thou thinkeſt to diſpleaſe me, that thou bee not ſo hardy as to ſpeake, or remember any more the new-found Damſell.
               When Florence heard the Kinge his Father ſay, howe the Damſell was drowned in the Sea, his bloud mounted into his face, and his heart was ſo oppreſſed and ſo heauie, that he had no power to ſpeake, and ſuch a maruailous colde ſweat tooke him, that there was no vaine nor member in his bodie, but trembled for anger and ſorrow that was in him, ſo that he had no power to ſuſtaine himſelfe, but fell downe to the earth in a great traunce, in ſuch ſort, that euerie man there thought hee had béen dead, and euerie man complayned for him, and eſpecially the king his Father was right ſorrowfull, and would as then that he had neuer begunne that matter. When Florence came againe to himſelfe, hee ſayde. Oh good Lorde, the earth ought to be curſed, when it ſuſtaineth ſuch a trayterous kinge, that hath done ſuch a déede, great perill it is to bee conuerſant with him: then Florence looked vppon the knightes about him, and ſayde. Sirs, I require you, for the loue you ought of reaſon to beare me, bring me to the ſame place, whereas ſhe whom I loued perfectly was periſhed and drowned, for other Sepulcher I deſire none, but the ſame that ſhe hath, for the loue of her it ſhall pleaſe me well to bee vnder couert, vnder the waues of the Sea, whereas my Loue is, to the entent that of me there be heard neuer more remembrance.
               Then hee beheld the king of Nauarre his Vncle, whome hee had taken Priſoner, and ſayd. Sir king of Nauarre, thou art my Priſoner, but if thou wilt ayd mee, to bee reuenged of this treaſon that my Father hath done: I ſhall then let thée goe againe frée and quit. Faire Nephew, (quoth he) leaue that folly and ſpeake no more thereof, for it toucheth much your honour, and you ſhall be blamed of all them that heare ſpeaking thereof. Sir, (quoth Florence) what is that you ſay? you knowe well that you are my Priſoner, and that it lyeth in me whether you ſhall liue or die? Faire Nephew, (quoth the king) I will well

agrée to your wordes, but if you will beléeue mee, beléeue the king your Father, & leaue to doe after your owne will. What? (quoth Florence) you know well, that in me it lyeth to ſtrike off your head, without you will agrée vnto my will and pleaſure, the which thing I will doe, except incontinent you ſweare the death of kinge Garyn my Father, and that neuer to take peace with him, vntill you haue brought him to the death, vpon this condition I ſhall ſet you in ſauegard: for the Traytour hath deceiued me, of ye thing that I loue beſt in all this world. Then the king of Nauarre ſayd. Déere Nephewe, you are as yet young, I cannot tell whether your wordes and promiſes are ſtable and firme or not, for the youth that I ſée in you, and alſo for the great diſpleaſure that you be in now: and therefore faire Nephew, I haue great feare that you ſhould beguile me. Sir, (quoth Florence) God forbid that I ſhoulde bée ſo deceiuable of my promiſe, to promiſe you any thinge and fulfill it not, whatſoeuer ſhould fall thereof.
               At this time there were but few perſons in the Pallace with the kinge, for all the Lordes and knightes were gone into the Towne to their Lodgings, to refreſh them of their trauaile and wearines: therefore the king was in his Pallaice with a ſmall companie, the which Florence had well eſpyed, and there was certaine of Florence knightes about him, vnto whome hee ſayd all wéeping. Sirs, incontinent goe and get mee my horſe, and alſo the king of Nauarre his horſe readie at the gate, the which was done, and when they were come, then Florence ſayd vnto the kinge of Nauarre his Vncle. Good Vncle, if there bee any courage in you, to be ſafe and out of ſeruage, take this ſword in your hand, and let vs leaue this vnhappie king, to vſe his daies in ſorrow, and come and follow me. Faire Nephew, (quoth the king of Nauarre) I haue great feare that you will beguile me. Sir, (quoth Florence) thinke it not, but come after mee, and you ſhall ſée what I will doe: then Florence departed, and the kinge of Nauarre with him, they leapt vppon their horſes, and when they were vpon their good horſes, there was no man at that time in the Towne abroad to let Florence of his Enterterprize, but thus they paſſed both vntill they were without the

Towne, then Florence ſayd to the king his Vncle. Sir, nowe you knowe well that I haue brought you out of this Towne, and therefore I require you againe, that you neuer take peace with the king my Father, vntill you haue ſlaine him. Faire Nephew, (quoth the king) that which you require me to doe I ſhall fulfill it, and thus I recommend you to God. When the kinge ſawe himſelfe ſo well deliuered, hee was ioyfull, and ſo road vntill hee came to his Hoaſt, whereas his men receiued him with great ioy, and they demaunded how he was eſcaped out of the handes of Florence, then the king ſhewed all the manner howe Florence deliuered him, whereof they had great maruaile, and had great ioy of his comming: and to accompliſh his promiſe to Florence his Nephewe, he ſent to all his Realme of Nauarre, to his Fréends and other to come and ayd him. Now wee ſhall leaue ſpeaking of the king of Nauarre, and ſpeake of Florence his Nephew.
            
            
               Chap. CLV.
               
                  ¶ How King Garyn put Florence his Sonne into a Tower in priſon, and how the Damſell eſcaped out of the Tower, and ſpake with Florence her Louer at an arch vpon the Garden-ſide, and how they were eſpyed, and howe ſhee thought to haue drowned her ſelfe.
               
               
                  
                     WHen Florence had deliuered the king of Nauarre his Vncle, whom hee had taken before in the Battaile, then he returned againe into the Citie, and ſo road till he came to the Pallaice, whereas he found the king his Father, and ſayd as a man almoſt out of his wits. Oh thou falſe Traytor, thou haſt done ſo much through thine ilneſſe, that I rather deſire thy death then thy life. Then he ſayd to the Knightes that were there preſent: Sirs, I pray you bringe mee to the Sea, and caſt mee therein, in the ſame

place whereas my Loue was caſt, for I will not liue one houre longer, if you doe not this, I ſhall ſlay my ſelfe with mine own handes. When king Garyn heard his Sonne ſay ſo, hee was right ſorrowfull, and ſpake fiercely vnto his Sonne, and commaunded to take him, and to ſet him in priſon in the Tower, in ſuch wiſe that hee may bee ſure of him, and ſayde. Well I ought to be angrie in my heart, when this boy mine own Son thus dealeth with mee: but by the faith that I owe vnto our Lord God, the diſpleaſure that he hath done vnto mee hee ſhall deerely abuy it, for as long as he liueth, hee ſhall haue no foote of my Land. Sir, (quoth Florence) by you, nor by your Land, nor by any thinge that you can doe, I ſet not thereby a button, for I hadde rather die then liue. There was no man preſent but that wept greeuouſly for pitie, and when Florence ſaw them wéepe, he ſayd vnto them. Sirs, come vnto mee, take off my Armour, and put me into the handes of the king my Father, for I will not that any of you ſhoulde haue any diſpleaſure for my ſake, let mee beare the blame my ſelfe, ſéeing that I haue loſt the thing that I loue beſt.
               Then the Knightes came vnto Florence, and vnarmed him, and deliuered him to the King his Father: then the king tooke him by the hand, and led him foorth rudely, and ſayd: howe hée would ſette him in ſuch a place, out of the which hee ſhould not come of a long ſpace. The Earle Peter of Aragon had great ſorow, but hee durſt ſpeake no word, the king himſelfe led him to the great Tower, and there left him ſore wéeping, and making great ſorrow for his Loue whom 
                     〈◊〉
                   had loſt, he made ſuch ſorrow that pitie it was to heare, & when the night came, and that hee remembred the Damſell, his ſorrowes beganne to renew. And aſwell as hee made ſorrowe for his Loue, the faire Damſell Clariet, who was in the ſame Tower immured vp in priſon, thee heard the complaintes that Florence made, and ſo long the hearkened, that at laſt ſhe thought that ſhee knew the voice, and ſayd. Oh good Lord, what may this bee? who is this that I heare thus complaine? mée thinkes I haue heard that voice before this time, and mée thinkes it ſhould be he that loued me ſo well, I will not leaue ſearching vntill I may know

the troth. Then the Damſell came to the dore that was newly immured vp, whereby the morter was not fully drie, and ſhee ſcraped with her fingers, and with a little knife that ſhee had, ſo that at the laſt ſhe ſcraped out a ſtone. Then ſhe aſſayed to pull out more, and ſo much ſhee did with her fingers and the knife, that ſhee made a great hole in the newe wall, ſo that ſhee créeped out and went into the Garden, the which ioyned to the Tower, & then ſhee felt by her a Roſter, vnder the which ſhee ſate downe, the Moone ſhone bright, whereby the Garden was as light as though it had béen cléere day. Then ſhe tooke a faire Roſe in her hand, the which ſmelled ſwéetly, and ſaide. Ah good Lord, I woulde that it were thy pleaſure that my Louer were heere with me, I thinke hee be not farre from hence, I wiſh with him this ſwéet Roſe, ſo that hee knew that it came from mee, I will not leaue ſearching vntill I haue found him, and if I cannot find him, in dolour and miſerie I muſt end my dayes.
               The ſame time that the Damſell complayned thus in the Garden, Florence, who was in the Tower, and heard the faire Damſell in the Garden, hee kn
                     •
                  we her well by the voice, and ſaide. Oh good God, what is it that I heare yonder in the Garden? Déere Louer, (quoth the faire Ladie) it is ſhe whom you doe loue ſo well, I am yſſued out of the Tower, wherein I haue béene in great miſerie, and I cannot tell what will fall thereof, comfort mee, or elſe I ſhall die héere in great ſorrow. When Florence heard the voice of his Loue, he had ſuch ioy at his heart, that he forgat all his dolour, when hee ſaw that ſhee was not dead, then hee ſayd vnto her. Ah my right ſwéete Loue, whether will you goe? for if the King my Father know, that you be eſcaped out of the Tower, incontinent hee will ſlay you, hee will haue no pitie of you, and I cannot ſuccour you. Swéet Loue, I pray you to gather me ſome flowers, and caſt them in at this window, then I ſhall paſſe my dolours the better, when I haue in my handes any thing that commeth out of yours. Then the Damſell gathered Roſes and flowers, and did caſt them in to her Louer, whereof Florence had great ioy, when hee had receiued them from her, and kiſſed them oftentimes:

then hee came to the window, thinking to haue taken his Loue by the hand, but he could not the wall was ſo thicke, whereof they were both ſorrie.
               The ſame time whiles they were thus deuiſing together, the watchmen came about, whome the King had ſent thether to eſpie and knowe, if Peter of Aragon did ſende vnto thoſe Priſoners any comfort or ayd, and when they came thether, they hearkened, and heard the voices of thoſe two perſons, & heard well their words, and wept for méere pitie of them: then ſwéetly one watch-man called vnto them, and ſayde. Holde your peace, for if you be ſpyed you cannot eſcape the death, I haue great pitie of you both, I pray God to preſerue you, for I cannot comfort you. Then they held their peace, and ſo went aſunder, to the entent that they ſhould not bee heard nor ſéene, then there came thether two other watch-men, ſent thether by the King, to ſée if any bodie came to the Tower, to aid or comfort the two Priſoners, and when they were come néere to the Tower, they ſawe the newe made wall broken, then they ſayd each to other: ſurely the Damſell is fled, and hath broken out of priſon, then they cryed out, and made a great crie and ſayd, the Damſell is fled out of the Tower. When the Damſell (being in the Garden) heard the noyſe that the Spies made, ſhee was in great feare and doubt, the which was no maruaile, then incontinent as priuily as ſhe could, ſhe went from the Tower, and went to the end of the Garden, whereas there was a hye Rocke, and vnder the Rocke a great water and déepe, ſhee did clime vppon the Rocke, and ſayd. Ah Florence my déere Louer, this day ſhall bee the departing of vs two, it muſt behooue me to die for your ſake, ſhee ſawe in the Garden a great number of Torches light, and men ſéeking all about for her, whereof ſhe was afrayd, and not without cauſe, for ſhee knewe well that if ſhe were taken, ſhe were loſt for euer. Right ſwéetly ſhe called vppon our Lord God, and on the holy Ghoſt for ayd and comfort, and ſaide. Alas, if I be taken, I cannot eſcape from the martirdome of death, but ſince it is thus, that we muſt néeds depart for euer, I had rather bee drowned then be taken, therewith ſhee made the ſigne of the croſſe, recommending her

ſelfe to our Lord God, & therewith tumbled downe the Rocke, to haue fallen downe into the water, but as ſhe fell, ſhe lighted in a great buſh by the way, whereby ſhe was pricked in diuers places on her face and hands, ſo that the bloud followed, wherby ſhée felt ſuch paine that ſhe ſwounded. Then the noyſe ran through-out the Pallaice, that the Damſell was eſcaped out of the Tower, in ſuch ſort, that the King was aduertiſed thereof, who was ſorrowfull, and made promiſe that Earle Peter of Aragon ſhould looſe all his Lands and goods, for he thought that by his meanes ſhe was eſcaped the priſon.
            
            
               Cbap. CLVI.
               
                  ¶ Howe the firſt Watchman found out the Damſell, and led her into a great wood there by, and afterward the ſame Watchman deliuered Florence out of priſon, and ſhewed him the place where the Damſell was: and how Florence and Clariet entred into the Sea, and how the Kinge went after his Sonne, and the VVatchman taken.
               
               
                  
                     THus as the brute was in the Pallaice, for the eſcaping of the Damſell, the firſt Watch-man that firſt eſpyed the two Louers together went all about in the Garden, to ſée if he could find the Damſell, he ſought ſo long that he found the Damſell, whereas ſhée lay in the buſh in great perill to be drowned. This Watchman was a wiſe man, and as priuily as he could he yſſued out of the Garden, and went downe to the water ſide, and there he found a little boat, and entred into it, & ſo paſſed the vine Garden as priuily as he could, ſo that none heard nor ſaw him: and when he was againſt the buſh whereas the Damſell was, hée ſpake to her ſoftly, and ſayd. Faire Damſell, be not abaſhed, for if I may in any maner of wiſe I will ayd you, come down, and enter into this boat, and I ſhall ſet you in the Forreſt, and

tarie there vntil I bring to you Florence your Louer, the which I ſhall doe by the grace of Ieſus, for if I can by any manner of meanes, I ſhall bring him out of the danger that hee is in, becauſe I haue alwayes loued him, and for the goodneſſe that hée hath done to me, I ſhall now reward it.
               When the Damſell heard the Watch-man, for ioy thereof ſhée forgat all her ſorrow, and incontinent aſwell as ſhe might ſhe yſſued out of the buſh, and went down the Riuer ſide: then ſhe entred into the boat, and the Watch-man ſet her ouer, and left her in the Forreſt, the which ioyned to the water ſide, then he tooke his leaue of her, and ſayd. Faire Damſell, tarie here vntill I returne againe to you. Fréende, (quoth the Damſell) I pray to God that you may ſo ſpéed as to bring hether my Louer, and to ſet him out of danger, and ſo he departed, and entred againe into the Garden, hearkening towardes the Pallaice, whereas there was great brute made for the eſcaping of the Damſell: But there was no doubt made of Florence, becauſe the Tower that hee was in was ſtronge and thicke. Alſo the Chamber that he was in was not toward the Pallaice, but it lay open againſt the Garden: then the ſayd Watch-man came to the wall ſide, whereas there was a ſtraight loope hole into Florence Chamber, and he had two Goates féete in his handes, then hee called Florence, and ſayd. Sir, if you will bee with your Loue, who tarieth for you in the Forreſt, whereas I haue l
                     ••
                  t her in ſauegard: helpe your ſelfe that you were out of this Tower, take heere this Goates foote, and doe you ſo much there within to enlarge the loope, that you may yſſue out, and héere without I ſhall make the hole wyder. When Florence vnderſtoode the Watch-man, hee was neuer ſo ioyfull in all his life, when he heard the man ſay that his Loue was in ſauegard, & they laboured ſo ſore, that they made the loope ſo large, that Florence yſſued out, and then the Watch-man brought Florence to the Stable, whereas ſome of the Kinges horſes ſtoode, eſpecially there was one, whoſe like could not be found. This Watch-man (who had great affection and deſire to doe ſeruice to this young Lord) did ſo much, that he brought vnto Florence his Armour, his ſhéeld, his helmet, his ſword, and a good Speare,

and ſo Florence armed him, and leapt vpon the good horſe, then the Watch-man ſhewed him the place in the Forreſt, whereas as hee had left the Damſell, and then hee tooke his leaue of Florence, who ſayd. Fréend, the ſeruice that you haue done me, ſhall be well rewarded in time to come: then hee road foorth, and left not vntill he came whereas his Loue was: and when he ſaw her, his ioy was renewed, then he alighted, and kiſſed his Loue, and when he ſawe that ſhe was ſo bloudie, he hadde great pitie of her, and ſayd. Deere Loue, it is néedfull that we depart before the day come: Therefore make you readie and leape vp behind me, and then Florence mounted, and ſhe leapt vp behind him, and ſo departed aſſoone as they might.
               When they were in the fields, the Damſell looked backe towards the Citie, and ſhee ſaw a great number of men yſſuing out, then ſhée ſayd vnto Florence. Sir, I ſée well that wee bee loſt, for I ſée much people yſſuing out of the Citie, it is not poſſible for vs to be ſaued, but that we ſhalbe taken, and eſpecially I cannot eſcape, I ſée well that nowe our loue ſhall depart, your Father is fell and cruell, I knowe well that hee will ſlay mee. Then the Watch-man came running after Florence, for feare that he had of the king, but he could not ouertake Florence who fled with his Loue behind him as faſt as he might toward the Sea-ſide, for Florence knew well the priuie wayes, becauſe he had often times vſed the wayes, when he was woont to go a hauking or hunting. So long he road, that he came to a little Port, where there was a Shippe readie to depart, then Florence alighted and his Loue with him, and tyed his horſe to a Trée, and then he tooke the Damſell by the hand, and came to the Maiſter of the Shippe, and agréed ſo with him, that he and his Loue entred into the ſhip, then they hoyſed vp their ſayles, and ſo ſayled from the land, the Watch-man came to the Seaſide, truſting to haue found Florence there, and hee was right ſorrowfull when he ſawe them ſo farre on the Sea, hee was in great feare of looſing of his life. Then Kinge Garyn came thether with a great number, and when he ſaw the Shippe ſo far in the Sea, he ſayd. Ah good Lord, now haue I loſt my ſon, for I know well he is gone inyonder Shippe, and the Damſel

with him, but by the faith that I owe vnto our Lord Ieſus Chriſt, this Watch-man ſhall looſe his head: then the Watch-man was taken and faſt bound, ſo that the bloud came out at his fingers ends, and ſayd all wéeping. Ah good Lord, in an ill houre I was acquainted with Florence and his Loue: Alas for the goodneſſe that I haue done, I ſhall haue a ſmall reward this day, I am like to looſe my life for loue of my Lord.
            
            
               Chap. CLVII.
               
                  ¶ Of the great debate that was in the Pallaice for the VVatch-mans ſake, whome the King would haue had to be hanged, and how the king of Nauarre tooke the Citie of Courtoys, and how he departed from thence.
               
               
                  
                     WHen the Earle Peter of Aragon ſaw the Watch-man taken, by whom Florence and his Loue were ſaued, hee was ſorie to ſée the man ſo ſore beaten and threatened, then he went in haſt to the King, and ſayd. Sir, you ſhew well by your workes that you haue but ſmall reaſon, to ſuffer thus this poore man to be beaten, and that you would put him to death, for the goodneſſe that he hath done to your Sonne, he hath done therein but as he ſhould doe, and like a true Seruant, you ought the better to loue him, you ſhall doe ill to put him to death, I will that you know, that if you put him to death, I will not ſerue you one day longer, but I will rather goe to the King of Nauarre, and helpe to maintaine his war againſt you. When the King heard him ſo to threaten him, he ſwoore by God that he ſhould repent it, and how there ſhould no man ſaue the Watch-mans life. Then the poore man embraced the Kings Legge, and cried for mercie, but the King ſware and made promiſe, howe he ſhould bee hanged without mercie. When the Earle Peter heard that, he was verie ſorrowfull: the poore man wept, and

beheld the people that were there aſſembled, and deſired them to pray for his ſoule, ſaying, how he ſhould die for ſauing of his Lord, there was many of the poore mans kinred, they knéeled all downe before the King, deſiring him to pardon him, the king anſweared that hee would not. When the Earle Peter heard that, he ſayd to the King. Sir, ſurely he ſhall not die, without it be by iudgement as your Lords and Counſaile ſhall ordaine. When the King heard that, he was ſore diſpleaſed, and ſo entred into the Citie, and ſet the Watch-man in priſon, then hée went to his Pallaice, and Peter followed him, and accompanied with many other Knightes ſuch as loued him, and in like wiſe ſo did the poore mans kindred. When the Kinge was in his Pallaice, he commaunded a Scaffold to be made, whereon hee would haue the Watch-man to looſe his head. When his Kinſ-men heard that, they cried for mercie, but the king would doe nothing at their deſire. When the Earle Peter ſaw the ill will of the king, he made a token to the Watch-mans freends, (who were in number about a Hundred and Fiftie) that they ſhould goe to ſuch a Tower, where there was great plentie of Armour, and to breake it vp and to arme them, and ſo they did, and came againe to the Pallaice: and when the king ſaw them comming armed, hee cryed to his men, that they ſhould arme them, and take them that were ſo bolde to come into his preſence all armed, and when euerie man was armed, they came again to the Pallaice to haue taken the Watch-man and all his kindred, but the Watch-man and his Fréendes (who were readie in armour) ſet vpon the kinges men, and alſo Peter of Aragon and his companie aided them, ſo that there was ſo great a Skirmiſh in the Pallaice, that it was pitie to ſée it, they cut off armes, legs, and heads each of other. Finally, the king and his men were ſo ſore conſtrained, that of force they abandoned the Pallace and fled away, and the king fled into his Chamber for ſauegard.
               Anon the newes ran in the Towne, that the king was ſore aſſaulted in the Pallaice, and in ieopardie of his life. Then all the Communaltie went and armed them, and ſounded the larum bell, there was ſuch a noyſe and brute, as though all the

world had béen loſt. Then a Spie went out, and ſhewed the king of Nauarre, howe king Garyn was aſſembled in his Pallaice within the Citie, becauſe of a Watch-man that the King would put to death, in that hee had deliuered out of priſon Florence and the Damſell his Loue. Then the King of Nauarre right ioyfull of thoſe newes, commanded haſtely his men to be readie in Armour, for he ſayd that it was then time or elſe neuer to aſſaile the Citie. Great deſire I haue (quoth he) to bee reuenged of this King, who had wedded my Siſter, whom he hath ſlaine, I ſhall neuer haue ioy at my heart, vntill I bee reuenged: then euerie man armed them, and ſo aſſembled together with banners diſplayed, and ſo came in good order toward the Citie to aſſayle it, but when they within the Towne heard the crye and noiſe without, and ſawe their enemies comming towards them, they went and ſhewed it at the Pallaice, wherby the ſtrife there ceaſed, and then the king and all his Lordes with all his people yſſued out in Battaile. Then there began a ſore Battaile, and many a man ſlaine and maymed, but there were ſo many Nauarnes, that whether king Garyn would or not, perforce they were faine to abandon the Victorie to their enemies, and were faine to retire into the Towne, but their enemies followed them ſo néere, that the kinge of Nauarre and his men entred in with them. Then the kinge of Nauarre commanded that none ſhould be ſlain, without they were found in defence, for he ſayd that he cared not, ſo he might be reuenged of the king.
               Then the Nauarnes ſpread abroad in the Citie, taking priſoners, then kinge Garyn fled to the Minſter-church, then hee ſtoode in the Church dore to make defence, but it could not auaile him there was ſo many of his enemies, that he fledde to the hye Aulter for ſauegard, but the kinge of Nauarre (who was entred into the Church) commanded his men to take king Garyn, the which they did. Sirs, (quoth king Garyn) yée doe me great wrong to take me in this holy place, whereas euerie man ſhould be ſaued aboue all thinges, the houſe of God ought to be refuge for euerie man. Then the king of Nauarre (who was holden for a good holy man) hearing what king Garyn
                  
ſayd, he knewe well that he ſayd the truth, and repented himſelfe, and ſayd. Faire Nephewe, for the offence that I haue committed againſt our Lord God, I ſhall amend it to the double, ſo that you will pardon the Watch-man, that hath deliuered my Nephew Florence out of your priſon, I ſhall then ſhew you this courteſie for the offence that I haue made, I and all my men ſhall yſſue out of this Citie, without taking of any priſoner, or any manner of goods, for the loue of my Nephewe Florence whome I loue entirely, and for the goodnes of the people, I ſhall goe to my Tents without, and I will graunt you a Truce to endure for a Moneth, and I promiſe you the Moneth once expired, I ſhall approach againe ſo nere to this Citie, that as long as life is in my bodie, I ſhall not depart vntill I haue taken this Citie and you, whome I take for mine enemie, to haue you as my priſoner, for I ſhall neuer haue ioy at my heart vntill I haue reuenged the death of my Siſter your Wife.
               Then King Garyn ſayd. King of Nauarre, of the courteſie and bountie that you ſhewe vnto me I thanke you, and as for the Watch-man, I doe pardon him all mine ill will, & whereas you ſay that you will come ſo néere my Citie to winne it, when that commeth (by the grace of God, and by the helpe of my true Subiects) I ſhall doe the beſt I can to defend my ſelfe and my Citie. Then the King of Nauarre yſſued out of the Church, and leapt vpon his horſe and road to the gate, and taried there vntill all his men were cleane auoided out of the Citie, to the entent that neither Priſoners nor goods ſhould be caried out of the Citie, whereof his men were angrie, and eſpecially they that were poore, the other cared not greatly, becauſe the two Kinges had béene ſo long fréendes together, wherefore the warre diſpleaſed them, and they were ſorrie that it endured ſo long. When the King of Nauarre ſaw that all his men were yſſued out of the Citie, then hee withdrewe him into his Tent, and he cloſed in the Citie with a ſiege, abiding vntill the Truce was expired. Now let vs leaue to ſpeake of this warre betwéene theſe two Kinges, and ſpeake of Florence, who ſayled vppon the Sea with his Loue Clariet.
               
            
            
               
               Chap. CLVIII.
               
                  ¶ How the Shippe wherein Florence was and his Loue, was taken by the Sarazins, and all their companie taken and ſlaine, and ledde to the Caſtle of Anfalerne.
                  
               
               
                  
                     THe Hiſtorie ſheweth, that after that Florence was departed out of his coū
                  trey with his Loue Clariet, howbeit, he knewe not what ſhe was, ſo it was, that the Maiſter of the Shippe that he was in was of Marſellis, and when hee knewe that Florence was Sonne to King Garyn of Aragon, and that he had put his truſt in him, then hee came vnto Florence, and ſayd. Sir, the goodneſſe and honour that I ſée in you, cauſeth me to ſay vnto you that which I would not doe to another: I well perceiue by you, that you are in great doubt of the King your Father, leaſt hee ſhould follow you to get you againe, but Sir, to the entent that you ſhall be well aſſured of me and of my Marriners, I put into your handes my ſelfe, my Shippe, and all my Marriners, and I will that they obay you as they haue done mee, and that you are Maiſter ouer vs all: and Sir, neuer thinke that the king of Aragon your Father ſhall trouble you, we are farre ynough from him, by the grace of God we ſhall ſo conduct you, that wee ſhall bring you to the holy Sepulchre, and afterward bring you backe to Marſellis, and then from thence you may goe whether as it pleaſe you. Sir, (quoth Florence) of the honour and great courteſie that you offer me, I thanke you: then all they that were within the Shippe ſayd. Sir, refuſe not to be our Maiſter, for if the winde had not béene againſt vs, wee had béene farre off by this time: Sir, haue no doubt, we ſhall all obey you and doe as you commaund vs, ſince it is ſo our Maiſters pleaſure. Sirs, (quoth Florence) I thanke you of your offer, God ſuffer mee to d
                     •
                  ſer
                     •
                  e it.
               
                  
                  Florence was ioyful of the good aduenture that God had ſent him, and thus hee and his Loue ſayled ioyfully in the Sea of Affricke. So long they ſayled, that they paſſed the Iſles of Corſia and Sardania, and Cicilie, and 
                     •
                  n a Wedneſday betimes, they arriued néere to the Iſle of Candy, there aroſe vppon them a maruailous great winde and Tempeſt, ſo that perforce they were driuen to the coaſt of Barbary, the Tempeſt was ſo great, that euery man was in feare of drowning, ye waues were great and fearefull, & the Damſell was in great doubt when ſhe ſaw the mariners in ſuch feare, & ſhe called deuoutly vpon our Lord Ieſus Chriſt, deſiring him to haue pitie of her, & to bring them to a good Port. When Florence perceiued his Loue, and al the Marriners in ſuch feare as they were, hee comforted them the beſt he could, but it auailed not, for the wind draue them whether they would or not towards Bongy, néere to a Citie named as then Anfalerne, wheras they were faine to caſt their anchor, in great feare of loozing of their liues. Then there fell on them a Galley, wherein were a Hundred Sarazins, & another great Ship, wherein were more then foure Hundred men, and they all fell vppon Florence Shippe. When Florence ſawe both the Ship and Galley ſet vppon his Ship, the Maiſter of the Ship and the Marriners began to wéepe, and ſaid vnto Florence. Ah Sir, you and we all are loſt, we ſhall be all ſlaues with the Sarazins, yonder Galley and ſhippe are full of Sarazins, and they are ready comming to ſette vppon vs. When Florence heard that, he ſaid. Sir, bée not abaſhed, hee whome God will ſaue cannot be periſhed, no mortall man can hurt him, lette vs put our truſt in him, & take ſuch grace as he will ſend vs, the great number of people cannot hurt vs, if God will ayd vs, lette vs ſhewe our ſelues like men, they bee without law and without faith, and we beléeue in God, by whome wee truſt to be ſaued, let vs arme our ſelues, and ſhew our ſelues like men to defend our liues.
               When the Maiſter and the Marriners heard Florence, they ſayd. Sir, into the ſauegard of our Lord Ieſus Chriſt, and to you we commit our ſelues: then they all armed them, and euerie man ſtoode at their defence, and Florence ſayd. Sirs, let vs

all thinke, that we now doe fight for our liues, and therefore let vs not be abaſhed, euerie man thinke to do his beſt that he can, I loue by amours, behold her here, by whome I am ſo mooued to doe well, and to defend both her and me. Sir, (quoth they) ſhame haue hee that fainteth: then the Ship and Galley came néere to Florence Shippe, then the ſhotte of both parts flewe ſo thicke as though it hadde béene ſnowe, there was a great Battaile betwéene them, great hurt was done with caſting out of barres from the tops, two times Florence entred into the Ship of his enemies, whereas he did maruailes, and ſlewe ſo many Sarazins, that the water was red with the bloud of them that were ſlaine on both parts, there was an horrible Battaile, many of Florence men were ſlaine, the good Maiſter was ſlaine, & the moſt part of his men. Alſo from the land there were ſhotte Bombardes and Gunnes at Florence ſhip, ſo that thereby, and with the great barres of yron, the ſhippe was ſore impaired, for it was ſtriken thorow in a hundred places, in ſuch ſort, that the Sea entred in with great abundance. When the Damſell ſaw that mortall diſcomfiture, how their company were ſlaine, and their ſhip néere full of water, and ſaw no more perſons left aliue with Florence but ſix, ſhe was then in great feare, and ſhe thought that ſhee had rather enter into the Sarazins ſhip, then to be drowned in the Sea, ſhee ſawe the Galley, the which lay ioyning to the ſhippe, ſhe leapt into the Galley to ſaue her life.
               When Florence ſawe his Loue in the Galley, hée was néere out of his wits for ſorrow, and hee ſawe well, that if he tarried ſtill in his owne ſhippe hée ſhould be drowned, then he leapt into the Galley whereas his Loue was, and there he ſlew many a Sarazin, but there was ſo much people, that with force of Darts and ſpeares hée was borne downe, then they tooke and bound his handes ſo ſore, that the bloud ran out at his nailes.
               Thus Florence was taken, and all his men ſlaine and drowned, except ſome that were taken, then Florence wept for pitie of them, & ſayd. Ah my Father, how falſly haue you wrought againſt me, thus by your folly I am in great daunger, I ſhall neuer returne into my Countrey without God helpe me, often times hée beheld his Loue, whome the Sarazins did ſore beate

and ill threaten, whereof Florence had ſuch diſpleaſure, that he was néere hand out of his wits. Alas, (quoth he) I ought to be ſorrowfull, to ſee her that I loue beſt ſo ſore beaten and tormented before my face. Oh curſed death, why ſuffereſt thou me to liue to ſee this day, that my Loue ſhoulde bee thus dealte with, and yet I cannot helpe nor ſuccour her? therewith hee wept, and ſuddainly fell in a ſwound among the handes of the Sarazins. When the Damſell ſawe her Louer fallen in a traunce, and ſaw him ſo pale of colour, ſhe came vnto him, and ſhe thought ſurely that he had been dead, and alſo the Sarazins ſayd the ſame. Then ſhe cryed out, and ſaid. Oh good Lord, why do
                     •
                  ſt thou conſent the death of my Louer? ſéeing that we muſt thus depart for euer, it is nothing the paine and ill that I ſuffer, but my ſorrow is for the death of my Louer héere before me, I ought to be ſorrowfull, when the moſt faire, ſwéete, and gentleſt creature of all the world is thus dead and loſt for euer, and the moſt valiant Knight that euer was borne: and therewith ſhe fel downe in a traunce by her Louer, and all that ſaw them thought ſurely that they had béen both dead without any recouerie, and had great pitie and compaſſion of them, then hee that was the Captaine of the towne and Caſtle, who was named Sorbarre, came into the Shippe, and ſaw where Florence & his Loue lay one by another as dead, he had great pitie of them for he was a good Chriſtian man, but he durſt not be to knowe thereof for feare of ſlaying, hee loued God well, and did afterward good ſeruice in chriſtendome, for by him the ſayd two Louers were ſaued from the death, as yée ſhall heare héereafter. When theſe two Louers were come againe to themſelues, the Sarazins deliuered them both into the Captaines handes, and when Florence ſawe his ſwéete Loue by him, hee embraced and kiſſed her ſwéetely, the Captaine Sorbarre, when hee ſawe the youth of theſe two Louers, hée had great pitie of them, but hee made thereof no ſemblance, hee tooke them both into the Caſtle with him, and the other Priſoners ſuch as hadde taken them, brought them into diuers Towers, whereas they were kept in great miſerie, for the Sarazins had no pittie of them, becauſe they were chriſtened.
            
            
               
               Chap. CLIX.
               
                  ¶ How Sorbarre the Captain comforted Florence and Clariet: and how there arriued foure Shippes with Chriſtian men by fortune of the Sea, and how Florence was knowne by them.
               
               
                  
                     WHen the Captain of the Caſtle was within the Caſtle, and Florence and his Loue with him▪ he ſayd to them. Fréends I haue great pity of you, ſhew me what yée be? and what fortune hath brought you hether, ſéeing you bée ſo young? how is it that you would aduenture vppon the Sea, wherein are ſo many perils? if yée ſhew mée the troth, yée ſhall looze nothing thereby, for if I can I ſhall ſet yée in ſuch a place, whereas yée ſhall be in ſauegard? Sir, (quoth Florence) I ſhall ſhew you all mine aduenture, whatſoeuer fall thereof. Sir, knowe for troth, that I am Sonne to King Garyn Kinge of Aragon, and I am departed from him in diſpleaſure. Thus Florence ſhewed Sorbarre al his whole aduenture, and how he was taken by his Father, and how he eſcaped and his Loue alſo, then he ſaid. Sir, I haue ſhewed you the troth, and I commit my bodie and my Loues here into your handes, for in you lyeth our liues and deathes, you may doe with vs at your pleaſure, and therewith he knéeled downe, then Sorbarre tooke him vp. and ſayd. Faire Sonne, bee not abaſhed, for I haue béene before this time in as great aduenture, haue no doubt, I ſhall ſo order the matter, that you ſhalbe out of all perill but keepe euerie thing ſecrette to your ſelues, then Sorbarre called vnto him Foure of his ſeruants, and ſaid. I command you to vſe well this Priſoner, and this Damſell, and let them haue fleſh, bread, and wine at their pleaſure, as I had when I was priſoner at Terraſcon. Faire Son, (quoth Sorbarre to Florence) know for troth, that I was once king of Belmarin, and once I fought with Aymerie of Narbone, and I was taken by

the handes of Reynalt of Beanland, then I was brought to the Citie of Bourdeaux, whereas I ſawe a noble Prince named Duke Huon, who had wedded a noble Ladie called Eſcleremond, Daughter to the Admirall Gaudiſe, and they had a Daughter well beloued of them, ſhe was the faireſt Ladie that euer I did ſée, ſhee was not aboue at that time Sixe yeares of age, and as I heard ſay ſince, there came to Bourdeaux diuers Kinges and great Princes, for to haue hadde her in mariage, then I came priuily to mine Vncle, who gaue me this Caſtle to kéepe, when hee ſaw that I had loſt all mine owne Realme, and becauſe I was well entertained amonge the Chriſtian men, I will that theſe Priſoners bee well dealt withall. Sir, (quoth his Seruants) ſéeing that it is your pleaſure, wée ſhall accompliſh the ſame.
               Then they tooke Florence and the Damſell, and did ſet them in a Tower each of them in a Chamber apart, whereof they were right ſorrowfull. When the faire Damſell ſaw that ſhe was put from her Louer, ſhe was right ſorrie, then ſhee began to complaine, and ſaid. Ah my right déere Father Duke Huon, and déere Mother Eſcleremond, I may well hate the acquaintance that yée haue had with King Oberon, for by him I haue loſt you both, yée haue forgotten mee in this worlde, when yée leaue me in this priſon. Ah King Oberon, thou haſt done mée great ill and dammage, when thou diddeſt giue my Father thy Realme, whereas is the Citie of Momur, and whereas now is the Duke my Father, and the Ducheſſe my Mother, I haue loſt the flower of all my kindred, and I am ſure that I ſhall die in this Tower with ſorrowe: Ah falſe death, thou diddeſt mée great ill, in that thou tookeſt not me when I was yong & little, I yéeld my ſelfe to God, whome I require to haue pitie of me, & would to God that I were in companie with my Louer Florence, the Captaine hath done ill thus to ſeperate vs aſunder, for if I were with him, I ſhould the better paſſe the time, if his Father knew of what lineage I am of, and whoſe Daughter I am, he would not haue refuſed to haue giuen me his Sonne in mariage, but he ſhall not knowe for me whatſoeuer paine I ſuffer. Florence, who was aboue in the Chamber next vnto the

Chamber whereas the faire Damſell Clariet was, who hadde well heard the complaintes that ſhee had made before, and vnderſtood euerie word that ſhée had ſpoken, whereof hee was the 
                     •••
                  fulleſt man at his heart liuinge, for if hée loued her well before, then he loued her much better, and then he looked out at a window, whereas he ſawe Sorbarre walking vp and downe in the Court of the Caſtle. Then Florence required him, to haue 
                     •
                  ity and compaſſion of the Damſell being in the Tower alone. Fréend, (quoth Sorbarre) ſuffer for a time, I ſhall ſet you both in ſuch a place before it be night, that you ſhall be both ioyfull, be not abaſhed, for the loue of you I ſhall leaue the Law of Mahomet, and beleeue in our Lorde Ieſus Chriſt, for when it is night, and euerie man in bed, we ſhall enter into a Galley that lyeth here by, but as for your other men, that bee Priſoners abroad in the Towne, it would be hard for me to get them out of priſon. Then I pray to God (quoth Florence) to aide and ſuccour them in their great néede.
               Great pitie had Sorbarre, when he heard Florence ſo pitiouſly pray for the ſauegard of his men, whome he muſt leaue behind him, if God ſuccour them not: then Sorbarre ſaw comming towards the Port foure great Ships, wherein there were more then Two Thouſand Pilgrims, who were comming from the holy Sepulchre at Ieruſalem, but by fortune of the ſea and force of the winde, they were conſtrained to arriue there. Then the Captain Sorbarre went vp into the tower to ſée Florence, whom he 
                     •
                  ooke by the hand and ſayd. Freende, yonder you may ſee ſo
                     •
                  e great Shippes full of people, comming hether by force of the winde, let vs goe downe and ſee what they bee, and who is their Captaine. Sir, (quoth Florence) I am readie to follow your pleaſure, my bodie and my Loues I commit to your ſauegard: then the Captaine ſent for the Damſell, and when Florence ſawe her, hée was right ioyfull, and ſayd. Deere Loue, bee nothing afraid, the Captaine and I will goe downe to the Sea-ſide, to know what people they are that commeth in yonder Shippes, and anon we will returne againe vnto you. Sir, (quoth the Damſell) God be your guid. Sorbarre and Florence went downe to the Hauen-ſide, and when the Shippes arriued,

they ſaw well that there was many people, and perceiued well that they were Chriſtian men. Then Sorbarre ſaluted thē and ſayd: Sirs, yée bee welcome, I pray you to ſhew me from whence you come, and what yée ſéeke for in theſe partes, and what yée bee? Then the chéefe Maiſter of them anſweared and ſaid. Sir, we be of the Realme of Fraunce, and we come nowe from Ieruſalem, from the Pilgrimage of the holy Sepulchre, and the force of the winde hath cauſed vs to arriue heere, and if we ought to pay any thing for comming hether, wee are readie to pay it. Sirs, (quoth Sorbarre) ſéeing that this is your aduenture, yée are welcome hether to me, ſince yée be here arriued, it is reaſon that I bee comforted and aided by you, and I ſay vnto you▪ that I beléeue vppon Ieſus Chriſt, but as yet I was neuer chriſtened, I ſhall ſhew you (Sirs) what yée ſhall doe, if you will beléeue mee, you neuer came to ſo faire aduenture, yée ſhall goe with me into the Caſtle here aboue, in which place I ſhall fourniſh you all with horſe and Armour, and yée ſhall abide in the Caſtle, & make no noiſe nor ſhew your ſelues, and I will goe to the Hauen, and garniſh a Galley with all things neceſſarie, in this Towne there are many French men Priſoners, who were taken but lately in this Hauen, and many were ſlain, and ſuch as be taken are priſoners in this town, and early in the Morning wee will yſſue out of the Caſtle into the Towne, and ſette fire in diuers places, then the Sarazins will haue great buſineſſe to reſcue and ſtanch the fire, and then we will enter into their houſes, and take all their goods and all the Priſoners, and all the riches that we can find in the towne wee ſhall put it into our Ship, and if the Sarazins come to aſſaile our Ship with Boats and Barges, then let vs defend our ſelues aſwell as wee can, and firſt of all let vs goe and take all the Shippes that be in the Hauen.
               When the Captain of the foure Ships heard Sorbarre, they praiſed his aduiſe and good counſaile, and they all with one accord concluded to do his pleaſure. Sir, (quoth Sorbarre) to the entent that yée ſhall beléeue me, and to haue of me no manner of ſuſpect, if ye will haue knowledge what I am, this young man that you ſee by me can informe you. Sir, (quoth the Patron)

by your viſage it appeareth well that all troth is in you, & that you are a noble man: therefore Sir, wée all commit our ſelues into your conduct and grace, but Sir, if it may be your pleaſure to ſhew to vs, what young Gentleman this is that we ſée there by you? truely Sir, you ſhoulde doe mee a great pleaſure, for 
                     •
                  e thinkes I ſhould haue ſéene him ere this. Patron, (quoth Sorbarre) ſince you will know it, gladly I ſhall ſhew you, ſéeing he hath diſcouered himſelfe to me, know for troth, that hee ſo Sonne to Kinge Garyn of Aragon, who by fortune of the ſea arriued here, and here perforce he was taken, and his men moſt pa
                     •
                  t ſlaine, and with him was taken a noble Damſell, who is aboue in my Caſtle. When the Patron & they that were with him, vnderſtood that it was Florence Son to the Kinge of Aragon, they were thereof right ioyfull, for they were all of the Realme of Aragon, and ſent forth by the King to ſearch for Florence, they thanked God of their good aduenture, that hee had ſent them to find Florence there, whom they were ſent to ſearch for: then they came to Florence, and knéeled downe before him & ſayd. Ah Sir, you ought to thanke God that we haue found you, we haue maruaile why you hide your name from vs, for wée be all ſent from King Garyn your Father to ſearch for you, for if God had not ſent you this good fortune, wee ſhould neuer haue heard any tidinges of you, nor haue ſhewed the King your Father any thing to his pleaſure.
            
            
               Chap. CLX.
               
                  ¶ Howe Sorbarre and Florence and their companie went into the Towne, and robbed and ſpoyled it, and ſo tooke the Sea with great ioy and triumph, and the faire Ladie Clariet with them, and tooke their courſe to ſayle towards the Realme of Aragon
                     ▪
                  
               
               
                  
                  
                     WHen the Patron & his company knew & ſaw Florence, the ioy that they made could not be recounted, nor the chéere that they made to Florence when they were entred into the Caſtle, whereof Sorbarre had great ioye. The ſame ſeaſon whiles they made this great ioy & feaſting, there was in Sorbarres companie a Sarazin, who vnderſtood the French language, and had well heard the Enterprize that the Chriſtian men were determined to doe, and alſo he ſaw well, how Sorbarre was ioyned to their companie: then priuily he departed, and haſtely he went into the Towne, and ſhewed the Burgeſſes and Commons of the Enterprize, what the Chriſtian men had concluded to doe, & howe that Sorbarre was become a Chriſtian. When the Sarazins vnderſtood that, incontinent they went and armed them, and came to the Caſtle thinking to haue won it, but they found there ſuch defence and reſiſtance, that that which they did there was ſmall to their profit, yet the aſſault endured vntill the next day, and at laſt they were conſtrained to withdraw from the Caſtle a great ſpace. Florence, who was within cryed to them and ſayd. Ah yée falſe Villaines, yée haue ſlaine my men, but if God ſuffer me to liue, their deathes ſhall bee déerely bought. When the Paynims ſaw that they could not attaine to the Caſtle, they blew the retrait, & euerie man returned to their owne houſe. Then Sorbarre ſaid to Florence and his company: Sirs I aduiſe you to leape on your horſes, for now the Paynims are returned to their Lodgings wearie of their trauaile, and many of them ſore hurt, and they are in great feare, I know their conditions well ynough, and becauſe that after trauaile & labour a man is féeble and full of feare, and nowe euerie man is in his owne houſe and vnarmed to be at their eaſe: therefore I counſaile, that incontinent we yſſue out and ſet vpon the Towne. Then Florence and all the other ſayd. Sir, as you haue deuiſed, we are readie to doe it, for a more noble counſaile was neuer giuen.
               
                  Then euerie man made him readie, & yſſued out of the Caſtle, and Florence and Sorbarre went before them, and reſted not vntill they were entred into the Town, for their entring could not bee defended, becauſe the Caſtle ioyned to a corner of the Towne: then they made a great crie, and ſpread abroad in the Towne, and put in fire in diuers places, and ſlewe downe the Paynims in the ſtréets and Market places, finally, they did ſo much by force of armes, that they brought the Towne vnder their ſub
                     •
                  ection, and the Inhabitants thereof all ſlaine, and all the Chriſtian Priſoners reſcued, who had great ioy when they ſaw Florence their Lord, whome they thought had béene dead. Great riches that day was wonne in that Towne, the which was giuen and parted vnto them that had deſerued it, and Florence gaue to the Chriſtian Priſoners great riches. Thus when the Towne was wonne, and the riches thereof put into their Shippes, they all departed, and ſette fire on all the Citie, then they went into the Caſtle whereas the Damſell Clariet was, who had great ioy when ſhe ſaw Florence her Louer: and then Sorbarre (who had great deſire to depart from thence) tooke all the Treaſure & riches and had it into their ſhips, and victualled them with all thinges neceſſary, then when it was day in the morning, they departed from the Caſtle, and went to their Ships with great ioy, Florence holding his Loue by the hande, ſaid vnto her. Deere Loue, king Garyn my Father hath ſent to ſeeke for me, all about both by land and by water, and theſe that bee come heere with theſe Shippes, were ſent forth by the Kinge my Father to ſearch for me. When the Damſell heard that Florence would bring her againe to his Father, ſhe hadde great feare and ſaid. Sir, y
                     •
                  u know right well the great hate and diſpleaſure that your Father hath to you and me, for God ſake ſir, let vs goe ſome other way. Déere Loue, (quoth Florence) haue no feare of my Father, for if you had ſhewed your n
                     •
                  me, & what you bee before this time it had eaſed vs of much paine. Ah Sir, (quoth ſhee) it is not as you wéene it were. Well▪ (quoth Florence) it is ſufficient for me as it is: then they 
                     〈◊〉
                   vp their ſayles, and ſo ſayled vntill they were farre off 
                     〈◊〉
                   that Land, and Sorbarre was right ioyfull, in that he had

ſaued the Chriſtian men, and for the loue of Florence he forſooke his owne lawe and his countrey, then hee ſayd vnto Florence. Sir, my bodie and goods I abandon to you in ſuch wiſe, that I ſhall neuer leaue you for life nor death. Sir, (quoth Florence) of the goodneſſe and troth that you haue ſhewed mee, I thanke you, and I ſhall neuer haue penny worth but the halfe ſhall be yours. Now let vs leaue ſpeaking of them, ſayling ioyfully vppon the Sea towards Aragon, and let vs ſpeake of king Garyn, who was beſieged within the Citie of Courtoys, by his brother in lawe the king of Nauarre.
            
            
               Chap. CLXI.
               
                  ¶ How King Huon Kinge of the Fayrey, ſent two of his Knightes to the two Kinges: and how he appeared betweene them with a great number, and of the Peace that he made between them.
               
               
                  
                     WEll haue yee heard before, how that after the King of Nauarre had taken King Garyn priſoner, and that Truce was taken for a certaine ſpace, and then each of them to ſhew their powers: ſo it fell, that two daies before the breaking vp of the truce, and that their ayds and puiſſances were aſſembled together, the one partie within the Citie, and the other without with the Kinge of Nauarre, who ſore threatned King Garyn, becauſe hee had baniſhed away his Sonne Florence his Nephew, and ſayd, that hée had rather die then ſuch an ill King ſhould not be puniſhed: this King of Nauarre had aſſembled ſuch a number of people, that the Valleys and Hils were couered with men of warre, & the night before the Truce brake vppe, there was hearde in the ayre a fearefull voice, the which when it began to ſpeake, the earth trembled, and thundred and lightned, in ſuch ſort, that all they that were aſſembled aſwell they within as without, had ſuch feare, that they were likely to haue run away. Then the voice began to

ſpeake, and ſayd. Sirs, ye that be here in the field readie to fight, of both parties, make no haſt to ioyne together in Battaile, for ſuch ayd and ſuccour ſhalbe ſent to you both, that yee ſhalbe all ioyfull. Therewith the voice paſſed away, and was heard no more, whereby both parties were abaſhed, & all the night they were at their prayers, beſéeching God to ayd & ſuccour them. King Garyn was ſore abaſhed when he heard the voice, and ſaid. Oh good Lorde, if theſe people that are aſſembled bee ſlaine by my meanes & for me, my ſoule ſhall be loſt for euer. Alas my Son Florence, I was ill counſailed when I chaſed you away from me, and I did great ſin when I put you in priſon, I am wearie of my life, it is no matter though I die, and I am more ſorrie for you, (my déere Sonne) whome I haue betrayed and driuen away without a cauſe: alas, by my meanes this Realme will be waſted and deſtroyed, the which you ought to haue after me.
               Therewith he ſwounded among his Lordes, ſo that they all thought he had béene dead, whereof they ſore complained, and at laſt the king came againe to himſelfe: then his Lordes comforted him, and ſo bad him to heare Seruice, and after ſeruice, there appeared ſodenly before him two goodly young Knightes, the one was Gloriant, and the other Mallabron; they were twoo Knights of the Fayrey: then they all ſmiling ſaluted the King, and ſayd. Royall King, Huon of Bourdeaux ſaluteth thée by vs, hee is King of all the Fayrey, and he will come to ayd thée and to defend thy land: alſo he will that thou knoweſt, that he is Father to the faire Damſell Clariet, whome thou nameſt the new-found Damſell, and becauſe thou haſt baniſhed from thée thy Son Florence, hee will come to thée, to make the Peace betweene thée and thy Brother in lawe the King of Nauarre, and hee will make the Mariage betwéene thy Sonne Florence and Clariet his Daughter. When kinge Garyn heard the Knight of the Fayrey, hee hadde ſuch ioy at his heart, that hee wiſt not what to doe or ſay, and hee came to the Knight and embraced him all wéeping, and ſaid. Sir, know for troth, my body, my life, and all that I haue, I ſubmitte into the handes of the good King Huon, to do therewith at his pleaſure. With thoſe words

the twoo Knightes vaniſhed away, no man wiſt how nor whether, ſo that euerie man had great maruaile. King Garyn and his Lordes lifted vp their hands to Heauen, making the ſigne of the croſſe, recommending themſelues to Ieſus Chriſt, and the twoo Knightes reſted not, vntill they came to the Cittie of Momur to King Huon, and ſhewed him what they had done and ſayd to King Garyn, & ſhewed Huon of the day of Battaile, that was taken betwéene the two Kinges, and ſaid. Sir, haue pitie of Florence, and of Clariet your Daughter, who are as now on the Sea in a great Tempeſt: then Huon ſayde. Surely, I & they ſhall be ſhortly before the Citie of Courtoys, with a number of people, that the earth ſhalbe couered with them, to the entent that if either of thoſe two Kinges doe contrary to my will, I ſhall deſtroy him for euer, for ſhortly I will, that my Daughter Clariet ſhall bee Ducheſſe of Bourdeloys, and ſhee is ſo faire that there is none like her, and I will ſhew the great loue that I beare to her.
               Then Huon called to him Eſcleremond and ſayd: Ladie you ſhall ſée this day the thinge that you much deſire to ſée, that is your Daughter Clariet, to whom I giue her the guift, that ſhe ſhalbe beloued of euerie man, and I will that from henceforth ſhe ſhall giue large guiftes and rewards to Ladies, Damſels, Knightes, and Squiers, for I will that from hencefoorth ſhée haue her pleaſure, without ſuffering of any more ill or perill, for ſhe hath ſuffered inough. This day was faire and cléere, & within the Citie of Courtoys there was many people aſſembled, and they were in great deuotion, ſome made ſeruice to be ſong, and ſome were confeſſed, and ordred themſelues towardes the Battaile. Then King Garyn commanded euerie man to leape vppon their horſes readie armed, and the King himſelfe mounted: then they iſſued out of the Citie, and commanded his Conſtables and Marſhals to ordaine Thrée Battailes in the name of God. King Garyn had aſſembled a great number of men, he had more then Fiftie Thouſand men, there ye might haue ſéen Ladies, Damſels, and Burgeſſes that wept for feare of their Freends, whome they ſawe going towards the Battaile, and they went all to the wals, Colledges, and Churches to pray to

God for the good ſpéed of their King, and of their Fréends.
               Now let vs leaue ſpeaking of theſe two Kinges, who were readie in the fiel
                     •
                  s ranged in order of Battaile the one againſt the other, and lette vs ſpeake of King Huon, who called before him all his Lordes of the Fayrey, there was the faire Eſcleremond, and Gloriant and Mallabron, and many other Knights of the Fayrey: then King Huon ſaid. Sirs, yée all knowe well▪ that by the will of God, King Oberon whiles he liued gaue me all his Realme, and Signiorie, and puiſſance that he had ouer al the Fayrie of ye world, thereby then I may haue all my commaundements fulfilled, and ſince God hath giuen me this gift, I will not ſuffer the man-ſlaughter and murder, that is like to be betwéene the Two Kinges of Aragon and Nauarre: therefore I wiſh my ſelfe with Two Hundred Thouſand men well armed, and richly by ſéeming and all mounted on good horſes: and alſo I wiſh to haue as many 
                     ••
                  urniſhed with bowes and Croſbowes on foote. Alſo I wiſh a Hundred Thouſand to be apparelled in Gownes of cloath of gould and ſilke, and alſo I wiſh for my Daughter Clariet, whome I haue left a long time in paine and miſerie, whereof I repent me, for mine intention is to marrie her to Florence, Sonne to Kinge Garyn of Aragon, the which Florence is ſo faire, ſo hardy, and ſo humble and curteous, that in all the world there is none like him, I wiſh him and all his companie, and Sorbarre with him, to be at the Hauen of Courtoys. Alſo I wiſh my Tent in the meadow betwéen the hoaſts of the two Kings, and I will that my Tent be ſuch, that there be none like it in all the world, and vppon the toppe thereof I will there be pitcht a Dragon of fine gold. King Huon hadde no ſooner made his wiſh, but hee and all his company were there as he had deuiſed. When the king of Nauarre ſaw ſo many people, and ſo many Tents and Pauillions ſo néere him, and that he ſaw the rich and puiſſant Pauillion of Kinge Huons with the flambing Dragon, hee was greatly diſmayed. Then he called his Lords and Knightes, and ſaide. Sirs, behold what people yonder are before vs lodging, mee thinkes I neuer ſawe ſo many together in all my life, I wot not what it ſhould be, I am in doubt: then he called vnto him two knights

and ſayd. Sirs, goe thether, and knowe what people they be, and what they meane, and whether they bee Fréendes or enemies, & who is chéefe ouer them. Sir, (quoth the two knights) we will not goe thether, for we know not whether they bée our enemies or not.
               When the King of Nauarre vnderſtoode that thoſe knightes nor none other would goe thether, hee was ſorrowfull, and as the king was thus deuiſing, thether came the two knightes of the Fayrey Gloriant and Mallabron, and Gloriant ſayd. Kinge of Nauarre, King Huon of Bourdeaux hath ſent vs to you, and commaundeth you that you make peace betwéen you and king Garyn, for he will giue his Daughter Clariet to your Nephewe Florence, who is the faireſt Ladie of the worlde. When the king of Nauarre vnderſtoode theſe twoo Meſſengers ſent from king Huon, he was right ioyfull, and commanded al his Lords to goe with him to kinge Huon, they obayed his commaundement, and road with him vntill hee came to the rich Pauillion of king Huons, whereas they alighted and were well receiued, then the king of Nauarre ſaluted king Huon, who ſayd. Sir, you be welcome: and then the king of Nauarre knéeled down before kinge Huon, and ſayd. Sir, I am readie to fulfill your pleaſure. Then Gloriant tooke the king of Nauar by the arme and rayſed him vp, and ſet him down by king Huon and Eſcleremond: then king Huon ſent for king Garyn, who incontinent came to him, accompanied with a Thouſand knights, & when he was come, hee ſaluted king Huon, and ſaide. Sir, you are welcome into my Countrey of Aragon, the which I offer you to doe therewith at your pleaſure, and Sir, all that you haue commaunded mee to doe by your twoo knightes, I am readie to accompliſh, and there hee ſhewed to king Huon all weeping, the occaſion of the warre and of his Sonne Florence, who for the loue of a new-found Damſell was put in priſon, whereof he repented him, for he ſayd that there was not a fairer Damſell in the world, and for the loue of her, Florence my Sonne is departed from mee, and I thinke I ſhall neuer ſée him more. Kinge Garyn, (quoth Huon) knowe for troth, that ſhortly you ſhall ſée them both come hether to me, for I will marrie them together,

the Damſell is my Daughter, and her name is Clariet, and I will you know that ſhe is noble, and yſſued of a royall Lineage, there is none more noble in this Countrey, and ſhe hath bought her deſteny right déerely. When king Garyn knew, that the noble Damſell was Daughter to king Huon, and that he would make a marriage betwéene her and his Sonne Florence, & that they ſhould come thether ſhortly, he was neuer ſo ioyfull in all his life before: then hee knéeled downe before kinge Huon, and cryed him mercie, and ſaide. Ah Sir, how may it be, that in my olde dayes ſuch a grace may come to me, as to haue againe my déere Sonne, and that the noble Damſell (whome I haue done ſo much ill vnto) ſhall bee his wife. Then Kinge Huon roſe vp and ſaid. Noble king, haue no doubt but that you ſhall haue your Sonne, for I cannot ſo ſoone wiſh for him, but they ſhall be both here, whereſoeuer they bee in the worid, whereof all they that were preſent had great maruaile. Sir, (quoth the Quéene Eſcleremond) when ſhall the houre come that I may ſée my Daughter Clariet? and Sir, you knowe well that I came hether with you for none other cauſe. Madame, (quoth Huon) you ſhall ſée her ſhortly.
            
            
               Chap. CLXII.
               
                  ¶ How Florence and Clariet arriued there with their company, and came to king Huon, and of the great ioy that was made at their comming, and how there they were wedded together: and the Peace confirmed betweene the two Kinges.
               
               
                  
                     WHen King Huon ſawe the Quéene his wife weepe, his heart tendred and ſayde. Ah my déere Daughter Clariet, great pitie I haue of you and of Florence the hardy: I wiſh you both and all your companie here at the Port on the Sea-ſide, as richly apparelled, as euer was Quéene or Prince departing out of their houſe to

bée maried, and that with you there bee Ladies and Damſels richly apparelled, & of the faireſt that be in my Realme of the Fayrey: he had no ſooner made his wiſh, but that Shippes and Galleys arriued at the Port, and anon Florence & Clariet were in the Meadow, richly accompanied with Trumpets, Harps, Viols, and Lutes, and all other Inſtruments, the which ſounded ſo melodiouſly, that it ſeemed to all the hearers that they were rauiſhed into Paradiſe, and alſo there were Ladies and Damſels, and knightes of the Fayrey ſinging right ſweetely, the hearers thought them to bee Angels of Paradice, and they were apparelled richly, and garniſhed with precious ſtones, ſo that with the Sun ſhining vppon them, they glittered in ſuch wiſe, that whoſoeuer had ſeene them, would haue thought that God and all the Court of Paradice had been there aſſembled.
               Thus Florence came with 3 Thouſand men making great ioy. After him came riding the faire Clariet, vpon a rich Palfray ambling ſo freſhly, garniſhed and richly apparelled, that in all the world there was none ſuch, the armour hanging full of ſiluer bels, making ſo ſwéet a noiſe, that it was maruaile to heare them, if I ſhould diſcribe the beautie & riches that was on her Palfrey, it would be too long to rehearſe. This Ladie Clariet was accompanied with two notable Ladies of the Fayrey, the one was Morgue, and the other Glorianda, who came ſinging after Clariet: then after came the Lady Tranſelina, with many Damſels of the Fayrey, great ioy there was made, and then king Huon ſayd to Eſcleremond his Wife. Madame, it is time that you depart, for yonder I ſee comming toward vs my Daughter Clariet and Florence. When Eſcleremond heard that, ſhe was right ioyfull, for the great deſire that ſhe had ſo ſee her Daughter: the Queene went forth nobly accompanied. Then king Huon and the other twoo kings with all their companies, with banners diſplayed, with great ioy and triumph, went to meet Florence and Clariet: ye may well thinke, that king Garyn had great ioy of the comming of his Sonne, and ſawe ſuch an aſſembly meet there together to receiue him, that he deuoutly thanked our Lord God.
               Thus theſe kinges and Princes went to meete theſe twoo

young perſons richly accompanied, and great ioye had Clariet, when ſhe ſaw the Quéene her mother before her, and ſhe wept for inward ioy that ſhe had, & when the Queen ſaw her daughter, ſhe embraced and kiſſed her often times, and of a great ſeaſon none of them could ſpeake to other for ioy: then King Huon came & tooke his Daughter out of the Quéenes armes, and kiſſed her more then twentie times. Then king Garyn came vnto Florence, and ſayd. Déere Sonne, I haue much treſpaſſed againſt you, in that wrongfully I put you into my priſon, and I complaine greatly to you of your Vncle the kinge of Nauarre, who hath waſted your Countrey. Sir, (quoth Florence) I require you to pardon mine Vncle, it is reaſon that I ſhould bee content that peace be made betwéen you, and Sir, I deſire you to giue mee this Damſell in mariage. Sonne, (quoth Garyn) be in ſuertie that you ſhall haue her and none other, for a more noble Lady cannot bee found in Tenne Realmes. Sir quoth Florence, I thanke you: and thus theſe Twoo companies ioyned together, and the Kinge of Nauarre came to his Nephewe Florence, and embraced him & ſayd. Faire Nephewe, of your returne I am right ioyfull. Sir, (quoth he) I am well pleaſed with the peace that is made betwéene my Father and you.
               Thus they road vntill they came to the Tents, and there alighted, then king Huon called the other two kinges, and ſaid. Sirs, how ſay you? will yée abide by mine aduiſe, and put into my handes the diſcord that hath béene betweene you? they anſweared, that they were content to doe as hee woulde haue them. Then kinge Huon ſayde. Sirs, then my will is, that peace and accord be betweene you and all yours: and they liberally agréed thereto, whereof kinge Huon was ioyfull. Then king Huon deſired Florence to ſhew his aduenture, and how he was reſcued by Sorbarre. Then Florence ſhewed al his aduentures, and the other kinges were right ioyfull to heare it, and all other that heard it did greatly praiſe Sorbarre for his déede, and much honoured him, and made him great feaſting & chéere, and cauſed him to be chriſtened: then king Huon ſaid to the two kinges. Sirs, I will that preſently each of you doe pardon other of all ill will. Sir, (quoth they) wee are readie to doe it,

and ſo each of them embraced other, whereof king Huon hadde great ioy, and ſo had all other Lordes and Knightes that were there aſſembled. Kinge Garyn, (quoth Huon) incontinent I will, that your Son Florence haue my Daughter in mariage, and I giue them the Citie of Bourdeaux, Blames, and Geronnill, and all the appendants thereto belonging. When king Garyn heard the offer that king Huon had made to his Sonne Florence, he thanked him hartely, & ſo did all the other Lords, who allowed greatly that mariage. When kinge Garyn ſawe the honour, loue, and courteſie that Kinge Huon did to Florence his Sonne, hee knéeled downe, and ſayd. Sir, my Child and yours I commit into your handes, vſe them at your pleaſure: then by conſent of both Fathers, they were wedded and ſpouſed together all in one day, the Feaſt & Solemnitie of this mariage endured Eight daies, the king of Nauarre gaue vnto Florence his Realme of Nauarre to poſſeſſe and enioy after his deceaſe: Of the Feaſtes, Iuſts, and Tourneys that was made on thoſe Eight dayes, I make no mention thereof, for it were ouer-long to rehearſe.
               Then king Huon gaue his Daughter Thirtie Somers charged with gould and great riches, whereby the ioy encreaſed of all parts: then the Lordes and other people of Aragon came to king Huon, and all wéeping, they deſired him to haue pitie and compaſſion of them, and that he might find ſome meanes, that they might haue ſome recompence for the great hurts an dammages that they had receiued, by reaſon of the warre between theſe two kinges, whereby they were neere hand deſtroyed by the Nauarnes. When Queene Eſcleremond heard the people complaine, ſhe embraced her Huſband and ſaide. Sir, I deſire you (for the loue of your children) to haue pitie of theſe people, who requireth for aide, for in you is all their truſt. Madame, (quoth Huon) I ſhal incontinent ſhew what grace I will doe for the loue of you. Then king Huon commaunded all the people to kneele downe, and then he ſayd. Sirs, all yée that be here aſſembled, to the entent that you ſhall not thinke, that the thing that I will doe ſhould bee any witch-craft or illuſion, but that it is by the will of Ieſus Chriſt, the gift that king Oberon
                  
gaue mee before hee dyed, the which was all the puiſſance and dignitie that hee had in all the Fayrey of the world: therefore knowe, that by the puiſſance and dignitie that our Lord God, made king Oberon my Predeceſſor to giue me, I will that this Realme of Aragon, whereas it hath had dammage by reaſon of the warre, ſo that the Realme is ſore burnt and waſted: and I will that it be again in the ſame caſe, as it was before any war began, and that all Caſtles & houſes burnt or beaten downe, be better thrée times then they were before, and I will that from henceforth euerie man ſerue God, and thanke him of this grace that he hath ſent you, then he lifted vp his handes, and bleſſed all the people with the ſigne of the croſſe: and aſſoone as he had done his bleſſing, euerie thing was as he had deuiſed throughout al the Realme. Thus was the wil of Ieſus Chriſt, at the inſtance and prayer of the noble kinge Huon.
               
            
            
               Chap. CLXIII.
               
                  ¶ How King Huon and Queene Eſcleremond departed, and howe he gaue great rich guiftes vnto the two Kinges, and to all other Lordes, Ladies, and Damſels: and of the ſorrowe that was betweene the Mother and the Daughter, at their departing.
               
               
                  
                     WHen Kinge Huon had made his prayers to our Lord God, and that his requeſt was graunted, hee thanked God: ſuch Feaſts, Iuſts, and Tourneys as was made there during the Feaſt, was neuer ſéene nor heard of in any Cronicle heere before. Then king Huon made him readie to depart, and he gaue guifts before he departed to them that were there, and eſpecially to Sorbarre, to whome hée recommended his Daughter Clariet, & deſired him not to leaue her. Sir, (quoth Sorbarre) the great loue that I haue to you, conſtraineth me neuer to forſake her, nor them that ſhall come of her as long as life is in my body. When Quéen Eſcleremond
                  
vnderſtood the departing of her Lord Huon, and ſawe that ſhee muſt leaue her Daughter, ſhee had great ſorrowe at her heart, and ſo all wéeping ſhée came to her Daughter, and ſaid. Right déere Daughter, you ought greatly to thanke our Lord God, in that hee hath caſt you out of ſo many perils, and nowe to haue great honour, and to be exalted like a rich and puiſſant Ladie: therefore alwaies ſet your heart on God, and ſerue, feare, and loue him, be liberall to them that be poore, nor mocke no body, neither bee no Iangler againſt your Huſband, nor hearken to none ill lyers, flye from Flatterers, loue your Huſband, kéepe your ſelfe alwaies true, to the entent that none ill report bee made of you. Marke well this doctrine, for I cannot tell whether euer I ſhall ſée you againe or not. When the faire Clariet heard her Mother, ſuddainly ſhe began to wéepe, and ſayd. Oh my right déere Lady and Mother, the departing of you and of the king my Father from me, ought ſore to gréeue me, ſince we haue béene together ſo ſmall a time, for your departing is to me ſo gréeuable, that it is great paine for me to beare it. Then the Mother & the Daughter clipped and kiſſed each other more then Twentie times, and oftener would haue done if king Huon had not béene, for then hee tooke his Daughter Clariet in his armes, and kiſſed her often times tenderly wéeping, becauſe he knew well that he ſhould neuer ſée her againe: then he lifted vp his hands, and gaue her and her Huſband his bleſſing, & ſhewed them many faire examples and doctrines.
               Then the noble Quéene Eſcleremond kneeled downe, & prayed king Huon her husband, that he would counſaile and aduertize them what they ſhould doe. Madame, (quoth Huon) riſe vp, for ſuch pitie I haue of them & of you, that my heart neere hand faileth me, and I tarie here too long, for I muſt needs depart: come hether my deere Daughter and kiſſe me, and Son Florence, with you I leaue my Daughter, and keepe her well as longe as God will ſuffer her to bee with you. Then king Huon tooke leaue of the two kinges, who were right ſorrowfull of his departing, and he deſired them alwaies to be good Louers together, and ſo tooke his leaue, and ſayd, I wiſh my ſelfe my Queen, and all my company, to be in my Pallaice at Momur:
                  
he had no ſooner ſpoken the words, but that he was there, and ſudenly vaniſhed from the twoo Kings, whereof they and all other were greatly abaſhed, ſo that they wiſt not what to ſay, & they had thought it had béen but a dreame, but by reaſon of the great guifts & riches that hée had left behind him among them. Then after all theſe thinges done, the kinge of Nauarre tooke leaue of king Garyn and departed, and his Nephewe Florence road with him foure Leagues, and then returned to Courtoys to Clariet his wife, and there they tarried two Moneths in great ioy and ſolace. Then after a certaine ſpace, king Garyn (who was verie old and ancient) tooke a ſickneſſe, whereby he paſſed out of this world, for whoſe death, Florence his Sonne & Clariet wept many a ſalt teare. Then he was buried with great ſolemnitie, and then by all the Lords and Peeres of the Realme, Florence was choſen and crowned King, and Clariet Quéene: great ſolemn
                     •
                  ty and ioy was made at their crownation. Thus with great ioy and gladneſſe, Florence and Clariet were together, ſo that at the laſt Clariet was great with child, whereof Florence and all the noble men and Commons of the Realme were ioyfull, and thanked our Lord God, and when the time came, the Quéene was brought to bed of a faire Daughter, whereof both Father and Mother were right ioyfull, the which ioy within a while after turned to ſore wéeping and great heauines, as yée ſhall heare hereafter.
            
            
               Chap. CLXIIII.
               
                  ¶ How Queene Clariet was brought to bedde of a Daughter, at which deliuerance the Queene dyed▪ and how when the yong Damſell came to the age of Fifteene yeares, the King her Father would haue had her in marriage, wherewith all his Lords were ſore troubled.
               
               
                  
                  
                     WHen Kinge Florence was aduertiſed, that his Quéene was deliuered of a Daughter, hee thanked God, the Childe was borne to the chriſtning into the chéefe Church, and was named Ide, the ioy of the comming of this Child, coſt 
                     •
                  éerely to the Quéen her Mother, for by reaſon of the paine that ſhe endured, ſhee departed out of this life, and ſo dyed. The Child was brought to kinge Florence, and when he ſawe her, he was ioyfull, and demanded how her mother did, and they thought that the matter could not be hidden nor kept ſecrette, they ſayd. Sir, your Quéene is departed to God. When the king heard that, he fell downe in a ſwound, ſo that euerie man feared he had béene dead, and when he came to himſelfe, hee ſayd. Ah my right déere Loue, in an ill houre were you borne, for your ſake I hadde forgotten all paine, and thought to haue liued in reſt with you, me thinkes you be rauiſhed and ſtollen away from me. Ah falſe death, thou art hardy to take from me that thing which I loued beſt, the moſt faireſt, trueſt, and ſwéeteſt creature liuing. Then his Lordes came and comforted him, the cries, complaints, and wéepings roſe through-out the Citie: all Ladies, Damſels, Burgeſſes, and Maidens, and all the Commons made great lamentations: that night the Queene was watched, and the next morning, with great cries and wéepings the Quéene was brought into the chiefe Church, her obſequie was done notably, and ſo layd in a rich Sepulture, the ſorrowe that the kinge made was neuer none ſuch ſéene.
               The king was viſited by the Lords of his Realme, but they could not cauſe him to take any ſolace, but a lonely nowe & then to goe to ſee his deere Daughter the Ladie Ide, and euer when he ſaw her, his ſorrow renewed, and ſhee was well nouriſhed & brought vp: and when ſhe came to the age of Fiftéene yéeres, ſhe was beautifull, wiſe, and ſage, for ſhe was brought vp with Foure noble Ladies, and ordred as it appertained to a Kinges Child, and her Father King Florence loued her ſo well, that he

could neuer be ſatiſfied with looking vppon her, often times he kiſſed her holding her in his armes, hee would neuer marie againe for the lone of her, ſo much grew and encreaſed this noble Ide, that ſhe came to the age of Fiftéene yeares complet, the freſh beauty and bountie that was in her, if I ſhoulde diſcribe it, it would be ouer-long to rehearſe: but I dare well ſay, that in beautie as then ſhe paſſed all other women of the world, for God and nature hadde employed all their ſtudie to fourme her, there was neuer any man that ſawe her but loued her, and ſo did her Father, ſo that on a day the king had his Lordes about him, and Sorbarre was amonge them, whome the kinge loued déerely, and the kinge ſéeing his Daughter Ide growe and encreaſe in all vertues, he ſayd to his Lords. Sirs, it were good that there were ſome Wife found out for me, whom I will marie, if any ſuch can be found, in all conditions like to her that I had before. When his Lordes heard him, they were ioyfull, in that the King would marrie againe: Alas, they knewe not the kinges inward intention, but ſhortly after the king knewe it, whereby much ill and miſchiefe came afterward, and many a man ſlaine, and many a Church burnt, as yée ſhall heare héereafter.
               Then the king wrote, and ſent to all his Lords and knights of his Realme, to come to his Court at a day aſſigned: & when they were all come to the Pallaice, there they found the King, who humbly receiued them, and made them great feaſting, and had them to diner with him. When the dinner was done, the king and all his Lords went into a Garden, whereas the king would kéepe his Counſaile, and when they were all there, and the king ſet in his ſeat, he ſayd. Sirs, you know well I haue no more Children but a Daughter, who hath béene deſired in marriage by diuers kinges and Princes, but I would not conſent to marrie her, nor I thought not to marie my ſelfe, for the loue of her Mother whome I ſo déerely loued, but nowe I am minded to marie and to take a Wife, ſo that ſhee bee ſemblable to her that is departed: and therefore I haue ſent for you to ſhew you my will and pleaſure. When his Lords heard him, they were ioyfull and ſayd. Sir, knowe for troth, there is no

woman liuing in Chriſtendome, but if you will haue her you ſhal, if ſhe be neuer ſo faire or ſo hye of Lineage: and therefore Sir, thinke in your ſelfe, whether you will that we ſhall goe to get you a Wife. Sirs, (quoth the kinge) in this matter you ſhall not néed to take any paines, for the Wife that I will haue is not farre from hence, it lyeth in me to haue her if I liſt. Sir, (quoth the Lordes) will it pleaſe you to name her that ſhall be ſo happie. Sirs, (quoth the kinge) it is my Daughter Ide whom I will take to my Wife, for the great loue that I had to her mother. When the Lords heard that, they beheld each other, bleſſing themſelues at the horrible and deteſtable wordes of the king, and looked on him maruailouſly. Then Sorbarre, (who was of the kinges priuie counſaile) began to ſpeake, and ſayd. Ah Sir, God forbid that ſuch a ſhame ſhould come to you, for it is worſe then heathen to him that will polute his owne proper Daughter by himſelfe ingendred, you ſhoulde not bee worthy to ſitte in a royall Chaire, and you ought to bee the mirrour and example to other men how they ſhould liue, will you then breake the Lawe that God hath giuen vs? put from you that crueltie, you ſhall find no man that will praiſe you, in ſo doing or thinking. When the king heard Sorbarre, hee beheld him angerly and ſaid. Sorbarre, (know for troth) but that I hold my ſelfe much bound vnto you, I would ſtrike off your head, and there is no man that ſpeaketh to the contrarie, but I ſhall put him to death.
               Then all the Lords together ſaide to the king. Sir, doe as you pleaſe, Sorbarre hath ſayd as a noble man ought to doe, for if you doe otherwiſe, you are not worthy to beare a Crowne, and ſo held their peace, they durſt ſpeake no more for feare of him: and alſo becauſe they thought ſurely, that the Diuell was within him to motion any ſuch matter. When the king heard the will of his Lordes, he ſent for his Daughter haſtely, who came with a ſmiling countenance, not knowing of the vnreaſonable will of the king her Father, and when ſhe came before him ſhe knéeled downe, the king tooke her vp and ſet her betwéene his armes, and kiſſed her more then Twentie times. The Ladie knewe nothing of her Fathers intention, none otherwiſe but

that ſhee thought hee did it, but as a Father ought to doe with his Child: then the Lordes ſayd ſoftly one to another. Oh vnhappie King, his thoughts bée farre vnlike to his Daughters, for if ſhe were here alone, he would diſhonour her although ſhe be his owne Daughter. The King ſéeing his Daughter Ide ſo excellent faire, he ſayd to himſelfe, that without hee hadde his Daughter in marriage, he ſhould die with rage, and the King beheld her, and made her to ſit downe by him, and ſayd. My déere Daughter, you are as an Orpheling on the Mothers ſide, wherefore I haue great pitie of you that you haue loſt her, and you reſemble ſo much your Mother, that I thinke when I ſée you in the face, that I ſée her before mee, and therefore I loue you the better, and for this cauſe it is my will to take you to my Wife, for I will haue none other in mariage.
            
            
               Chap. CLXV.
               
                  ¶ Of the great ſorrow that the Damſell Ide made, when ſhe heard her Father, how he would haue her in mariage: and how by the means of a noble Lady and Sorbarre, ſhe departed at midnight, and went at the aduenture that God would ſend her.
               
               
                  
                     WHen the Damſell heard her Father, her freſh red colour became pale and wanne, and ſhe caſt downe her lookes to the earth, & ſayd. Ah my right déere Father, take héede what you ſay, for if you be heard of them that bee héere preſent, you ſhall bee greatly blamed. Then the Damſell would haue riſen vp to haue gone from her Father, but the King tooke her by the hand and ſayd. My Daughter, make no daunger nor refuſe to follow my will, for you ſlay me for the loue that I beare you: then all the Lords knéeled downe before the King, and held vp their handes, and deſired the King for his owne wealth and honour, that he would haue pitie of himſelfe and of his Daughter, and

that he would neuer thinke to doe ſuch a déede, for if he did, hée ſhould neuer be ſet by after. When the king heard his Lords, and how they reaſoned with him to haue turned his mind, hee anſweared as a man full of villany and yre, and ſaide, that in deſpight of them all, and whether they would or not, he would haue her to his Wife, and that if there were any ſo hardy as to ſpeake to him to the contrarie, hee woulde cauſe them to die a ſhamefull death, and he ſore rebuked them. When the Damſell heard her Father to ſpeake vnto the Lordes and Knightes, then ſhe ſaw well the inordinate loue of her Father, and ſhe began to wéepe, and ſayd. Oh good God, I ſhall be ſhamed and loſt for euer if he take me to his Wife, for both of vs cannot eſcape without damnation: then ſhee thought within her ſelfe, that if ſhe could in any wiſe eſcape, ſhe would flye away ſo far off, that there ſhould neuer any tidings be heard of her.
               Then the Kinge ſent her into her Chamber with her Maydens, who were ſorrowfull and diſcomforted when they heard of that matter, for the King had commaunded them to kéepe her well, and to ordaine a rich bed for her, becauſe the next day hée would marrie her. When the Damſell Ide was in her chamber, ſhe called to her an ancient Ladie, who had béene her Miſtreſſe, and then ſhe auoided all other out of her Chamber, and made ſemblance to ſléepe: and when ſhe ſaw that al other were gone, ſhe knéeled downe, and held vp both her hands before the Ladie, and all wéeping ſayde. Ah my right déere Ladie and Miſtreſſe, I come to you as a poore Orpheling without Father or Mother, my Mother is dead as you know well, but he that ſhould bee my Father, would bee my Huſband, the which is a thing that the earth ought not to beare, nor ſuſtaine them that woulde liue in ſuch manner: and therefore (déere Miſtreſſe) counſaile and ayd this poore diſcomforted Orpheling, and help me, that I may bee out of the ſight of him that ought to bee my Father, for I had rather goe into ſome farre Countrey, & there to liue in pouertie, then to end my dayes with him in doing of ſuch a déede, and at the end to bee damned and loſt. When the olde Ladie (who was right noble and ſage) heard the pitifu
                     •
                  l complaint of the Damſell Ide, whome ſhee had nouriſhed and

brought vp, ſhe anſweared and ſayd. My right déere daughter, for the great loue that I beare you, I ſhall ayde and counſaile you, and bring you out of this doubt, as ſometime did my Brother Peter of Aragon to the Ladie Clariet your Mother, hée reſcued her out of the hands of the Sarazins, when ſhe was in ieopardie of her life, for all your Father I ſhall not let to aide you. When the Damſell Ide heard the good will of the Ladie, how ſhee would ayd her, all wéeping ſhee kiſſed her, and ſayd. Ah my right deere Mother, the goodnes that you doe to me God reward you for it, for it lyeth not in me: then the old Ladie yſſued out of her Chamber, and left the Ladie Ide verie penſiue, and went into Sorbarres Chamber, who was as then in ye Pallaice, for he was one of the kinges priuie Counſaile, and when he came to his Chamber, and found the Ladie there, he demanded what aduenture had brought her thether, the Ladie drewe him apart, and ſhewed him the requeſt and prayer of the Damſell Ide, whereof Sorbarre (for the great pitie hée had of her) began to weepe, and auoided his Chamber, the better to ſpeake with the Ladie at his eaſe, and they deuiſed together of diuers things, and at laſt they concluded, for the ſauegard of the damſels bodie, that this ancient Lady ſhould beare to her the apparell of a man, and that at the houre of midnight, ſhe ſhould array her therewith, and then ſhew her and let her goe out of the Pallaice, and come to the ſtable, whereas ſhe ſhall find me readie, with the beſt horſe that her Father hath, readie for her to leape vppon.
               When the ancient Ladie vnderſtood Sorbarre, ſhe was right ioyfull, and thought his counſaile good, and then ſhe departed, and made readie all the apparell belonging to a man: then ſhe came to the Damſell Ides Chamber, and ſhewed her the concluſion that was taken betweene her and Sorbarre. When the Damſell heard that, ſhe had great ioy at her heart, and ſhe clipped and kiſſed her: the Ladie was glad when ſhe ſaw her ſomwhat comforted, and ſayd. Faire Ladie, the Kinge your Father hath ordained a bath for you: therefore goe thether and hath with other Damſels, to the intent that the Kinge doe not ſuſpect any thinge, and when you haue bathed you a certaine

ſpace, lette your bed be made readie, and when you are in your Chamber goe to your bed, and then commaund me and all the Damſels to goe and bath vs, & I ſhall kéepe them there ſo long a ſpace, that they ſhall haue good liſt to ſleepe, and I ſhall leaue heere by your bed-ſide all your mans apparell, and array you therein, and then guird this ſword about you, and put on your ſpurres, and when you are out of the Pallaice, goe to the Stables, where you ſhall finde a horſe readie for you. Then they went into the bathing Chamber, and ſhee in her ſmocke readie to goe into the bath, and all the other Damſels were ioyfull, when they ſaw her come thether, for they thought ſhe had been gone to ſléepe, becauſe of the diſpleaſure that ſhee hadde at her heart: then they ſayd one to another, it ſeemeth that our Ladie is well appeaſed of her ſorrow, me thinkes to morrow ſhe ſhall be Ladie and Quéene, and ſhe ſhall bee wife and Daughter to the King her Father, the which is a thing vnreaſonable: then they came to her and bathed her, & feaſted her as much as they might.
               When the Ladie Ide thought that it was time to depart, ſhe ſayd to her Miſtreſſe and to the other Damſels, howe ſhee had bathed her ynough, and that ſhe would go into her Chamber to ſleepe, and bad all the other to go and bath them, and that there ſhould no moe goe with her, but two of them to haue her to bed, and ſhe ſayd to her Miſtreſſe, that ſhe ſhould goe and bring her with the Damſels, the which thing they did ioyfully: the damſell departed and went into her Chamber, wrapped in a Mantle of ſca
                     •
                  let. When the two Damſels had brought her to bed, they tooke leaue of her and departed, and cloſed the dore after them, and then they went and bathed them with others: and when the Damſell Ide felt her ſelfe all dry, ſhe roſe and arrayed her in the mans apparell aſwel as ſhe could, and tooke the ſword and guirt it about her, & put on her ſpurres, and then ſhe went to a great low window on the Garden-ſide, and there ſhe leapt out into the Garden as priuily as ſhe could, and ſo went along by the wall ſide vntill ſhe came to the Poſterne, then ſhee went out towards the Stable, and when ſhe came there, ſhee found a horſe readie in Sorbarres hand, and at the pommell of the ſaddle,

a bagge full of bread and fleſh, & two bottels of good wine. Then the Damſell tooke the horſe, and without any word ſpeaking, ſhee leapt vp quickely: then Sorbarre all wéeping ſaide. My déere Daughter, God bee thy guide and bring thée to ſauegard, goe thy way, and kéepe the way vpon thy left hand, and follow the Sea-ſide. Sir, (quoth ſhe) for the goodnes you haue ſhewed me God reward you, into whoſe ſauegard I commend you: thus departed this noble Ladie Ide, to eſchew and flye from the ill and diſhonorable will of her Father, and ſhe entred into the Forreſt kéeping no hye way, and ſo ſhe road thrée daies along the wood, vntill ſhe thought well that ſhe was farre from her Countrey. Nowe let vs l
                     •
                  aue ſpeaking of her, vntill wée haue occaſion to returne to her againe: and lette vs ſpeake of King Florence her Father.
            
            
               Chap. CLXVI.
               
                  ¶ Howe King Florence was ſorrowfull, when he was aduertiſed of his Daughters departing, who was apparelled like a man, and howe ſhee came into Almaine: and howe ſhee found certaine Theeues in a Forreſt, and how ſhee came to Rome to the Emperour like a Squier.
               
               
                  
                     YE haue heard here before in this Hiſtorie, howe King Florence of Aragon would haue his owne Daughter the Damſell Ide in mariage, againſt the will of al his Lords and people, after that he had ſpoken with her, and commanded the bath to be ordred for her, to the intent that the next day to haue her in mariage. The night approached, and after Supper the King went to his bed, and the next morning betimes, tidings was brought to the King, how the King of Nauarre was come to ſée him, the King went to méete him, and made him great chéere, & ſo came together to the Pallaice, and then incontinent it was ſhewed the King, how his daughter

was fledde away, whereof the King was ſo ſorrowfull and angrie, that no man durſt ſpeake a word to him, and hee went into his Daughters Chamber, and there he found the Ladies and Damſels that had the kéeping of her, the King would haue run vpon them, if the King of Nauarre had not béene, who letted him and blamed him much, when hee knew the cauſe of her departing, and what the King would haue done: then came the Horſe-kéeper to the King, and ſayd, howe his good horſe was ſtollen away the ſame night. Then the King as a man deſperate, commaunded on all ſides men to ride after her, and whoſoeuer could bringe his Daughter againe, or elſe ſure tidinges of her, he promiſed to giue him a Thouſand Florents of gold. There were many, that for loue of that monney road foorth, to the number of thrée hundred, they road diuers wayes, but there was none of them that could bring any tidinges of her, and ſo returned to the King, who was ſorowfull when he could heare nothing of her. Great lamentations there was made in the Citie, for the going away of the Damſell, becauſe of the feare that ſhe had of her Father, and road vpon the good horſe, in the day time ſhee would reſt her in the woods, and in the night ſhee would ride foorth.
               Thus ſhee pa
                     ••
                  ed all the Pr
                     •
                  uinces of Aragon, and ſhe paſſed into Lombardy, of her iourneys and aduentures I will make no mention, becauſe ſhe found nothing in the way to let her, ſhe road ſo long, that ſhee approached to the Countrey of Almaine, and when ſhe came there her monney fayled her, whereby ſhe was conſtrained to ſell her horſe for money to liue withall, and ſo went a foote, and at the laſt came to the Citie of Baſile, and there ſhee tarried a ſeaſon, and there ſpent her monney, ſo long ſhee lay there, that ſhee heard the Emperour of Roome ſent for men all about, to ayd and ſuccour him againſt the King of Caſtile, who made him great warre. When ſhe ſaid that many noble men were going to Roome, to ſuccour the Emperour, ſhe was ioyfull, and ſayd to her Hoſt, that if ſhe had horſe and armour, ſhee would goe with other into the warres, and thought within her ſel
                     •
                  e, that ſhe would gladly be acquainted with the Emperour of Roome, who was named Othon, and ſhe thought

if ſhe might ſhe would take counſaile of him, & ſhe did ſo much, that ſhe fell in acquaintance with ſome of the Almaines, ſo that they were glad to ſee her, ſhe ſéemed to them to be ſo faire and a young Squier, then an Almaine that was there ſayd vnto her. Freend, come hether to me, and ſhew me what thou art? Sir, (quoth ſhe) I am to him that my ſeruice may pleaſe, for I deſire nothing but to ſerue ſome noble man, but of late I was in Aragon, and there I ſerued a Lord that is dead, wherefore I am come hether for the diſpleaſure that I haue of his death, and I can well ſerue a Gentleman, and kéepe his horſe, and if néed be to driue his Sompter-horſe, and if I come in Battaile or in Skirmiſh with my Maiſter, I thinke hee ſhall haue a worſe then I am in his company. The Almaine hearing her ſo to ſpeake, ſayd: Faire Sonne, that thou ſayſt procéedeth of a good courage, therefore good muſt come to thée, yet I pray thée ſhew mee thy name? Sir, (quoth ſhee) I am called Ide. Brother, (quoth the Almaine) I entertain thée into my ſeruice, take héed of my horſe. Sir, (quoth ſhe) I am ready to doe you the beſt ſeruice that I can, ſo the Almaine had her to his Lodging.
               Thus ſhe then ſerued, that was woont to be ſerued, for ſhee feared if it ſhould be perceiued that ſhe were a woman, it wold be to her trouble, therefore ſhe kept her ſelfe cloſe and ſecret, and ſhe continued thrée dayes with her Maiſter, after the other company were gone towardes Roome, but her Maſter might not depart ſo ſoone as the other did, for his buſineſſe was not readie: & then thrée dayes after they departed to go to Roome, and ſhee was armed after the cuſtome of the Countrey, ſhe ſerued her Maiſter ſo well, that hee prayſed her. So long they road, that they came and approached neere to the Countrey of Rome, ſo that on a day they entred into a great darke Forreſt, wherein lay in ambuſhment about Seauen-ſcore Spaniards, lying there to abide their aduenture, they lay in a darke Valley: and when they ſaw the Almaines, they diſpiſed them to the death and ranne vppon them. Then Ide (who road before her Maſter) couched her Speare, and ſtrake a Spaniard therewith cleane through the bodie, and with the drawing out of her Speare, the Spaniard fell downe dead, of the which courſe her

maiſter praiſed her, then the Spaniards ran in among the Almaines, who right valiantly defended themſelues, but their defence could not auaile them, for at the end they were all ſlaine, ſo that none eſcaped aliue, but alonely Ide, who did beare her ſelfe ſo valiantly, that ſhee ſlewe Foure of the Spaniards, but when ſhe ſaw that her maiſter and all his companie wer ſlain, with her ſword in her hand all bloudie, ſhe fled away, and road out of the way, and tooke a little path, the which brought her to a Rocke, and there ſhe alighted, and taried in the wood all that night vntill the next morning, ſhe had ſo great hunger & thirſt, that ſhe was néere hand famiſhed, for ſhe had ridden all the day without meat or drinke, and in the morning ſhe looked al about her, and ſawe in an arbour about Thirtie Théeues, ſitting at a Table eating and drinking at their pleaſure: and when the Damſell ſaw them, for the great rage of hunger that ſhe ſuffered, conſtrained her in ſuch wiſe that ſhe forgat all feare & went vnto them. When the Théeues ſaw her, one of them ſayd to his fellowes, I ſee yonder comming a Squier mounted vpon a good horſe, the which ſhalbe ours: and when Ide approached to them, ſhee humbly ſaluted the companie and ſayd. Sirs, if it may pleaſe you to let me eate and drinke with you, I will pay for my ſhotte. Fréende, (quoth one of them) is there any man that hath beene your guide in this Forreſt? Sirs, (quoth Ide) God hath beene my conduct and none other: then one of the Theeues ſtept forth, and tooke her horſe by the bridle, and ſaid to his companie. Sirs, lay on, ſtrike him downe, he ſhall neuer eate nor drinke more, his horſe ſhall not eſcape me. When the Damſell ſaw that ſhe was taken, ſhe was in great feare, & ſhee durſt make no countenance to defend her ſelfe, there were ſo many Theeues vpon her, and ſhe thought to humble her ſelfe which ſhould bee more profit, and ſayd. Sirs, why make you that haſt to ſlay mee? little ſhall yee winne thereby nor looze, hold heere my ſword, I yeild my ſelfe into your handes, and I pray you (in the honour of Ieſus Chriſt) to giue me ſome meat and drinke, for I am ſo hungrie, that I am almoſt famiſhed. Then the maſter Theefe ſayd: Squier, haue no feare to be ſtriken, thou ſhalt haue no more hurt then my ſelfe, but thou ſhalt

haue all that thou lackeſt, goe thy way and ſit downe, and eat and drinke at thy pleaſure. Sir, (quoth Ide) I thanke you. Then the Damſell ſate downe with them, and did eat & drinke at their pleaſure: and when they had all eaten and were riſen vp, the Théeues beganne to ſtriue among themſelues, ſaying to their chiefe maiſter, howe hee had done ill that he would not ſuffer them to ſlay the Squier: then another anſweared, & ſaid. how there ſhould be no hurt done vnto him, becauſe hee was ſo faire a young man and ſo courteous, and ſayde, that it ſhould be great dammage to ſlay him, and that it were better to kéepe him ſtill with them, and to learne him to ſteale and to murder men, and if he will not ſo doe, then it were good reaſon to ſlay him.
               When Ide vnderſtood the Théeues, ſhe was in great feare, & called vpon our Lord God, praying him humbly in her great néede to ayd and ſuccour her: then the chiefe maiſter demaunded what was her name, then ſhee anſweared in great feare to bee ſlaine, and ſaid. Sir, my name is Ide, and I am of the Realme of Faunce, and we were in company when we departed out of our Countrey about fortie Gentlemen, we were going to haue ſerued the Emperour of Rome, who hath now war with the King of Spaine, and we found in our way about ſeauen ſcore Spaniards in ambuſhment, lying in a Valley, ſo they ſet vppon vs, and ſlewe all my company, none eſcaped but my ſelfe: and therefore Sirs, I pray you let mee haue againe my horſe and my ſword, and ſhew mee the way to Rome, it would be a great almes deede to ſhew me that courteſie. Nay, (quoth the maiſter Théefe) that we will not doe, but thou ſhalt tarrie with vs, and learne to be a Thiefe and a Murderer, and if thou wilt not thus doe, with my Sword I ſhall ſtrike off thy head. Sirs, (quoth Ide) you would haue me to do a thing that I was neuer accuſtomed to doe, nor none of my Lineage, nor I haue no intention to doe any ſuch workes, therefore I pray you lette me haue my horſe and my ſword, then you doe me great courteſie, and when I am mounted vpon my horſe, if one of you will defie me, and if I defend not my ſelfe from him, then ſtrike off my head. I haue bought my meate and drinke verie déere, if I

ſhould looze my horſe: then the maiſter Théefe ſayd. Becauſe I ſée that thou art ſo hardy, I will wraſtle with thee, vpon this couenant, that if thou caſt me, thou ſhalt be one of our companie, and if thou be caſt to the earth, then I will haue thy horſe and thy Sword, and ſpoyle thee of all thy cloathes. Then Ide ſayd: I am content thus to do, ſo that you withdraw your men from me, and ſet my horſe by me, and my ſword tyed to my ſaddle bowe, for it is a common prouerbe, that a man is taken for a Foole that putteth his truſt in a Theefe. When the Theues heard that, they could not forbare laughing, and they had great deſire to ſee this wraſtling betwixt them, then they withdrew backe, and ſet his horſe there by him: then the noble Damſell Ide quickly tooke the Théefe, who thought to haue borne her to the earth, but ſhee drew him ſo ſore to her, that he could ſcarce haue any breath, and therewith ſhee caſt him ſo rudely to the earth againſt a ſtone that he was therewith in a ſwound, and with the fall his teeth burſt in his mouth.
               When Ide ſaw the Théefe in that danger, ſhe went quickely to her horſe and mounted vp: then ſhe drew out her ſword▪ and ſayd. Ah ye vilde Théeues, your treaſon ſhall not auaile you, for ye haue all thought violence and treaſon againſt mee, goe & helpe your maiſter who lyeth yonder, I thinke he ſhall euer remember this wraſt
                     •
                  ing between vs, and I haue now no doubt of you all, though you were a Hundred more, for if I can I ſhall make you all bee hanged and ſtrangled, then the quickeſt and the lighteſt Théefe amonge them ſtept foorth & tooke him by the bridle of his horſe: and when ſhee ſawe that, ſhee lifted vp her Sword, and ſtrake the Théefe vpon the hand, ſo that the hand flew from his bodie and hanged ſtill vppon her bridle, then hee ranne away, thinking to die with the paine of his hande: and then ſhe daſht in among the Théeues, for they had no weapons about them to defend themſelues withall, but they were there to their folly, nor they had no feare of that which fell, nor they beléeued not that ſuch a young Squier ſhould haue hadde ſuch hardnes and force: then ſhee fought fiercely among them, and cut off armes and ſhoulders, and claue ſome to the braines, ſhe did ſo much, that ſhe ſlew fiue of the Théeues before ſhe dep
                     •
                  rted,

and when ſhe ſaw time to depart, ſhe ſpurred her horſe, for by that time the reſidue of the Théeues had gotten weapons, and they followed her to haue ſlaine her or her horſe, then ſhée departed with the ſpurres, her horſe was good, therefore anon ſhe was farre from them, then the Théeues ſawe they loſt but their labours to follow any further: therefore they let her goe. When Ide ſaw that ſhe was eſcaped their handes, ſhe humbly thanked our Lord God, deſiring him to ayd and conduct her into ſome ſauegard, and ſhe road ſo long, that ſhe yſſued out of the great Forreſt: Of her iourneys and lodging I will make no mention, but ſhe ſped ſo in her iourney, that ſhee arriued at the noble Citie of Roome, and ſhe tooke vp her lodging néere to the Pallaice, whereas the Emperor was deuiſing with his Lordes of the Feats of warre: then Ide went thether, & knéeled downe and ſaluted the Emperour and all his Lords. When the Emperour and the Romanes that were there ſawe the goodly yong man, who ſo humbly ſaluted them, they regarded him much, for the beautie that they ſawe in him: then the Emperour ſayd vnto him. Faire Sonne, ſhewe mee what you bee, and from whence you come, that thus commeth hether to mee? Sir, (quoth Ide) I am a Squier, that came nowe ſtraight from Almaine, whereas I haue ſerued a certaine time, and little there I haue wonne, whereof I am ſorrie, and but lately I was in place where diuers Spaniards and other were in companie, & they had great deſire to make warre, and they went to the king of Spaine your enemie, but before they had gone farre, they that were in my company met with them, and there we fought together and ſlew the moſt part of them, and there I was a little hurt: and now Sir, I am come to you to ſerue your grace, if my ſmall ſeruice may pleaſe you, and in the beſt wiſe that I can, I ſhall ſerue you truely.
            
            
               
               Chap. CLXVII.
               
                  ¶ Howe the Damſell Ide was entertained with the Emperour of Roome, and how the Lady Oliue his Daughter was enamoured of Ide, weening ſhee had beene a man: and howe the Kinge of Spaine came before the Citie of Roome: and howe the noble Damſell Ide tooke the King of Spaine in battaile, and diſcomfited him.
               
               
                  
                     WHen the Emperor heard Ide
                   ſpeake, he beheld her well, and ſawe how ſhée was bigge and great, and thought that in all his life he neuer ſaw ſo faire a young man, and as the Emperour was talking with Ide, there came to them Oliue the Emperours Daughter. Then all the Lordes roſe vp at her comming, and ſhe ſate downe by her Father, and greatly beheld the young Squier, and much ſhe praiſed him in her courage, becauſe of the maruailous great beauty that was in her, wéening that ſhee had béene a man. This Oliue was ſo faire, ſo ſwéete, and ſo méeke, that (for her bountie and humilitie) ſhe was beloued of euerie man: then the Emperour demaunded of Ide what her name was, and from whence ſhe came? Sir, (quoth ſhe) my name is Ide, and I was borne at Terraſcon, and I am kinne to Duke Naymes of Bauier, and to Aymerie of Narbon, and to Gillerme the Scot: but by the kinſmen of Ganelon, I was chaſed and baniſhed out of my Countrey, & ſince I haue endured much paine and pouertie. Then the Emperour ſayd: Fréend, thou art of a good kindred, I entertaine thée into my Court, for the bountie that I thinke to be in thée, and alſo for thy good Lineage. Sir, (quoth Ide) God giue me grace that I may doe you ſuch ſeruice, that it may bee to your pleaſure. Daughter Oliue, (quoth the Emperour) for the loue of you, I haue entertained this Squier to ſerue you. Father, (quoth Oliue) I thanke you, for it ſéemeth that hee is

come of a good Stocke, and I had no Seruant a great ſeaſon that better contented me: then the Emperour ſayd vnto Ide. My Freend, ſerue me well, behold héere my Daughter whom I loue entirely, and to whom I deliuer you to ſerue her, I haue no moe Children but ſhee, and therefore ſerue her truely, as a man ought to doe that is come of ſuch a Lineage as you are, if you ſerue her well and truely, you had neuer in all your life ſo good aduenture. Sir, (quoth Ide) I ſhall doe ſo much, that by the grace of God, you and ſhee ſhall bée well content, and Sir, there is nothing lightly but I can doe it, to ſerue a noble man, and in the warre I ſhall defend my ſelfe I truſt aſwell as another, and alſo I can ſerue at a Table before a King or Quéene. Fréend, (quoth the Emperour) if you can doe thus as you ſay, you are welcome hether, and you ſhall fare the better, and I am ioyfull of your comming to ſerue me, you ſhall neuer haue néede to goe out of my ſeruice.
               When Ide heard the Emperour, ſhee humbly thanked him: and thus was Ide entertained with the Emperor, whereas ſhe did ſo much by her good ſeruice, that the Emperor & his daughter, and all they of the Court, loued and praiſed her, and the Damſell Oliue often times gladly regarded Ide, and began in her heart ſore to loue her, and Ide (who perceiued her) prayed our Lord God, that he would ſo deale, that ſhée bee not accuſed neither of man nor woman. Shée gaue almes often times to poore men, and ſhe viſited gladly the holy Church, ſhe demeaned her ſelfe in ſuch wiſe, that of euerie man ſhe was beloued & praiſed: often times ſhee prayed to God for King Florence her Father, although ſhe was chaſed and fled out of her Countrey by his occaſion and cauſe, yet ſhee alwaies prayed to God that ſhe might be agréed with him.
               Thus this Damſell Ide was in this danger, ſeruing ye Emperour and his Daughter Oliue the ſpace of two Moneths, and on a day ſhe was in the Pallaice with the Emperour, and thether came in great haſt a Meſſenger, and came and ſaluted the Emperour, and ſayd. Sir, knowe for troth, that the Kinge of Spaine with great puiſſance is entred into your Empire of Rome, and waſteth all before him with fire and ſword, & many

a Romane he hath ſlaine, and he hath ſworne by his Law, that before a moneth bee paſſed, hee will bee within your Cittie of Rome with all his puiſſance, and hee ſayth, that hee will haue his pleaſure of your Daughter, and to make you to die a ſhamful death, becauſe you haue refuſed to giue him your Daughter in mariage. Sir, it had béen better for you that he had maried your Daughter, then ſo many men ſhould haue béene ſlaine, & ſo many Townes burnt and deſtroyed, and Caſtles beaten downe. Sir, goe quickely againſt him, and defend your Coū
                  trey, or elſe you ſhall ſée him ſhortly pitch vp his Tents & Pauillions before this City. When the Emperour heard ye meſſenger, he ſtudied a great ſeaſon, and looked vpon Ide, and ſaid. Fréend, counſaile mee, for I thought full little, that theſe men of warre would haue come vppon me, and nowe they waſt and deſtroy my Land. Sir, (quoth Ide) trouble not your ſelfe for it, comfort your ſelfe, and reioice your Lordes and Seruants, and lette mee haue men to fight with them, and I will looke vppon them before they come any néerer, and by the grace of God, I ſhall cauſe them to buy déerely the deſtruction that they haue made in your Countrey, if God ſaue my life, & my ſword hold. When the Emperour heard the valiant courage of Ide, he praiſed her much in his heart, and ſayd. Fréend, your reaſon pleaſeth mee well, and therefore I ſhall doe you that honour, as to make you a Knight, whereby your Proweſſe and hardineſſe ſhall increaſe. Sir, (quoth Ide) of the honour that you will doe to me, I am right ioyfull, and I thanke you thereof: then the Emperor came vnto Ide, and guirt about him a good ſword and a rich, it was ſo good, that there was none like it in goodnes, neither ſharper nor harder, and then the Emperour gaue her the necke-ſtroake of Knighthood, and ſayd. Ide, remember this order the which you haue receiued this day, and I pray God that it may be to the increaſe of your honour, and eue
                     •
                   beware that your thoughts be not light nor wauering, but rather ſage, diſcréet, and temperate, and bee hardy in Battaile, and caſt away from you all feare, and when you haue wonne any goods or riches, kéepe them not locked in your Coffers, but diſtribute them to poore Knightes, the which ſhall increaſe and

exalt your honour, and alwaies loue the holy Church, if you do thus, you cannot faile to come to great honour, and euer ſhew your vertue againſt your enemies. Sir, (quoth Ide) by the grace of God I ſhall ſo doe, and there is no Spaniard but that ſhall wiſh himſelfe to be on the other ſide of the Sea: then euerie man arrayed them in the Pallaice and in the Cittie, & then Trumpets, Drummes, and Hornes beganne to ſound in the Citie, ſo that all the Chiualrie and Communaltie of the Citie were ready armed: then they came all before the Pallaice, and preſented themſelues to the Emperor, who did command them that day to follow and obey the commaundement of Ide, whom he committed that day to doe and be as chéefe Captaine, & ſaid. Sirs, looke that you doe as much for him as you would doe for me, and yée know well, that I am old and féeble, and can beare armour no longer, nor I am not able to ride as I might haue done before this time: wherefore I deſire you, and alſo commaund you all on paine of your liues, to doe euerie thing as he commaundeth in ſtead of mee, aſwell as though I did commaund you in mine owne perſon, for hee that doth the contrarie, he ſhall loſe his head without any other redemption. Then they all ſaid they would ſo doe ſince it was his pleaſure.
               Then the noble Emperor cauſed Ide to be richly armed, and then deliuered him his owne horſe, who was ſo good that his like could not be found in any Countrey, then Ide mounted vp quickly with helmet, ſhéeld, and a good Speare: and Ide tooke leaue of the Emperor, and of the Ladie Oliue, & ſo road through the Citie of Roome with all his Hoaſt, & when they were without the Citie, Ide ordained Thrée Battailes, the two firſt battailes were ledde by twoo great Lordes, and the Third Ide did guide: and thus with banners diſplayed, they aduaunced foorth towards their enemies. The Spaniards thought ſurely that all had been theirs, becauſe they ſaw of all the way that they had come, no manner of defence made againſt them, but it is an old ſaying, yt many things remaineth of fooliſh thoughts as it did with the Spaniards, for they thought ſurely that the Citie of Rome was wonne, but if God ayde and ſuccour the Damſell Ide and her Chiualrie, ſhe ſhould take from them ere

it were night, their hope to haue any Victory. She road by her Battailes and encouraged her men, and mooued them to doe valiantly, and thus they approached towards their enemies. Great ioy and noiſe there was when the Battailes encountred together, the ſhot flew ſo thicke on both parts, that it ſéemed to be ſnow and hayle. Ide encountred with a Knight Nephew to the King of Spaine, hee receiued ſuch a ſtroake, that for all his armour, Ides Speare went cleane through his bodie, ſo that ye Knight fell to the earth with his féet vpward, and ſo dyed miſerably among the horſe féete: then Ide ſayd, of God be thou curſed, in an ill houre thou camſt hether to receiue ſuch an offering, I challenge from you all the Empire of Rome, then ſhée ſayd to her ſelfe. Good Lord God, I require thée humbly this day to aid and ſuccour me a poore fugitiue: therewith ſhe ſpurred her horſe, and with the ſame ſpeare ſhe ſlew another great Baron of Spaine, and ſo ſlew with the ſame Speare diuers other, & when the Speare was broken, ſhe drew out her ſword, the which the Emperour had giuen her: then ſhe came to a notable Duke of Spaine Vncle to the King, to whome ſhee gaue ſuch a ſtroake with her good ſword, that ſhee claue his head to the téeth, and ſo he fell downe dead, then ſhe daſht into the thickeſt preſſe, and euer did chooſe out the greateſt perſonages, and ſlew many of them, for ſhe thought the more that were ſlaine of the great men, the more ſhould her enemies bee afrayd: therefore ſhe choſe out ſuch one after another. And alſo the Romans fought valiantly, ſo that by the hye Proweſſe of Ide, and of the good Chiualrie of the Romanes that were with her, they made the Spaniards abaſhed, and cauſed them to flye away, and had neuer returned againe if the Duke of Argon, with thrée Thouſand Knightes in his companie had not béene, who made them that fled to returne againe. Then there began againe a fierce Battaile, and many a man ſlaine, the Romanes did valiantly, by the aide and comfort of Ide their Captaine, ſhe road into the thickeſt of the preſſe, and bare downe the Spaniards on all ſides, that it was pittie to ſée, great was the noiſe, pitiouſly cryed out the hurt men lying among the horſe féete, which were beaten downe to the earth, then the King of Spaine came into

the Battaile with his ſword in his hand, and encountred with a great Lord of Rome which was Coozen to the Emperour, the King gaue him ſuch a ſtroake vppon the helmet, that hee claue his head into the braines, and then the King ſlew another: then Ide (who ſaw that) was ſorrowfull, and ſayd. I ought little to be praiſed, without I reuenge the death of theſe two Lordes ſlaine by the King of Spaine: then ſhee road to the Kinge, and gaue him ſuch a ſtroake vppon the helmet, that all the circles with ſtones and pearles flew downe to the earth, and ſtroake away part of his coife, haire, and ſkinne, and if the King hadde not turned his head, it had béen clouen to the téeth, & the ſword glaunced and lighted vpon his horſe necke, and ſtrake it cleane aſunder, and ſo the horſe fell downe dead and the King to the earth, whereof the Spaniards were ſore abaſhed, thinking their King had béen ſlaine, ſo they fled away, and left him there lying on the earth in a traunce, in ſuch ſort, that hee could neither ſée, heare, nor ſpeake one word: then the Damſell Ide tooke him, and deliuered him to two noble Lordes of the Emperours Court, and when he reuiued, he was made to ſweare and promiſe to be a true Priſoner. Thoſe two Lordes went with the King of Spaine into the Citie of Rome, and preſented him vnto the Emperour from Ide, whereof the Emperour thanked God that hee had ſent Ide thether to ſerue him: then the King was ſette in a ſtrong Tower, and Ide was without ſtill doing maruailes in armes, ſo that euerie man was abaſhed thereof, & the Spaniards made her way. Finally, by the hye Proweſſe of the Damſell Ide, the Kinge of Spaine was taken and all his men diſcomfited, happie was hee that might eſcape to ſaue his life, the chaſe endured long, wherein many were ſlaine and taken. Then Ide and her companie returned to their Tents and Pauillions, and there they found great riches, the which was brought out of Spaine, and was giuen and diſtributed to them that had deſerued it. Great ioy was made in the noble Citie of Rome, for the Battaile was well ſéene ouer the wals, and eſpecially the Ladie Oliue, had well regarded the hye proweſſe of Ide, whereby ſhe loued her ſo in her heart, that ſhe ſmiled with ioy, and ſayd to her ſelfe. To yonder young Knight I doe giue

my loue, the which I neuer granted before to any man liuing, but it is good right and reaſon that I grant my loue to Ide, ſuch like wordes Oliue ſayd to her ſelfe.
            
            
               Chap. CLXVIII.
               
                  ¶ How the Emperour of Roome highly receiued the noble Damſell Ide, and of the honour that was made vnto her, and how the Emperor made her Conſtable of his Empire: And how the king of Spaine was deliuered out of priſon, and made homage vnto the Emperour.
               
               
                  
                     AFter that the Battaile was done and finiſhed, and the bootie diſtributed, Ide with great triumph accompanyed with Lordes and Knightes entred into the Citie of Roome, and the Emperour was infourmed of the comming of Ide, and of her valiant déedes, by whom the Victorie was obtained, & how that none could endure againſt her, whereof the Emperour had ſuch ioy at his heart, that hee wiſt not what to doe, and hee thanked our Lord God, that the matter went ſo to his honour and glorie, therewith Ide came to the Pallaice, whereas ſhe was receiued with great ioy with all the Colledges of the Citie, and when the Emperour ſawe her, he aroſe and embraced her, and ſayd. My true Fréend Ide, of your comming I am right ioyfull, for this day you haue done ſuch honour to our Empire, that you ought to bée honoured for euer, and becauſe you haue done vs ſuch ſeruice, wee will that you ſhall bee the mirrour for all other Knightes, to encourage them to doe well: wee therefore make you our firſt Chamberlaine, and high Conſtable of all our Romane Empire, and all my Landes and Signiories I abandon, to be at your commandement in all things that you thinke reaſonable to be done, for I will and commaund that all my Lordes doe obey you. Sir, (quoth Ide) of this honour I thanke you, God giue mee grace

that I may alwaies perſeuer, to doe that thing which ſhalbe to you agreeable, and profitable to your Countreys and Signiories. Then the Emperour ſent for the King of Spaine out of priſon, and when hee was come, hee knéeled downe and ſayd. Sir, I require you to haue pitie of me: the Emperour anſwered 
                     ••
                  ercely, and ſayd. King of Spaine, for what cauſe are you come out of your Countrey of Spaine, and thus to deſtroy and waſt mine Empire? you haue ſlaine many of my Lordes and Knightes, who neuer did you any diſpleaſure, and beſides that you haue burnt many of my Townes, and beaten downe my Caſtles, whereof I am ſorrie, ſeeing that I nor none of mine did you neuer any diſpleaſure: and becauſe that all euill ought to bee puniſhed, and all good déedes rewarded, before euer I drinke any wine, I ſhall cauſe your head to be ſtriken off, for any mans ſpeaking to the contrarie, I ſhall not fayle to doe it. When the King heard that, he was in great feare, and humbly prayed him to haue pitie him, and ſayd, how he was readie to make amends for all his treſpaſſes, and to repaire again all the ill damages done by him, or cauſed to be done within the Empire, and therewith to doe homage and feaultie vnto him, and to hould the Realme of Spaine of him: promiſing alſo, if any warre were made againſt the Emperour, hee would come and ſuccour him with twentie Thouſand men at his owne proper coſtes and charges, and to bee with him againſt all men that would trouble him: then the Emperor ſayd. King of Spaine, know for troth, that for all your promiſe and words, I will doe but little for it, for you ſhall not eſcape from me: then the damſell Ide ſtept foorth, and ſayd to the Emperour. Sir, I haue often times heard ſay, that he that humbleth himſelfe and cryeth for mercie, then reaſon requireth that hee ſhould haue mercie graunted him: and therefore Sir, I require you to receiue this 
                     •
                  ing to your grace, and pardon his treſpaſſe, ſéing the offers that he hath offered to do, yt he will become your Liege-man, & hold his Land of you, and amend the dammages that you haue ſuffered: he that reaſon offereth, ought to haue haue reaſon, and you ought to thanke God, ſince ſuch a man as hee is, putteth himſelfe into your handes. When the Emperour vnderſtoode

                  Ide, he ſayd. Fréend Ide, your wit and courteſie is to bee allowed▪ and becauſe I knowe that the counſaile that you giue mee is reaſonable, I will doe as you will haue mee, take you him, and by you hee ſhall bee deliuered. Sir, (quoth Ide) I thanke you. When the Kinge of Spaine ſawe that hee ſhould haue grace, and that with amends making he ſhould be deliuered, he thanked God, and did homage to the Emperour, and deliuered ſufficient pledges to make reſtitution as he had promiſed: then the Emperour gaue him a ſafe conduct vntill he came into his owne Countrey, and all the other Priſoners were deliuered, ſuch as were taken in the Battaile by the Romanes, then the King of Spaine was ioyfull, and often times thanked the Damſell Ide, by whoſe meanes this bountie and courteſie was ſhewed him. Then hee tooke his leaue of the Emperour & of Ide, and of all other Lords and Knights that were there preſent, and ſo hee returned into his Countrey of Spaine, whereas he was receiued with ſore wéepings, for the great loſſe that he had receiued. Now we ſhall leaue ſpeaking of him, and returne to our matter.
            
            
               Chap. CLXIX.
               
                  ¶ How the Emperour gaue his Daughter Oliue in mariage to the Damſell Ide, knowing none other but that ſhe had been a man, and how ſhee was appeached by a Varlet, that heard their deuiſes whiles they were in bedde together, whereby the Emperour would haue burnt the Damſell Ide.
                  
               
               
                  
                     AFter that the King of Spaine
                   was departed from Roome, the Emperour honored and praiſed much Ide for the good ſeruice that ſhee had done, who euer better and better perſeuered in good ſeruice doing, for ſhe did ſo much by her wit, that all diſcords and debates that were in the Empire betwéene Lordes or Neighbors, ſhe ſet them in peace

and accord, wherefore the Emperour loued her in ſuch wiſe, that without her he did nothing, and the Emperours Daughter Oliue loued her in ſuch wiſe, that ſhe could not liue one day without the ſight of her, ſhe was ſo taken with loue, thinking that ſhe neuer ſawe ſo goodly a young man. And ſo on a day, the Emperour aſſembled his Lords and his priuie Counſaile, to whome he ſhewed, and ſayd, that he had but one Daughter, the which as then was of lawfull age, wherefore he would that ſhe ſhould be married, to the intent that ſhe might haue heires to enioy his Lands after his deceaſe, and ſayd. Sirs, I thinke if all the world ſhould be ſearched, there could not bee found a man ſo worthy to haue my Daughter Oliue in mariage, as our welbeloued Conſtable the valiant Ide, by whome ſo noble ſeruice hath béene done vnto vs and to our whole Empire, for I would before I die that ſhe ſhould be married, and I thinke I cannot better beſtowe her, for in all the world there is not a more valiaunt Knight then Ide is, nor that is more worthy to gouerne an Empire or a great Realme. When the Lords vnderſtood the Emperour, they all allowed his mind, and counſailed him to doe the ſame: then the good Emperour called to him Ide, and ſayd. My déere Fréend, for the great ſeruice that you haue done, I will reward you as by reaſon I am bound to doe, and I cannot giue you a more richer thing nor that I loue better, then Oliue my déere Daughter, whome I will giue you in mariage, and I will that you take her to your wife, to the intent that after my dayes you may gouerne mine Empire, for now I féele my ſelfe aged and féeble, wherefore I ſhall be content, that from hencefoorth you haue the gouerning thereof, and now I deliuer to you my Land in kéeping, to gouerne it as your owne. Ah Sir, (quoth Ide) what is that you ſay? you know well, that I am but a poore Gentleman, baniſhed out of my Countrey, and I am woorth nothing, great dammage it ſhould bee to ſo noble a Damſell, to be aſſigned to ſuch a poore man as I am. Sir, I crie you mercie, humbly requiring you to take aduice, that your Daughter (who is ſo faire) may be married to ſome hye Prince & puiſſant, to the intent that if you ſhould haue any buſ
                     •
                  neſſe, that he might be of power to ayd and ſuccor

you, for I am poore, and ought alwaies to trauaile and to take paines, to get honour for mee, and to increaſe my Lineage. What, (quoth the Emperour) are you ſo hardy as to refuſe my Daughter, by whome great wealth and goodneſſe may come to you? Sir, (quoth Ide) ſince it is ſo, that it pleaſeth you to ſhew me this honour, I will not refuſe it, but Sir, I ſay it to this intent, that you ſhould take good aduiſe therein, and ſéeing you are content that I ſhall thus doe, and that it is your pleaſure, I am content, and I humbly thanke your grace of the honour that you beare me.
               Then the Emperour ſent for his Daughter, who came vnto him with a glad heart, for ſhée had béene aduertiſed of the matter why her Father ſent for her, and then the Emperour ſayd. Daughter, you muſt promiſe mée to doe as I ſhall ſhewe you. Déere Father, (quoth ſhe) it is not in me, nor I will not refuſe any thinge that is your pleaſure. Daughter, (quoth the Emperour) you doe well ſo to anſweare mée, and becauſe I haue no more but you, that ought to haue my Realme after me, therfore I will that you take a Huſband to the intent that your Landes and Signiories may bee defended by him, and therefore, I will that you take to your Huſband our Captaine the valiant Ide, whome I loue entirely, this is my pleaſure and agréement of all my Lordes, if it be your pleaſure to haue him, he ſhall be King and you Quéen after my deceaſe. Sir, (quoth the Ladie) I am readie to fulfil your pleaſure and to obey your commaundements, and I thanke God of this faire aduenture that is fallen to mee this day, for I ſhall haue him that I loue beſt, I haue not nowe loſt my time, when I ſhall haue at my will him whome I loue beſt in all the world▪then ſhee knéeled downe before her Father, and thanked him of his guilt: and then ſhe roſe and kiſſed her Father, and ſayd. Right déere Father, I require you to haſten that this may bee done, let vs goe to the Church to be wedded, for me thinkes we ought ſo to doe. When the Lordes heard the Ladie, they laughed at her haſt: and then the Emperour ſayd. Daughter, come foorth and fiance your Huſband, and you Ide approach néere, and nowe after my death I giue you all mine Empire, and I giue you my

déere daughter, in recompence of the good ſeruice that you haue done me. When Ide vnderſtood the Emperour, all her bloud changed, and ſhe wiſt not what to doe, all her bodie trembled for feare, and ſhe called vppon our Lord God right pitiouſly to her ſelfe, and prayed him to haue pitie of her, and to counſaile her what was beſt for her to doe, for ſhée ſaw that perforce the Emperour would marrie her to his Daughter, and ſayd. Ah my Father Florence, by you & by your diſordinate rage, I am nowe brought to this caſe, when you made mée to depart, becauſe you would haue had me to your wife, but before I would haue conſented thereto, I had rather to haue béen burnt: therefore I fled away to eſchewe that ſhame, whereby I haue béene ſince in many perils, from the which by the will of God I haue eſcaped, whereof I ought to thanke him, & I thought to kéepe my ſelfe within Roome ſecret, and that no man ſhoulde knowe that I am a woman: but I ſhall be accuſed by the Emperours Daughter, whoſe loue is ſo much ſette on mée, that I haue no power to eſcape, without I ſteale away priuily from them all: and if I ſhew them what I am, I may then haue ſome villany and bee accuſed, and ſent vnto the Kinge my Father, or elſe to ſend him word where I am, and then in great haſt he will ſend for me, or elſe if I will eſcape, I muſt flye away ouer the Sea, howbeit, I ſpeake but like a Foole, ſéeing this fortune is fallen vnto me, to haue the Emperors Daughter in mariage and his Empire, I will wed her, and doe as God will giue me grace to doe. All this the Damſell Ide ſpake to her ſelfe.
               Then ſhée ſayd to the Emperour: Sir, ſince it is your pleaſure to giue me your Daughter in mariage, I am ready to take her. Then they were ledde to the Minſter-church, and there they were fianced, whereof great ioy was made in Roome, then the day of marriage came, and the faire Oliue was ledde to the Church betwéene two Kinges, and Ide went afore verie ſadly, and ſo came to the Church, & there they were wedded. Then great was the triumph and ioy in the Citie of Roome, many a rich garment of gould and ſilke was worne that day, and euery man ran to ſée the new Brides: then they went to the Pallaice and ſo to dinner. Of the Feaſts, ſports, and rich meates that

were there that day, if I ſhould ſhew it, the time would bee ouer-long to rehearſe it, but ſince Roome was firſt founded, it was not knowne that there had béen ſuch a Feaſt as this wedding, for no bodie thought but that Ide had béen a man: and after Supper, when it was time to goe to reſt, the Brides were brought into their Chamber, then the Ladie Oliue went to her bed, then came Ide, and the Chamber auoided, and ſhee locked faſt the dore, to the intent that none ſhould heare them, then ſhee came to bed, and layd her downe on the bed-ſide, and ſayd to Oliue. My right ſwéete Loue, God giue you good night, for as for me, I can giue you no good, becauſe I féele ſuch a diſeaſe, the which gréeueth me ſore, and therewith ſhe kiſſed Oliue, who anſweared and ſayd. My ſwéete Louer, you are the thinge in the world that I moſt deſire, for the bountie and ſwéetneſſe that I knowe in you, then doe with me as it ſhall pleaſe you, and to the intent that you ſhall not thinke, that I haue ſo great deſire, that you ſhould do the thing which of right ought to be done betwéene man and Wife, I am content to forbeare it Fiftéene dayes, and becauſe that diuers folkes are héere about to heare vs, I am content to giue you truce, for wee ſhall haue time ynough hereafter to ſport vs, and I know ſuch nobleneſſe in you that I am ſure you will take none other Wife, nor touch none other, but that you will kéepe your faith and troth to me, for I am chaſt and ſo ſhall you find me, it ſufficeth me to kiſſe you, & as for the priuie loue, I am content for this time (ſince it is your pleaſure) to forbeare it. Then Ide anſweared: Faire Ladie, I wil not refuſe your will, thus they paſſed that night with clipping and kiſſing. Then in the morning they aroſe and made them readie, and came into the Pallaice, the Emperour beheld Oliue his Daughter, to ſée if ſhee were any thing chaunged, and ſayd. Daughter, how is it with your new huſband? Sir, (quoth ſhee) euen as I deſire, for I loue Ide my Huſband better then I loue you, although you are my Father, at that word the Emperour and all his Lordes laughed: ſo great ioy and feaſting was there made, that it endured Eight dayes. Then euerie man tooke leaue and went whether as they liſted, and after the Fiftéene dayes were expired, that Ide had layne

with Oliue, Ide
                   touched her not but with kiſſing, whereof Oliue was ſorrowfull, and ſayde to her ſelfe. Oh good Lord, I was ingendred in an euill houre, when I haue married with the goodlyeſt perſon of the world, and the moſt worthy, and hardy that euer was guirt with a ſword, or road on horſe, he maketh no ſemblance to doe that thinge which I haue ſo ſore deſired: then ſhe drew néere to Ide and touched her, and Ide (who knew well what her deſire was) turned toward her, and wold hide himſelfe no longer from her, but all wéeping cryed her mercie, and ſhewed her from the beginning to the ending the manner of all her aduenture, and how that ſhe was a woman, and was fledde away becauſe her Father would haue married her himſelfe. And when Oliue vnderſtood Ide, ſhee was right ſorrowfull, howbeit, ſhee comforted Ide, and ſayd. My right ſwéete Louer, diſcomfort not your ſelfe, for you ſhall not be accuſed by me neither to no man nor woman liuing, we are wedded together, and I will be good and true to you, ſince you haue kept your ſelfe ſo truely, with you I will vſe my time, & paſſe my deſtiny ſince it is thus, for I ſée well that it is the pleaſure of our Lord God.
               Thus as Oliue and Ide were deuiſing together of their ſecrets, a Page being in a Chamber that ioyned cloſe to their Chamber, heard well all their ſecret words and communication, what each of them had ſayd to the other, then he in all haſt went to the Emperour, and ſhewed him all that he had heard betwéene the two Louers. When the Emperour heard that, he was right ſorrowful, and ſayd. Fellow beware what thou ſayeſt, looke that thy report bee true, for if I finde it contrarie, thou ſhalt die an ill death. Sir, if it bee not as I haue ſayde, and that Ide be not a woman whom you take for a man, ſtrike off my head. Then the Emperour made him to bee taken and kept, to the intent to prooue the troth, for he thought that matter ſtrange to beleeue: then hee called to him the Lordes of his priuie Counſaile, and he ſhewed them the matter, whereof they had much maruaile, ſeeing the great vertue and hye Proweſſe that was in Ide, and they greatly complained of the matter and were ſorrowfull: then the Emperour (who was right penſiue)

ſware and made promiſe, that if hee found the matter in that caſe, hee would cauſe both his Daughter and Ide to bee burnt, becauſe of hyding of that ſtrange caſe, and ſayd. If Ide hadde diſcouered the matter to me betimes, my Daughter ſhould neuer haue married her, and the matter now kept cloſe from me, I ſhall neuer haue ioye at my heart vntill I knowe the troth. Then hee commaunded a bath to bee made readie in his owne Chamber, wherein he would haue Ide to bée bathed, to the entent that he might know the troth before ſhe eſcaped away, for he ſayd that he would not ſuffer no ſuch falſhood to bee vſed: the bathing was made readie, and Ide was ſent for, who knewe nothing of that matter, then the Emperour ſaid to her. Ide doe off your cloathes, for you ſhall bath you with mée. When Ide heard the Emperour, ſhe was ſore abaſhed, and ſayd. Sir, I pray you to forbeare it for this time, becauſe I haue not béene accuſtomed to be bathed: then the Emperour ſayd. I wil not forbeare it, becauſe I will ſée you naked, for if I finde that true which hath béene ſhewed me, both you and my Daughter ſhall be burnt. When Ide heard that, ſhe ſaw that ſhe was betrayed and loſt, then ſhee knéeled downe before the Emperour and cryed him mercie, and required him to haue pitie of her, and the Emperour in great haſt ſent for his Lordes, who were in the Hall talking together, and were ſorrowfull for Ide whom they loued entirely, ſo they came to the Emperour, and found Ide before him on her knées ſore weeping, in ſuch ſort, that for pity of her they wept all, then the Emperour ſhewed them all the déede: wherefore ye muſt needs ſée iuſtice to bee done vpon Ide, who then by the Peeres and Lords of Roome was iudged to be burnt. Then it was commaunded, the fire to bee made readie to burne her, the which was done: and Ide before the Emperor abyding her iudgement, with her handes ioyned lifted vp towards Heauen, making pitifull prayers to our Lord God, and to the holy Ghoſt, praying them to haue pitie of her ſoule, and to receiue it into the holy Paradice, for ſhee ſawe well that the end of her life was come.
            
            
               
               Chap. CLXX.
               
                  ¶How our Lord God made great Miracles for Ide, for God made her to chaunge from the nature of a woman and to become a perfect man, whereof the Emperor and his Daughter Oliue had great ioy, and ſo Ide and Oliue lay together, and ingendred a faire Sonne named after Croiſſant. And of the death of the Emperour.
               
               
                  
                     THe ſame houre that Ide was in her prayers, there appeared ſodenly in the Chamber a great cléere light, and therewith a maruailous ſwéet odour, that it ſéemed all the Chamber to bee full of eſſence & ſpices Aromaticke: then preſently after they heard an Angel-like voice ſent from our Lord God, and ſayd. Thou Emperour of Rome, our Lord God commaundeth thée by mée, that thou be not ſo hardy as to touch Ide, to doe her any hurt, for our Lord God hath giuen her the grace for the goodnes that is in her, he doth conſent and will by his diuine puiſſance, that ſhe be changed in nature, and to become a perfect man, as all other be without any difference: & alſo God commandeth, that the Page whom thou haſt in priſon, that thou ſetteſt him at libertie, for ye which he ſhewed thée was of troth, this morning Ide was a woman, but now ſhée is a man. Alſo God commaundeth thée to make thy ſelf
                     •
                   readie, for thou ſhalt liue here in the world but Eight daies longer, therefore from hence foorth let Ide and Oliue thy Daughter haue the gouerning of thy Empire, who before this yéere bee paſſed ſhall haue betwéene them a Sonne, who ſhall be named Croiſſant, who ſhall doe maruailes when hee commeth to age, many aduentures and pouerties hee ſhall ſuffer in his youth, but afterward he ſhall haue ioy and wealth ynough: and with thoſe words the Angell vaniſhed away, and left the Emperour and his Lordes and all the people of Rome in great ioy, for the

euident Miracle that our Lord God had ſent by the prayer of Ide, who with Oliue his Wife had great ioy, and thanked our Lord God. Then the Feaſt and triumph beganne againe at Rome, that day paſſed, and the night came, and Ide and Oliue went to bedde together, and tooke their ſport in ſuch wiſe, that the ſame night was gotten and ingendred the faire Croiſſant, whereby the ioy doubled in the City of Rome, and the next day Ide came to the Pallaice with other Lordes. And the Emperour was in his Chamber making of his Teſtament, for he had not forgotten the wordes of the Angell, ſo he liued Eight daies longer, and on the Ninth day hee dyed, and hee was borne into the great Church of Saint Peter, where his obſequy was done ſolemnly, and layd in his Tombe the which was ordained for him as it appertained, his Sonne in lawe and his Daughter mourned, according to the cuſtome then vſed, and then after Eight daies were paſſed, all the noble Lords of the Countrey came to the Court, and crowned Ide Emperour and Oliue his Wife Empreſſe, great ioy and feaſting was made at their Coronation. And when Oliue the Empreſſe approached her time, ſhe was deliuered of a faire Sonne, and when hée was chriſtened, he was named Croiſſant, that is to ſay growing, becauſe the Moone the ſame time was increaſing. Of the chéere that Ide and his Lordes made at the birth of his Child, néede not to bee rehearſed, for you may well thinke it was as great as euer was any before. Then the time came that the Empreſſe was churched, whereof great ioye was made, this Child was well nouriſhed, and two notable Ladies had the kéeping of him vntill he was Seauen yéeres of age: then a noble Knight and an ancient was ſette about him, and a wiſe, and a great Clarke to teach him cunning, for commonly it is ſayd, that a King without learning or cunning, is compared to an Aſſe crowned: Often times the Father and the Mother would viſit their Child, he was kept to Schoole vntill he was Fiftéene yéeres of age, & he was ſo good a Clarke, that there was none in the Citie of Rome, but that hee could well diſpute with him and aſſoile his queſtions: of his beautie, greatneſſe, force, humilitie, & good vertues, wherewith he was indued, if I ſhould deſcribe them,

it would be ouer-long to rehearſe, whereof Ide and his Mother Oliue had ſuch ioy, that they wiſt not what to doe, but alonely to thanke God of his grace, for their Child grew ſo in bignes & ſtrength, that euerie man was thereof abaſhed, in ſuch wiſe, that at that time there could not be found in the Citie of Rome of his age none ſo great, nor ſo hye of ſtature, whereof his Father, and his Mother, and all the noble Lordes, and Knightes were right ioyfull.
            
            
               Chap. CLXXI.
               
                  ¶ How King Florence ſent two Knights to Rome to the Emperour his Sonne, deſiring him to come and ſee him, and leaue the Empire of Rome to his Sonne Croiſſant, and to ſet noble men about him to guide him: And alſo to bringe with him the Empreſſe, the faire Oliue.
                  
               
               
                  
                     THe Emperour and the Empreſſe ſéeing their Sonne to grow, and amend euerie day in all good workes, they thanked God, praying him to giue him the grace from better to better to perſeuer: ſo it fell, that vppon a Whitſunday the Emperour and the Empreſſe held eſtate Royall at their Pallaice, for the ſolemnitie of that day, & there was many Kinges, Dukes, Earles, Barons, Ducheſſes, and Ladies, and whiles they were in the middeſt of their dinners, there arriued Two notable ancient Knightes: and when they were entred into the Pallaice, they came before the Emperor, and kneeled downe, and ſayd. God that created vs, ſaue and kéepe the noble King Florence of Aragon, and of Nauarre, and Duke of Bourdeaux: and the ſame God ſaue the right noble and excellent Emperour of Rome his déere Sonne, and his faire Daughter the Empreſſe Oliue. When the Emperor Ide heard ſpeaking of his Father, hee was fearefull in his heart, becauſe of the ſhamefull thing not faileable, the which hee would haue

done againſt him, right intentiuely he beheld the two Knights, and demaunded how the King his Father did, euer ſince he departed from him? Then one of the Knightes anſweared, and ſayd. Right déere Sir, if the dolour, diſpleaſure, and the great rage wherein your Father was for your departing, if I ſhould ſhew it, too long it would be to rehearſe: but ſhortly I ſhal ſhew you the ſubſtance of the matter. The ſame Morning after your departing, tidings was brought to the King your Father, how that the King of Nauarre your Vncle was come to ſée him, then your Father went and met him, and brought him into the City of Courtoys with great ioy and mirth, and they alighted at the Pallaice, and there tidings was brought to the King your Father, how you were fled away, whereby ſuch ſorrow, dolour, & diſpleaſure tooke him at the heart, that there was none that durſt looke him in the face, for he looked like a ſpirit, becauſe of the fooliſh loue that he had on you, and he ran about in the Pallaice like a deſperate man, ſo that for feare of him, there was neither Ladie nor Damſell that durſt abide him, for the great furie & diſpleaſure that he was in, ſo that by reaſon of his great yre, he fell into a gréeuous maladie, wherein hee thought that he ſhould haue died, and ſo was confeſſed and made ready to receiue the holy Ghoſt. Then the King of Nauarre and Sorbar, and diuers other Princes came to viſit him, and deſired him to put the folly out of his mind, and to crie to God for mercie, many notable Docttors were there, and they ſhewed him many good reaſons and examples, and ſayd, without he would leaue and forſake his folly, he ſhould be condemned bodie and ſoule.
               When the King your Father ſawe himſelfe in that doubt, & knowing that hee had done ill to cauſe you to flye away, & that no tidings could be heard of you, ſuch a contrition and repentaunce tooke him, that great aboundance of drops fell from his eyes, in ſuch ſort, that all his face was wet, and he had ſuch dolour and gréefe in himſelfe, that euerie man that ſaw him wept for pittie, and the King of Nauarre had ſo great pittie of him, that he was ſo ſorrowfull, that a gréeuous ſickneſſe tooke him, ſo that the Fourth day he died, whereof the Kinge your Father was right ſorrowfull. At laſt his ſickeneſſe determined, & hee

was recouered, and in good health a certaine ſpace, but by reaſon of the dolour that he had for you, could not be ceaſed, but he fell againe ſore ſicke, and ſo he continueth, and hath no power to ayd and reléeue himſelfe, but he eateth and drinketh inough. And after nowe of late it hath béene ſhewed him all your life, and how by the grace of God it is fallen to you, whereby ſuch ioy is come to his heart, that there was neuer ſo much ioy in no mans heart, and yet he ſayth, that hee ſhall neuer haue perfect ioy at his heart vntill hee may ſée you: and therefore hee hath ſent vs hether to you, and he deſireth and commandeth, aſmuch as the Father can commaund his Child, that both you and the Empreſſe your wife, ſhould leaue this your countrey in the guiding of your Sonne, and to leaue notable perſons about him, to kéepe and conduct him, for it ſhall be to you more profitable and better, to vſe your life in peace in the Realmes of Aragon and Nauarre, with the Duchy of Bourdeaux the which to you appertaineth by iuſt inheritance, and he hath giuen vs in charge not to depart from hence, vntill you haue ſhewed vs your will, to the intent, that we may bring him ſome good newes.
            
            
               Chap. CLXXII.
               
                  ¶ Howe the Emperour Ide and the Empreſſe Oliue gaue good inſtructions to their Sonne, when they departed from Rome
                     ▪ and howe they arriued at Courtoys, and came to Florence, who with great ioy receiued them as his Children.
               
               
                  
                     WHen the Emperor Ide had heard this Knight report theſe newes of the King his Father, the water fell from his eies for pitie and ioy that he had, and anſweared and ſayd. Sirs, I will that yee know well, that of your comming and good newes, I am right ioyfull, but I am ſorrie for the great ſickneſſe that my Father is in, wherefore to recomfort him and to make him

ioyfull, I will that you returne to him and ſay, howe that I humbly recommend me to his good grace, and that at Midſummer next I and my Wife will bee with him: the Meſſengers hearing that anſweare, were right ioyfull. Then after dinner they tooke their leaue of the Emperor and of the Empreſſe, who gaue them many rich guiftes, for the honour of King Florence their Father, and ſo the Meſſengers departed. When the Empreſſe Oliue vnderſtood the will of her Lord, ſhee was right ſorrowfull for to leaue her Countrey, whereas ſhée was borne and nouriſhed, and eſpecially to leaue her Son Croiſſant whom ſhe loued: but ſince it was the pleaſure of her Lord ſo to doe, ſhe contented her ſelfe, for ſhée loued her Huſband ſo well, that ſhée would in no wiſe ſay againſt his pleaſure, nor let him to do his will. Right ſorrowfull were the Princes and Lordes of that Countrey, and all the people of Roome: but in the beſt wiſe yt they could they comforted themſelues, becauſe of ye yong Prince Croiſſant, who ſhould tarie and abide with them, and whom the Emperour deliuered vnto them to be kept.
               And then hee ſpake to his Sonne, and ſhewed him many notable examples and reaſons, he commaunded him to bée gentle and courteous to his Lordes and people, and that he ſhould not bée light of credence, and that in any wiſe hee ſhould not liſten with his eares to heare Flatterers, nor the filth that commeth from them that will lye and flatter to pleaſe him withall, to the intent to come to their intention, whereby many a Prince hath béene deſtroyed and brought to Hell, & whereby they and their Lordes alſo for beléeuing of them, haue béene damned perpetually. Sonne, looke thou be ſerued with Gentlemen, ſuch as are come of them that haue béene of good renowme, loue the holy Church, giue almes to the poore for the loue of Ieſus Chriſt, let thy Cheſts be open to thy good Knightes, beware thou bée no Nigard, and beware thou be not ouercome with wine, lead an honeſt life, haunt and kéepe companie with the ancient noble men, and praiſe them if they be worthy, flye Flatterers and Mockers, and beware thereof thy ſelfe, for thou canſt not doe worſe, becauſe it will abate thine honour. Thus the Emperour Ide ſayd to his Son Croiſſant, and ſhewed him many notable

ſayings and faire inſtructions, then he called his Lordes, and ſayd. Sirs, the moſt part of you know my will, the which is, that I and my Wife will goe into Aragon to the King my Father: therefore I deſire you all and command you, that yée will haue my Sonne as recommended to you, I haue left him great treaſure, to the intent that if any warre or any other buſineſſe fall to him, that he ſhall haue riches ſufficient, to withſtand them that would doe him or his Country any dammage, and alſo the Realme of Aragon is not ſo farre from hence, but that anone I may haue newes from him.
               When the Lords vnderſtood the Emperour, and how he had taken on him this Voyage, they knewe well they could not let nor ſtop him of his pleaſure. Then they all anſweared in generall, and ſayd, that as néere as they could, they would accompliſh his commandement, and to ſerue truely his Sonne Croiſſant, and to aid, keepe, and defend his Countrey againſt all men that would annoy him. Sirs, (quoth the Emperor) I thanke you. Thus after the Emperour had ſpoken with his Sonne and with his Lordes, and ſhewed them his will and pleaſure, hee made readie for his iourney, and tooke with him a certaine number of Knightes to accompanie him and the Empreſſe his Wife▪ and he fourniſhed two great Shippes, and cauſed them to be charged with victuall and Artillerie, as it appertained for the defence of their bodies and liues, and tooke with him great riches, apparell, & iewels: then he tooke his leaue of the Pope, of all his Lordes, and of all them of the Citie, who made great ſorrow for their departing. Then they entred into the Riuer of Tyber, accompanied with about fiue Hundred Knightes, at their departing they tooke leaue of their Sonne Croiſſant, and kiſſed him often times. When the Empreſſe ſaw her Sonne, whome ſhee muſt depart from, ſhe began to wéepe, but the Emperour comforted her as much as he could. Then they tooke their Shippes and ſo departed, and ſo long ſayled in the Riuer of Tyber, that they came into the hye Sea, whereas they ſailed night and day with good winde, that without danger they arriued at the Citie of Courtoys, whereas they were receiued with great ioy, and ſo they came to the Pallaice, whereas they found

King Florence lying on a Couch, who when hee was aduertiſed of their comming, he had great ioy. Then the Emperour and the Empreſſe entred into the Pallaice, and came whereas the Kinge lay, then they both knéeled downe before him: and when the King ſaw them, he had ſuch ioy that hee could ſpeake no word, but made a token that they ſhould approach néere to him, and ſo they did, and hee embraced and kiſſed them oftentimes, and when hee might ſpeake, hee ſayde. My right déere Children, of your comming I am right ioyfull, and of the grace that God hath ſent to you, then againe oftentimes he kiſſed the Empreſſe Oliue, & ſayd, how ſhe was welcome into the Realme of Aragon: Of the great ioy, feaſting, guifts, and preſents that were giuen and done at their welcomming, if I ſhould ſhew it at length, it would be ouer-long to rehearſe: and therefore I paſſe it ouer. Nowe let vs leaue ſpeaking of the King, and of the Emperor and the Empreſſe his Wife, who tooke ſuch pleaſure to abide with Kinge Florence, that neuer after they returned to Rome, but they raigned together all their liues in good peace and loue, and they hadde no Child but Croiſſant, whome they had left at Roome, and of whome wee ſhall ſpeake nowe héereafter.
            
            
               Chap. CLXXIII.
               
                  ¶ How Croiſſant was ſo bountifull and ſo liberall, that hee gaue away all the Treaſure that his Father had left him, ſo that at laſt he had no more to giue, and ſo was conſtrained to goe ſeeke his aduenture, he and a Varlet alonely.
               
               
                  
                     AFter that the Emperour Ide
                   and the Empreſſe Oliue were departed from the Citie of Roome, Croiſſant their Sonne grewe & amended in all thinges, he delighted to take his pleaſure in all ſports, and he made to be proclaimed Iuſts and Tourneys, and gaue large guiftes to Ladies &

to Knightes, none went from him without ſome guift, he tooke great pleaſure to giue guifts, ſo that hee was praiſed of euerie man: howbeit, diuers ancient and wiſe men ſayd, if Croiſſant our yong Prince deale thus with the Treaſure that his Father left him, it will be much waſted, and ſuch as nowe follow him will forſake him, when they ſée that he hath no more to giue, as they did indéed as yee ſhall heare, for he gaue to them that were poore, whereby they were made rich, who after would not giue him one morſell of bread: he was ſo liberall and ſo great a ſpender, that all the Treaſure that his Father had left him, he gaue it away, ſo that many complained greatly of his bountie and Larges, for he gaue away ſo much, that he was forced to diminiſh his eſtate, and was forſaken of all them that were woont to ſerue him, becauſe he had no more to giue them, ſo that when they met him, they would turne to another way: and when he knewe that, he had ſo great ſhame, that he determined to depart priuily out of the Countrey, and to goe ſéeke his aduentures, for he ſawe well that he had giuen away and lent ſo much, that he could not then find one man that would lend him one penny. Then with that which was left he bought two good horſes, and mounted on the one, and vppon the other a Varlet and a Male behinde him, and therein a Gowne, and his ſhirts, hoſe, and ſhooes, and he had in his purſe no more but one Hundred 
                     •
                  . for his expences, and in a Morning he departed from Roome, to the intent he ſhould not be perceiued, and road ſo long by his iourneys, that hee was farre off from the Citie of Roome more then Foure dayes iourney. Now let vs leaue ſpeaking of him, till time ſhall be to returne to him againe.
            
            
               Chap. CLXXIIII.
               
                  ¶ How they of Roome ſent to the King Guymart of Puylle, to the entent that he ſhould come and gouerne that Countrey, and to be their Lord, becauſe that Croiſſant was a Child, and had giuen and waſted all that he had: and how Guymart came thether, and was receiued as Lord.
               
               
                  
                  
                     AFter that the Barons and Senatours of Roome were aduertiſed, that their young Lord Croiſſant was departed from the Citie, and that he had waſted and ſpent al the Treaſure that he had: then they aſſembled at the Capitoll, and there was one ſayd. Curſed is that land whereof the Lorde is a Child, as yée may well perceiue by our young Lord Croiſſant, who hath ſpent all and giuen away the great treaſure that his Father had left him, verie badly ſhould he gouerne his Land and Countrey, when he cannot kéepe that which is cloſed faſt in his Coffers: and therefore mine aduice is, that wee ſend to King Guymart of Puille, who is alreadie of the mind to come and beſiege vs, becauſe he knoweth well that we be without a Lord, and therefore mine aduice is, that wée ſend vnto him a noble Ambaſſage, deſiring him to come to this Citie of Roome, and ſay that this Citie ſhall doe to him obeyſance, it is better to ſend betimes then too late, to the intent that neither he, nor none of his doe any dammage to the Landes of Roome. All they that were there agréed to his ſaying, and ſo they ſent to him, who receiued the Ambaſſadours right honourably, and ſo he came to Roome, whereas he was receiued for their Lord peaceably. But before he entred into Roome, they went and mette him, and with great ioy brought him into the City, with Trumpets and Drummes blowing before him, vntill he came to the Church of Saint Peter, and there hée offered and kiſſed the Reliques, whereof he made his oath, ſuch as Emperours are accuſtomed to make, he to defend and kéepe Roome & the Empire. Then hée went to the Pallaice, whereas hée was receiued of the noble men and of the people: then hee gouerned Roome in good peace and iuſtice. Nowe lette vs leaue ſpeaking of him, and returne to Croiſſant.
               
            
            
               
               Chap. CLXXV.
               
                  ¶ Howe Croiſſant arriued at Niſe in Prouaunce, and came to the Earle Remon, who was beſieged by the Sarazins, and of the honour that the Earle Remon did to Croiſſant, and howe hee gaue him his banner to beare, and made him Knight: and of the great enuie that the Earles Sonne had at Croiſſant.
                  
               
               
                  
                     AFter that Croiſſant was departed from Roome, and his Varlet with him, and had well ſéen that in all Rome they ſet nothing by him, becauſe hee had no more guifts to giue them. Then hee road through Romania and Lombardie, and paſſed Piemont, and then came into Daulpheney: and when hee came into the Towne of Grenoble, it was ſhewed him that in Prouaunce there was a noble Prince, named Earle Remon of Saint Giles, who was beſieged by land & by water in the Towne of Niſe, by the King of Granado, & the King of Belmarin, who day and night made great aſſaults to the Citie, and they had ſworne and made promiſe, that they would neuer depart from thence vntill they had wonne that Towne, and ſlaine the Earle Remon. When Croiſſant heard thoſe good newes, the hardy proweſſe wherewith hee was garniſhed and repleat, ſet him into ſo hye a will, that hee thought the Sarazins flew to the ayre, and that he would raiſe their ſiege before it be night, and for the burning deſire that he had, hee thought to goe thether to prooue his vertue againſt the Paynims: ſo when he had reſted his horſe, he and his Squier mounted, and reſted not vntill he came to Niſe, in an Euening late hee there arriued, without perceiuing of them of the ſiege, for as then they were all in their Tents, becauſe a little before there hadde béene at the gate a great Skirmiſh, wherefore the Sarazins were wearie of their trauaile, and alſo on that part that Croiſſant arriued, there were no Sarazins lodged. Then hee came

to the gate, and prayed the Porter to let him enter: and when the Porter ſaw there were no more but two perſons, and that hee was a Chriſtian, hee ſuffered him to enter without any refuſe. And when Croiſſant ſawe that hee was in without any danger, he was ioyfull, then he came to one of the beſt lodgings in the Towne, and there he alighted and ſupped with his hoſt, becauſe it was too late to goe that night to the Court: there he tarried all that night vntill the next morning, then hee went to the Pallace, whereas he found the Earle Remon, deuiſing with his Lordes and Knights of the déedes of warre, then Croiſſant ſaluted the Earle and all his Lordes▪
               
               When the Earle ſaw the young man, he greatly beheld him, and thought that in all his life he had neuer ſéen ſo goodly a perſon, and thought that hee was come of ſome noble Lineage. Then he tooke Croiſſant by the hand and demaunded what his name was? Sir, (quoth he) my name is Croiſſant. Croiſſant? (quoth the Earle) you are welcome, you are come wel at a point both for you and for mee, for I haue great néede to haue men with me to ayd mee, and mee thinkes by your perſonage, that you ſhould atchieue great Enterprizes, for of your age I haue not ſéene in my daies, a young man more likely to bee feared of his enemies, and becauſe I ſée by your apparell that you are no Knight, I ſhall make you a Knight, to the intent that to morrow your Proweſſe and hardines may be prooued, for you may ſée héere without this Towne two Kings, enemies to our Chriſtian faith, and by the grace of God, I intend to morrow to giue them battaile, I looke this night for my Brother the Duke of Callaber, who bringeth with him Thirtie Thouſand men of warre, and Twentie Thouſand I haue alreadie within the Towne, and conſidering your hye courage to come hether to ſerue mee, I ſhall doe you more honour: after I haue made you Knight, I ſhall giue you my banner to beare, and if you doe as me thinkes you ſhould doe, your paines ſhall not be loſt. Sir, (quoth Croiſſant) God giue me the grace, that to morrow to him and to you I may doe ſuch ſeruice, that it may bée wealth to all chriſtendome, and that God may performe in me that which wanteth, for if you make me Knight, all the dayes

of my life after I ſhalbe yours. Then the Earle incontinent ſent for a Son of his, who as then was no Knight, and diuers other whome he made Knightes with Croiſſant, then he ſaid to Croiſſant. Fréend, I pray to our Lord God to giue you ſuch fortune to Morrowe, that you may vanquiſh the Battaile. Sir, (quoth he) God giue me the grace to render to you thankes, for the honour that now you doe to me, for as for me, by the grace of God to morrow I ſhall ſo doe, that your enemies ſhall curſe the houre that they came hether to aſſaile you.
               Whiles ye 
                  Croiſſant was thus made Knight with the Earles Sonne and others, the ſame time came thether the Duke of Callaber, and hee came to the Pallaice: of the chéere that he had made him by his Brother the Earle Remon, I will make no mention thereof, but he came at the ſame ſeaſon that theſe new Knightes were made, and that a Quintaine was ſette vp to prooue themſelues. Then the Duke of Callaber and the Earle Remon his Brother went thether, verie deſirous to ſée who did beſt, then the Duke demanded of the Earle, what yong knight it was that road by his Nephew, for hée thought that he neuer ſaw ſo goodly a yong perſon, nor more puiſſant of his age: then the Earle ſayd, how he was come thether to ſéeke for honour: but what hee was, nor of what Lineage he knew not. Thus they talked together of this young knight Croiſſant, and when they came to the place whereas the Quintaine was dreſſed vp, the Earles Sonne ranne and brake his Speare all to péeces, & then others aſſayed themſelues, ſome brake their Speares, and ſome fell to the earth by force of their ſtroake, but there was none that could remooue the Quintaine. When Croiſſant ſaw that all had aſſaied themſelues to ouerthrow the Quintaine, he had a great ſpeare, and ran ſo fiercely, that hée ſtrake the Quintaine, and ouerthrew it to the ground, whereof euerie man had great maruaile: the Duke ſayd to the Earle, that he neuer ſaw ſo goodly a ſtroake, and ſayd, how he is greatly to bee doubted that giue ſuch ſtroakes, hée was greatly praiſed of the Ladies & Damſels that were there preſent, and eſpecially of the Earles Daughter who was a faire Damſell. But whoſoeuer was ioyfull, the Earles Sonne was diſpleaſed, hee tooke againſt

him a mortall hate and an ill enuie, ſo that if he durſt, he wold haue run vpon Croiſſant to haue deſtroyed him, and concluded in his courage, that if he might liue long, he would make Croiſſants life to depart from his bodie, and ſo hee had done, if God had not aided Croiſſant.
               
               When Croiſſant had runne his courſe, he road to the Earle, who ſayd to him right ſwéetly. Croiſſant, God increaſe your honour, and God giue you grace to perſeuer in your goodnes, and I pray you humbly to ſhew me the troth, what you be, and of what Lineage? for I am ſure that you are of ſome hye Lineage. Sir, (quoth Croiſſant) ſince you would know it, I ſhall ſhew you the troth. Sir, knowe for troth, I am Sonne to the noble Emperour of Roome, and I am departed out of the countrey, for certaine cauſes which I woulde not ſuffer, and therefore I went to ſearch mine aduentures, ſuch as God wold ſend me. When the Earle heard him ſpeake, he was right ioyfull, and thanked God, and ſayd. Faire Sonne, you are welcome, I am ioyfull of your comming, and for the goodnes that I ſée in you apparant, I haue a Daughter right faire, whome I will giue you in marriage, & as much of my goods and of my Lands and Signiories, that you ſhall neuer bee poore. Sir, (quoth Croiſſant) your faire offer that you make mee I will not refuſe, and I thanke you, but before I take a Wife, my will is to doe ſo much, that mine honour may bee exalted, and that renowne may run vpon me as it hath done of my Predeceſſors, and that I may conquer Lands and Signiories. Then the Earles ſon hearing his Father make Croiſſant ſuch an offer, as to giue him his Siſter in marriage, and a great part of his Land, hee was therewith ſo ſore troubled in his heart, as he tooke againſt him a cordiall hate, and made promiſe within himſelfe, that if hee might returne from the Battaile, hee would cauſe Croiſſant to die an ill death, thinking not to be diſenherited by him.
               After thoſe words, the Duke of Callaber and the Earle Remon tooke betwéene them the young Knight Croiſſant, and led him by the hand to the Pallace, whereas he was receiued with great ioy, and after dinner they came into the Hall whereas all the Lords were. Then Croiſſant (who greatly delighted to be

in ſuch a place, whereas hee might ſhewe his Proweſſe) ſpake on hye, and ſayde to the Earle Remon. Sir, you knowe well, that the enemies of our Lord God & yours, haue beſieged you in your Towne, the which is a thing not to bee ſuffered ſo long, without doing of them any annoyance: and therefore Sir I counſel you, that before they knew much of your eſtate or puiſſance, or what people you haue, it were beſt you went to aſſaile them, therefore without any longer tarying, ordaine your Battailes, and your Captaines to guide your people, to the intent that when you are yſſued out of the Towne, euerie man may know what you are purpoſed to doe, and then ſend to your enemies a Meſſenger, and giue your enemies knowledge of your comming, and wee ſhall follow ſo faſt, that they ſhall haue no leaſure to arme them. When the Duke of Callaber and the Earle Remon vnderſtood the noble Croiſſant, they much praiſed his counſaile and aduiſe. Then they ordained their Battailes and their Captaines: and then they yſſued out of the Towne with all their companie.
            
            
               Chap. CLXXVI.
               
                  ¶ How Croiſſant did maruailes in the Battaile, by whome the Sarazins were diſcomfited and ſlaine, whereof the Earle Remon and the Duke of Callaber were right ioyfull.
               
               
                  
                     WHEN the Earle Remon was without the Towne, hee ordained Thrée Battailes. The firſt Croiſſant hadde the leading thereof, and the Earle ſayd to him. Fréend, I pray you this day to ſhewe from whence you come, and how that you bee of the Lineage Emperiall, and of the good Line of the Duke of Bourdeaux, for I haue ſuch truſt in God and in the vertue of your armes, that me thinkes mine enemies doe now flye away before me. Sir, (quoth Croiſſant) I ſhall doe ſo much by the grace of God, that our enemies ſhall

haue no leaſure to graunt vs the Victorie. The ſecond Battaile the Earle Remons Sonne led, and his Father ſayd to him, that hee ſhould that day ſhew foorth his vertue and Proweſſe. The third Battaile the Earle Remon and the Duke of Callaber had the guiding thereof, and they ſet in euery Battaile Fiftéen Thouſand men: then the Earle Remon went before euerie battaile, ſtirring & moouing them to doe well: and then the Earle ſent a Meſſenger to the Hoaſt of the Sarazins, to ſhewe them of the comming of the Chriſtian men, & they were before their Tents in Fiue Battailes, they were in number about a Hundred Thouſand Sarazins, whereof there were two Kings and Foure Admirals. This Meſſenger did his Meſſuage, & when he had done, hée returned to the Earle Remon, and ſhewed him all that hee had heard and ſéene. Then Croiſſant ſayd to the Earle: Sir, I pray you to ſhew mee what armes the two Sarazin Kinges doe beare? to the intent that I may know them, for the ſooner the great men bee ſlaine, the ſooner the other will flye, becauſe that will abaſh them, and the ſooner to be diſcomfited, for men without a Lord, are as ſhéepe without a ſhepheard. Then the Earle ſhewed him their armes and badges: Sir, (quoth Croiſſant) ſince I am hereof aduertiſed, I ſhall neuer reſt vntill I haue encountred them, if God will ſaue mine armes and good ſword.
               Then the Paynims (who ſaw well the Chriſtian men comming) caſt vp a great crie and ſo maruailous, that there was none ſo hardy, but was thereof abaſhed, for it ſéemed that all the world arriued there. When Croiſſant ſawe the Sarazins approach, he aduaunced his Battaile, and when they ioyned, he couched his Speare, and ſtrake therewith the King of Belmarins Sonne, ſo that the Speare-head paſſed through his bodie more then a foote, and ſo with drawing out of his Speare, the Sarazin fell downe dead among the horſe féele, whereof the Paynims had great dolour. When Croiſſant hadde ſlaine the King of Belmarins Sonne, there came before him the Nephewe of the King of Granado, and Croiſſant bare him to the earth ſo rudely, that in the falling he brake his necke: then he ran at the Third & the Fourth and ſlew them, and as long as his Speare

held, he ceaſed not to ſlay and to beat downe the Sarazins, and when his Speare was broken, he tooke his Sword, wherewith hee claue the Sarazins to the braines, and cutte off armes and handes, hee made among them ſuch ſlaughter, that there was not ſo hardie a Sarazin that durſt abide his full ſtroake, but they fled before him as the ſhéepe doe before the Wolfe. Anon the tidings was brought to the King of Belmarin, how his Son was ſlaine by a young Knight, who did maruailes in the Battaile: and when the King knew that his Sonne was ſlaine, he wept for ſorrow, and made promiſe that he had rather die, then the death of his Sonne ſhould be vnreuenged, and therewith he preaſſed into the Battaile, and met at his comming the Duke of Callabers Seneſchall, and ſtrake him with his Speare in ſuch wiſe, that he ran him cleane through, and ſo he fell downe dead, then the Battaile began fiercely, and they of Prouaunce & Callaber did valiantly. Then the Earle Remon came into the battaile, and met with the Admirall of Cordes, and gaue him ſuch a ſtroake with his ſword on the helmet, that he claue his head to the braines, and ſo he fell downe dead. Then hee ſawe the King of Granado, (who ſlewe many a Chriſtian man) and the Earle Remon tooke a ſpeare, and ran at the Kinge, and ſtrake him ſo on the viſor of his helmet, that hee fell to the earth with his féet vpward among his owne men, and had béen there ſlain if his men had not ſuccoured him.
               In another place was Croiſſant, and hee ſaw before him the King of Belmarin, who road about ſéeking for Croiſſant, to be reuenged of him for the death of his Sonne: and when the King ſaw Croiſſant beating down horſe and men, and that none could reſiſt againſt him, he had great deſire to be reuenged, and ſayd to Croiſſant. Oh thou falſe Traytour that hath ſlaine my ſon, I ought greatly to laud and praiſe Mahomet, if I may bee reuenged vpon thée: then he couched his ſpeare, and ſtrake Croiſſant in the middeſt of his ſhéeld, ſo that his ſpeare flew all to péeces, but for all the ſtroake Croiſſant remooued no more, then though he had ſtriken a ſtone wall, and Croiſſant ſore diſpleaſed that the king had giuen him ſuch a ſtroake, let goe the bridle of his horſe, and lifted vp his ſword with both his hands, & ſtrake

the king as he paſſed by on ye corner of his helmet in ſuch wiſe, that he ſtrake it cleane aſunder, & if the ſtroake had not glaunced, he had clouen his head to the guirdle, but the ſword turned and alighted vppon the horſe necke, ſo that he ſtrake the necke cleane aſunder, in ſuch ſort, that of force the king tumbled to the earth, ſore aſtonied of the ſtroke that he had receiued, and if he had not béen quickly reſcued, Croiſſant had ſtriken off his head. Then the Sarazins remounted againe their King, and ran at Croiſſant, and caſt darts at him and Iauelins to haue ſlain him, but they durſt not approch néere him, ſo much they feared him, howbeit, they hurt him in diuers places, hee held his ſword in his handes, wherewith hee ſtrake no man with a full ſtroake, but that hee claue his head to the braines. Then hee ſawe the great Admirall of Spaine, and he gaue him ſuch a ſtroake, that his head was clouen to the chinne, and ſo hee fell downe dead. Great ſorrowe made the Sarazins, and eſpecially the King of Granado: and when Croiſſant ſaw him, he knewe him well by his armes, whereof hee was ioyfull, and Croiſſant approached to him, and gaue him ſuch a ſtroke on the helmet, that his head was clouen to the braines, and ſo the Kinge fell downe dead: then Croiſſant ran at him that bare the Sarazins banner, wheron was painted the Image of Mahomet, hee ſtrake him that bare it with a reuerſe ſtroake, betwéene the necke and the ſholders, that the head with the helmet flewe in the field, and layd on ſo in the thicke preaſſe, that anone he made way, the Sarazins would faine haue raiſed vp againe their banner, but they could not.
               When the Sarazins ſaw their king dead, and their banner lying on the ground, their courage beganne to faile them: then they brayed and opened their array, and began to looſe place, & Croiſſant (who tooke héed of nothing, but to ſlay the great Captaines) at laſt ſawe before him the kinge of Belmarin, who had ſlaine many a Chriſtian man that day, Croiſſant gaue him ſuch a ſtroake on the right ſhoulder, that his arme & ſhéeld fell to the earth, and by reaſon of the great dolour that the king felt, he fel in aſwound among the horſe féete, whereas he died miſerably. The Duke of Callaber and the Earle Remon, regarding the hye

déedes of armes done and atchieued by Croiſſant, hadde great maruell of his force and puiſſance, & they bleſſed the houre that hee was borne in, thanking God of his comming thether, they reſted and beheld him how he made their enemies to fly away, for none was ſo hardy to abide him. Finally, if I ſhoulde rehearſe the hye déedes that Croiſſant did that day, it would be ouer-long to declare, for by him and by his great Proweſſe, the Paynims and Sarazins were vtterly diſcomfited, for he was happie that could ſaue himſelfe. Thus they fled on all partes towards the Sea-ſide, and there were moe ſlaine in the flying, then were in the plaine Battaile, for from thence to the Sea-ſide, the wayes were couered with dead men, ſuch as might ſaue themſelues in the Ships were happie, but there were verie few that eſcaped. After the chace was done, they of Prouaunce and Callaber came to the bootie, the which was excéeding great, and the Earle Remon diſtributed ſo liberally therof, that euery man was wel contented, for there was ſuch riches in the Tents of the Sarazins, that it could not bee valued, whereby all ſuch as were at the Battaile were rich euer after, both the
                     •
                   and their Freends.
            
            
               Chap. CLXXVII.
               
                  ¶ Of the great honour that the Earle Remon did to Croiſſant: and how he would haue giuen him his Daughter in mariage, whereof the Earles Son was ſore enuious, and thought the ſame night to haue murdered the noble Croiſſant in his bed, but he fayled, for the noble Croiſſant ſlew him, and afterward fled away as faſt as he might.
               
               
                  
                     AFter that the Battaile was finiſhed, and that the Sarazins were dead, the Earle Remon with great reuerence came vnto Croiſſant, and tooke him by the hand, and ledde him into the Towne betwéen the Duke of Callaber
                  
& himſelfe, and they did him as great honor as they could deuiſe, and ſo entred into the Towne, and with great ioy and ſolemnitie they were receiued, and they came to the Pallaice & vnarmed them: and when they were refreſhed, the Duke of Callaber and the Earle Remon came to Croiſſant, and the Earle ſayd. Oh right noble Knight, repleat with all vertues and hie Proweſſe, to whome no man is comparable, the ſtrong arme, ſhéeld, and refuge of the Countrey of Prouaunce and Languedoc, by thy hye Proweſſe this day thou haſt ſaued one of the quarters of Chriſtendome, whereby the faith of Chriſt is exalted, the which (if thou 
                     ••••
                  eſt not béene) had béene abated & ſtaunched, it is not in mee to ſay nor recount the goodneſſe that you haue done vs this day, nor it lyeth not in me to reward it, but if it were thy pleaſure to abaſe thy ſelfe ſo lowe, as to take my Daughter in marriage, the which I would gladly ſée, & I will giue thée the one halfe of all that euer I haue, for a fairer iewell nor a richer I cannot giue, then my déere Daughter whome I loue entirely: ſhée is the moſt faire, ſwéete, and the humbleſt Damſell that is now liuing. When Croiſſant had well vnderſtood the Earle Remon, hee ſayd. Sir, of your courteſie & rich guiftes that you offer mee, I will not refuſe it, but thanke you hartely thereof, & as for your daughter whom you offer to giue me, I truſt that I ſhall doe her that honour, that vpon her head I ſhall ſet a Crowne of gold, and make her Empreſſe of Rome, whereas ſhe ſhall be ſerued and honoured as Ladie ouer all the Countrey.
               When the Earle heard the anſweare of Croiſſant, he was verie ioyfull, but his Sonne (who was there preſent) was néere hand in a rage with the diſpleaſure that he had, and ſayd inragedly to him. By God Croiſſant, ſince thus by you I ſhall bée diſenherited, and that my Father will giue you that which of right appertaineth to me, before I grant thereto, I ſhal make you to die of an ill death, though I doe it by treaſon, nor thou ſhalt neuer haue my ſiſter in marriage: thus thought ye Earles Sonne to worke againſt Croiſſant, who knew nothing thereof: and thus (without God helps him) he was likely to haue béene ſlaine pitiouſly. Then there began great ioy in the Pallaice,

the Earle Remon went to ſée his Daughter, and ſayd to her. My déere Daughter, know for troth, I haue giuen you in mariage to the moſt faire & hardyeſt Knight that euer was guirt with a ſword, that is Croiſſant who you ſée héere, by whom we were all deliuered, and brought out of ſeruice into fréedome, for we had béen all loſt if his hye proweſſe had not béene, by whom all the Paynims are diſcomfited. When the Damſell heard her Father, ſhe was right ioyfull, and thanked God, and ſaid. Sir, ſince it is your pleaſure to giue me to this noble Knight, I ſhall not refuſe him, but I am content to fulfill your pleaſure: whereof Croiſſant was ioyfull, for ſhee was ſo faire that euerie man had maruaile thereof. Then the Damſell ſaluted Croiſſant, and ſayd. Sir, of your comming and ſuccours we ought to be ioyfull, for by you wée are reſtored to ioy, the which was loſt. Ladie, (quoth Croiſſant) ſo goeth the works of our Lord God, for men make Battailes, and God giueth the Victorie.
               Thus deuiſing, they entred into the Chamber, whereas the boards were readie ſpread: but Izacars the Earles Son would not come there, but went into a ſecret place of the Towne, and thether hée ſent for Ten of his affinitie, in whome hee had perfect affiance: then he ſhewed to them all his intention, and determined that when Croiſſant was in bed and a ſléepe, then they to murder him in his bedde, and his Squier alſo. When theſe Ten Traytours vnderſtood their Maſter, they anſweared and ſayd, howe they were all readie to doe his commaundement, whatſoeuer came thereof. Thus they taried the houre to accompliſh their vngracious Enterprize, & as they were in their communication, there was in a Chamber there beſide a young Squier, who had well heard their Enterprize, and what they were determined to doe: then he ſayd to himſelfe, that ſurely he would aduertiſe Croiſſant of their malicious Enterprize, to the intent that he ſhould not be ſurprized: then he departed as priuily as he could, and ſo came to Croiſſant, and ſhewed him, how the Earles Sonne with Ten men were determined to murder him, the very ſame night in his bed ſléeping, and how that each of them had a ſharpe knife, and he ſayd. Sir, be readie armed to defend your life, for they all haue ſworne your death. When

                  Croiſſant vnderſtood the Squier, he waxed as red as a burning coale, and ſayd. I cannot beleeue that ſuch a treaſon ſhould be in the courage of a noble man, as to murder him that neuer did him treſpaſſe. Sir, (quoth the Squier) you may doe as you pleaſe, but except you finde a remedie, you are but loſt.
               When Croiſſant heard that, hee trembled for the diſpleaſure that he was in, and he thought within himſelfe, that he would not ſhew the matter to any perſon liuing, but he ſware, that if any came to doe him diſpleaſure, with his Sword hee woulde cléeue his head to the braines. Thus the matter reſted vntill it was night, & ſo he went into the Hal among the other Lords, and there he found the Earle, who made him great chéere, and Supper was readie, then they ſatte downe: of their ſeruice I make no rehearſall. After they had ſupped diuers ſports were ſhewed in the hall, and when the houre requiſite came, euerie man went to bed, & the Earle Remon had prepared for Croiſſant a faire Chamber, with a rich bed for him, and a Couch for his Squier. Then Croiſſant tooke leaue of the Earle and of the Damſel, with whom he was enamoured: & then he came to his Chamber well accompanied with Knights & Squiers, & within a while they tooke leaue of him, & then he was alone ſauing onely his Squier, whome he made to lye in the Couch, & ſhewed him nothing of that he thought to doe. Then Croiſſant armed him at all péeces, his helmet on his head, his ſheeld about his necke, and his ſword about him, and ſo layd him downe in his bed, and hid him with cloathes, that his armour ſhould not be ſéen by them that would come thether, ſo there he lay as priuily as he could: and then about midnight the Earles Son entred into the chamber al vnarmed, with his ſword in his hand, and his ten companions with him, each of them with a ſharpe weapon in their hands, then they approached to Croiſſants bed, and the Earles Sonne lifted vp his Sword, and ſtr
                     •
                  ke Croiſſant ſuch a ſtroake on the helmet, that the ſword ſwarned in his hand, whereby he perceiued that hée was armed, and that hée had warning of their comming, whereof he was right ſorrowfull, then he recouered again another ſtroake, thinking to haue 
                     ••
                  aine Croiſſant, but he could not his helmet was ſo good: then

the other Tenne ſtrake at Croiſſant, but they could doe him no hurt, his armour was ſo good. Then Croiſſant roſe vp quickly (as a hardy Knight) with his ſword in his hand. When the Earles Sonne ſaw that, he was neuer ſo afraid in all his life, and thought to haue fled away, but Croiſſant was before him, and gaue him ſuch a ſtroake on the head with his ſword, that he claue it to the chin, and ſo he fell downe dead, and the other had ſlaine Croiſſants Squier, whereof hee was ſorrie, then hée ran at them like a man deſperate, and did ſo much, that within a ſhort ſpace he had ſlaine Fiue of them, and the other fledde away into another Chamber, and durſt not ſpeake one word.
            
            
               Chap. CLXXVIII.
               
                  ¶ Howe Croiſſant depated from Niſe with his ſword in his hand: And howe the Earle R
                           •
                        mon was ſorrowfull for the death of his Sonne, and chaſed after Croiſſant, but he could not bee found.
               
               
                  
                     WHen Croiſsant ſaw himſelfe ſo enterprized, and that hée had ſlaine the Earles Sonne, he was in great feare, for hee knewe wel, that if he were taken, he ſhould be in danger of his life, therefore haſtely he departed out of the Pallaice: and when hee came to the Stable where his horſe ſtood, he found a great yron chaine before the dore, to the 
                     〈◊〉
                   that the horſe ſhould not bee taken out in the night time, & when he ſaw that, he was ſore diſcomforted, and ſayd. Oh good Lord, now by thy grace ayd me, I ought well to be ſorrie when I muſt leaue my horſe. Alas, now I cannot tell how to 
                     〈◊〉
                   mine armour, certainely, except God ſuccour mee, I ſée no way how I can eſcape aliue: Alas, I thought to haue béene married to the Earles Daughter, but now I am farre from it, 
                     〈◊〉
                   I haue ſlaine her Brother▪ I was not minded to haue returned into my Countrey ſo ſoone, vntill I had conquered ſome 
                     •••
                  our and Landes, whereby I might haue béene receiued honourably

of them that did ſette nothing by me: then hee began ſore to wéepe, ſo he went through the towne as he might, for he coulde not trauaile long in his armour, but hee beheld a voide houſe in a corner of a ſtreete, & hee went thether and vnarmed him of all his armour, except his ſword, & ſo he was in a white Iacket, and then he reſted not vntill hee came to the gate, and called the Porter, & deſired him to open the gate, ſaying, that he had buſineſſe to doe a little without the Towne, the Porter anſweared ſtubbornely, and ſayd, there rrquireth no haſt, hée might well abide, for he ſayd that hee would not open the gate vntill it was faire day. Fréend, (quoth Croiſſant) I pray thée ſhew me this courteſie: the Porter anſwered him fiercely, and ſayd. Thou doeſt but looſe thy labour, for the gate ſhall not be opened vntill the Sunne riſe. When Croiſſant ſaw, that the Porter would not open the gate by faire meanes, hee ſette his hand to his ſword, and ſayd. Thou falſe Traitour, except thou doeſt open ye gate incontinent, with my ſword I ſhall ſlay thee. When the Porter ſaw that Croiſſant held a naked ſword in his hand to ſtrike him, he had great feare, and he came forth in haſt with the keyes in his hande, and ſayd. Sir, I ſhall open the gate with a good will, howbeit, he was ſo afraide, that all his bodie trembled for feare, then he came to the gate and opened the wicket: and then Croiſſant yſſued out vnarmed, and hadde on but a Cloake ouer his Iacket and a ſword about him, and a little purſe at his guirdle, and therein Twentie Shillings in monney and no more.
               Thus as yée haue heard, Croiſſant yſſued out of the Towne of Niſe in Prouaunce, and tooke the way towards Roome, but before he had gone two Leagues, the Fiue Traytours that fled from him and were hidden in a Chamber, when they thought that Croiſſant was departed, for they thought he would not tarie, becauſe hee had ſlaine the Earles Sonne: then they went out of the Chamber, making great brute and noiſe, ſo that euerie man roſe in the Pallaice, and the Earle himſelfe aroſe, and came into the Hall with his Sword in his hand, and there hée found the Fiue Traytours, who ſhewed him, that for certaine wordes betwéene Croiſſant and his Sonne, there was a Fray

betwéene them, whereby your Sonne is ſlaine by the hands of Croiſſant, the which hee did wilfully, to the entent to haue all your Landes after your deceaſe, becauſe you haue giuen him your Daughter in mariage, and before wée could come he was ſled, but before he departed out of the Chamber, he ſlewe Fiue men beſides your Sonne, for they were not armed, but Croiſſant was armed & he ſeemed rather a ſpirit then a mortall man, and when we ſaw that wee could not approach to him, becauſe he was armed, we ſlew his Squier. When the Earle heard them, it was no maruaile though he was ſorrowful: and then he went into the Chamber whereas his Sonne lay dead, when he came there, for the great diſtreſſe that hee had at his heart, he fell downe vppon his Son in a ſwound: and when he came to himſelfe, hee cried and ſayde. Ah Croiſſant, your acquaintance is to me verie hard: then he commanded his men to arme them, and incontinent to goe after Croiſſant, who ſo pitiouſly had ſlaine his Sonne, and ſayde: if I may take him, hee ſhall neuer eſcape my handes without death. Then in the Pallace and in the Towne euerie man armed them, & the Earle himſelfe armed him & mounted on his Horſe, and yſſued out of the gate with many people, and then they road abroad in the Coū
                  trey, ſearching and demaunding if any man met with Croiſſant, but he could heare no certaine newes of him, except of one man, that ſayd how he met him about fiue Leagues frō thence, and that he went a great pace.
               When the Earle heard that, hee ſaw well that it was but a labour loſt to fellow any further: then he returned to the town right ſorrowfull, and ſore diſpleaſed for the death of his Sonne, and yet againe hee greatly complayned for Croiſſant in that aduenture, and ſaide, that a more valiant Knight coulde not bee found, neither more courteous, nor more wiſe, I would to God that there were betwéene him and me good amitie, ſo that hee had my Daughter in marriage, and that after my deceaſe hee might haue my Land: then diuers of his men ſayd. Sir, lette him goe, hée ſéemeth to bée rather a Diuell then a man, hée is fierce and cruell, hee makes no more to ſlay a man, then ſome 
                     〈◊〉
                   to drinke good wine, lette him goe, hee was borne in an ill

houre: then the Earle entred into the Towne, right ſorrowfull and ſore diſpleaſed for the death of his Sonne, and alſ
                     •
                   for Croiſſants aduenture: and then he cauſed his Sonne to be buried as it appertained, & great ſorrow was made by the Earle, and by the Duke of Callaber, & other Knights that were there, but they knew not the troth of the matter: whoſoeuer made ſorow, the Earles Daughter was ſorrowfull, both for her Brother, and alſo for the noble Croiſſant, whome ſhee had thought to marrie. Nowe let vs leaue ſpeaking of them, and returne to Croiſſant.
               
            
            
               Chap. CLXXIX.
               
                  ¶ How Croiſſant arriued in the Subburbs of a little Towne called Florencolle, and lodged among Ruffians and Villaynes, and how they fell at ſtrife: and how Croiſſant ſlewe them and fledde, and was in great daunger. And howe hee came into the Cittie of Rome, whereas there was no man that would giue him one morfell of bread: and how he went and lay in an old Pallaice vpon a burden of ſtrawe.
               
               
                  
                     WHen Croiſsant ſaw that he was departed from the Towne of Niſe, and that he was alone afoo
                     •
                  e, hee made his complaints to our Lord God, requiring him humbly to haue pitie of him: then hee went foorth, and ſo trauailed Three daies and Thrée nights, without meat or drinke, but a little bread and water, he had ſuch hunger and thirſt, that he could ſcarce ſuſtaine himſelfe on his féet, ſo at laſt a little before the Sunne was ſet, hee came to a little Towne called Florencolle, whereof the gates were ſhutte before he came thether, then in the Subburbs hee ſaw a houſe like a Tauerne, and hée ſware though he ſhould be ſlaine, he would goe to that houſe to eate and drinke, and to pay well for his ſhot: it had béen better for him to haue paſſed by, for there he was in great perill of his

life as yée ſhall heare. Thus hee approached to the houſe, and heard how the Cookes were buſie in the Kitchin, then he ſawe a great fire in a Chamber, where there was the greateſt Ruffians, and players at dice in all the Towne, and they had prepared fleſh and fiſh for their Supper. When Croiſſant ſaw the preparation that was made there for the Sixe Ruffians, he entred into the houſe, and ſaluted the Hoſt, and demaunded if he might be lodged there: the Hoſt ſayd yea, and how hee ſhould be there well ſerued both of wine and of meat, ſuch as he wold demaund. Then Croiſſant went in, & the Ruffians met him, and ſayd, how hee was welcome, and each of them pinched other, and wincked with the one eye, and ſayd ſoftly to the maſter of them: this great Trauailer is come well at a point, for before he depart, he ſhall pay for our ſhot and expences, and anon we will put the dice into his hands, whereby he ſhal leaue his Gowne, Cappe, and monney if he haue any. Croiſſant did not vnderſtand them, becauſe they ſpake whiſperingly: then Croiſſant ſayd. Sirs, if I eate with you paying my ſhot, ſhall it turne you to any diſpleaſure? Fréend, (quoth the Maiſter of them) it pleaſeth me well that you eate with vs: then they waſhed all together, and ſate downe at the Table néere to the fier, & they were well ſerued of euery thing. When Croiſſant was ſet, hee began to féede well, (his hunger was ſo great) for in Thrée dayes before he had eaten nothing but bread and water: & therefore hee had the better appetite, and alſo hee found there good wine and freſh, and he dranke thereof at his pleaſure.
               When they had well eaten and drunke, and were well chafed by reaſon of the good wine, the Hoſt roſe vp & ſayd. Sirs, it is time to make reckoning, & that euerie man pay his part, then the maiſter Ruffian ſayde. Sir, make you the account, for you can doe it better then we, and ſhew vs what wee ſhall pay. Euerie man alike Sirs, (quoth the Hoſt) as néere as I can reckon, yée muſt pay in all Twelue ſhillings, and looke euerie man pay his part. Then the Maſter Ruffian began to ſweare bloud and wounds, that they ſhould play at the dice, to ſée who ſhould pay for all, then hee ſayd to Croiſſant. Fréend, you muſt come play with vs, behold heere Thrée dice good and

ſquare, wee muſt doe ſo, for one muſt pay the whole expences before we depart. Sirs, (quoth Croiſſant) we ſhall not néede to play at dice to know who ſhall pay for the ſhot, I will pay it all together without any ſtrife: then they ſayd▪ that they were well content therewith, and thanked him: then one of them, the falſeſt Villayne among them, wilfully caſt downe a potte of wine vpon the Table, whereof his fellowes blamed him, then he anſweared and ſayd. Sirs, you néed not to be angry therewith, for there is none of you will drinke thereof, it is better to haue a freſh pot of wine of a new Veſſell: they ſayd, well, that is true, ſo be it. Then their Hoſt brought them a new pot full of wine, and ſayd. Sirs, this potte of wine is not of the firſt reckoning, this is a potte of a newe account: then the Maiſter Ruffian ſayd to Croiſſant. Sir, take and caſt the dice, for the firſt caſt ſhalbe yours.
               
                  Croiſſant beheld them fiercely, and ſayd: Nay Sirs, I will kéepe mée from that, for I neuer played at dice in all my life, be content with the twelue ſhillings that I ſhall pay for our ſhot, for by reaſon of the longe Voyage that I haue made, I am not well fourniſhed of monney, for I haue but Thirtéen Shillings in my purſe: then the Maiſter ſayd. Thou art better arrayed then we, and thou muſt vſe thy tongue otherwiſe, for thou ſhalt not thus ſcape, thou ſhalt leaue thy Gowne to pay for our ſhot to morrow in the morning: then another Ruffian ſayd, and I will haue his hoſe and ſhooes to morrow, to buy fiſh for our dinner. When Croiſſant heard the Villaynes, he began to change colour, and was ſore diſpleaſed, and ſayd right fiercely. Sirs, leaue your clattering, yet I haue xiij. s̄. in my purſe, the which I wil giue you, rather then you ſhould be diſpleaſed, me thinks this ought to ſuffice you: and Sirs, I am a noble man, & lately I was made Knight, for if I were once againe in my Countrey, I would neuer come from thence to ſéeke for ſuch aduentures, you ought to beare my honour, ſince I ſhew you that I am a Knight: the Ruffians ſayd, how his words nor his preaching ſhould not auaile him, but that he muſt leaue his gowne, Iacket, hoſe and ſhooes. Then Croiſſant repleat with yre, did off his ſurcot, the which was furred with armins, and caſt it to

them, and ſayd. Sirs, now you ought to be content with me, and I ought to be quit. When the Ruffians vnderſtood him, they cried all at once, that he ſhould put off his hoſe and ſhooes, and his guirdle, purſe, and Gowne, and bad him quickely deliuer it to them, and then to auoid the houſe, for they ſayd there was no lodging for him, and the Hoſt to pleaſe the Villaynes, ſayd, how they ſayd troth. Then Croiſſant full of yre and diſpleaſure, turned his viſage to the bench where his good Sword 
                     •
                  ay, whereof hee was ioyfull that they had not taken it away, then he ſtept thether, and tooke it in his handes and drewe it out, and came to ye Villaynes, and they roſe againſt him with their ſwords in their hands, & he ſtrake the Maiſter Ruffian ſo maruailous a ſtroake, that he claue his head to the téeth, ſo hee fell downe dead before the Chimney, & from another hee ſtrake his head, and then he ſlewe the Third and Fourth, & the other Two had ſo great feare that they fled away. Then the Hoſt began to crie, a Théefe, a Murderer: but Croiſſant would doe him no hurt, and hee yſſued out of the houſe with his ſword in his hand, and ran as faſt as he could vntill he was without the Subburbs, then he ranne in the field ouer hedges and diches, to the entent that none ſhould follow him, and he hearkened towards the Towne, where hee heard great crying, and noiſe of the Hoſt of the houſe that he came from, whereby all his neighbours, Taylours, Shoomakers, Drapers, and men of al crafts, came to the houſe, and there was ſuch a noiſe made in the ſubburbs, that the Towne gates were opened, and the Burgeſſes yſſued out, and came to the houſe whereas the noiſe was: and when the Magiſtrates of the Towne came thether, and ſawe the men lye dead, they demaunded of the Hoſt who had done that murder. Sir, (quoth the Hoſt) a Vagabond hath done it, who is bigge and mightie, for I neuer ſawe with mine eyes a man better made nor fourmed, and he is fledde away with his ſword in his hands on yonder hye way: but Sir, for God ſake come not too néere him, for hee ſéemeth no man when hee is angrie, but hée is like a man out of his wittes without all feare and doubt.
               Then the Magiſtrates commaunded to follow him both on

horſe-backe and afoote, and they all ranne to armour, though the Captaine were not greatly afraide, yet hee would not bee the firſt that ſhould go foorth, he loued better that another ſhold take that aduantage. Thus on all ſides on horſe-backe and afoote, they followed Croiſſant, who kept not the high way, and it was far in the night: and alſo there were many that would not chafe themſelues ouer much to ſéeke for him, for they wold make no preaſſe to receiue his offering: becauſe they feared to finde him: and when they had ſought a long ſpace in the fields and in the high wayes, and could not finde him, they all returned to their Towne, and Croiſſant went euer from the Townward, with his ſword naked in his hand: and when hee ſawe that he was two Leagues off, he entred into the high way, and praiſed God that hee was ſo eſcaped without daunger, but hee was ſore diſpleaſed, in that he had neuer a penny in his purſe, and nothing but his Sword, his Coat, and a rich purſe at his guirdle, and alſo he ſawe that it was Winter, froſt and ſnow: alſo he felt the cold winde, the which did him much ill. Thus hee went foorth all night, and the next day, vntill it was néere night, then he arriued at a Village, and there he was faine to ſell his ſword, for lacke of monney to pay for his ſhot, he came to a Lodge, where he was ſerued of euerie thing that he would haue: then in the morning when he departed, he ſold his purſe for as much as hee could get, and hee trauailed ſo long that hee approached to Roome, and hee came to a Lodging without the gate, and there he lodged that night, and in the morning he demaunded of his Hoſt, to whome that Towne appertained, and who was lord thereof, and what his name was that gouerned the Towne? The Hoſt ſayd: Fréend, hee that nowe is Lord héere, is named Guymart of Puille, but before hee came hether, we had a young Lord, the faireſt young Gentleman that euer was ſéene, and he was Sonne to the noble Emperour Ide, you ſomewhat reſemble him, but he was of ſo ill rule, and ſo full of follies, that all the riches and wealth that his Father had left him, hée ſpent and gaue away to euerie man that would craue any thing of him, ſo that in the end hee left himſelfe nothing to liue by. And after I heard ſay, that he had in himſelfe ſuch

ſhame, that he departed priuily with a Squier, & went to ſéeke his aduentures: but no man knoweth where he is, nor whether he will euer come againe or not, and the Communaltie of the Cittie made little thereof, for after hee was departed, they ſent for King Guymart of Puille, whome they haue made Emperour of this Empire.
               When Croiſſant vnderſtood his Hoſt, he complained right pitiouſly to himſelfe, and ſayde. Alas poore Caitiffe that I am, what ſhall I do, that thus haue loſt al mine Inheritance without recouerie? and beſides that I haue nothing to ſpend, nor I haue no trade to liue by, it muſt behooue me to die through hunger and cold, I haue no more but fiue and Twentie ſhillings, for the which I ſould my purſe. Thus as well as he could, he continued till Lent, then the ſeaſon began to be ſomewhat hotter, and euerie day in the morning he would heare ſeruice, and euerie man that ſaw him, beheld him greatly for ye great beautie that he was of, & there were diuers that knew him, but they would make no ſemblance thereof, to the intent that they wold giue him nothing: and when they ſawe him, they would ſhun the way, becauſe he ſhould not know them, there were many of them that hee had done much good vnto, and giuen them in ſuch wiſe, that they were become rich, and he poore, and there was none of them that would offer him one morſell of bread, whereof he was ſorrowfull, for then he ſawe well his monney was gone, ſo that he had neuer a penny left, then he thought to ſell his Gowne, rather then to die for hunger, and ſo he did: he ſould it for eight & Twentie ſhillings, and then he taried in his Lodging as long as his money endured, & hée continued there vntill Eaſter, & by that time all his monney was gone.
               Then he thought that he would goe into the ſtréetes, to ſée if he might eſpie any Burgeſſes, to whome he had done in times paſt ſome good vnto, and to demaund of them ſome courteſie: & ſo he yſſued out of his Lodging, and walked into the ſtréetes, & ſaw a rich Burgeſſe, who was leaning out at a window in his houſe: Croiſſant knew him well, for it was hee that made him rich, and before he was but poore: then he thought to acknowledge himſelfe to that Burgeſſe. Then Croiſſant went and ſaluted

him right humbly, and ſayd. Sir, haue remembrance of a poore Caitiffe, to whome fortune is contrarie, and who in time paſt did you much good when you ſerued him, if you bee a good man as I beléeue you are, of the goodnes haue you remembrance, and it may be ſo, if you doe ſo, you ſhall fare the better. When the Burgeſſe heard Croiſſant, he beheld him fiercely, & he knew him preſently, and without making of any manner of anſweare, he called his Page, and commaunded him to bring him a pan full of water to the windowe, and he did as his maſter had commanded him: then the Burgeſſe tooke the pan full of water, and he beheld Croiſſant who ſtood vnder the window, and did caſt the water vppon his head, ſo that his faire haire, coat, and ſhirt were all wet: Croiſſant without any word ſpeaking made himſelfe cleane, and afterward ſaid to the Burges, that if he liued long, the offence that he had done him, he ſhould déerely buy it, but the Burgeſſe (who was proud and diſdainfull) ſet but little by his words. Croiſſant (who was right ſorrowfull) tooke his way towards the Pallaice, before ye which there was an old Pallaice, whereas no man had dwelled in of a long ſpace, and he entred in at the gate, the which was great and ſtood open, and there he ſaw a great Piller, whereas there lay two burdens of ſtrawe: then he layd him downe and ſlept, right ſorrowfull & angrie with the Burgeſſe that had ſo wet him with water: the which Burges after he had caſt this water vppon Croiſſant, hee went to the Pallaice to the Emperour Guymart, to flatter and to pleaſe him, & he found the Emperor leaning in a window and ſaluted him, and ſayd. Sir, I bring you certaine tidings of Croiſſant, Sonne to the Emperour Ide, who of right ought to be Inheritour of this Empire, whereof you are as now Emperour: he is come into the Towne in his doublet, without hoſe or ſhooes, he is arrayed like a Vagabond or a Ruffian, comming from the Tauerne, & he is ſo great and ſo well made in all his members, that hee ſéemeth more like a Champion readie to fight, then euer I ſaw man in all my life: if you will follow my counſaile, ſtrike off his head, or caſt him into a pit, that of him there may neuer be had any more memorie. For if he liue long, he may doe you dammage, and put you

out of this Empire which you hould, the which ſhould appertaine to him. When the Emperour Guymart vnderſtoode the Burges, he beheld him fiercely and ſayd: Speake no more to me of this matter, for thou doeſt like a Traytor, thou knoweſt well, that by him and his déeds thou and other bee made rich, & thou art like him that betrayed our Lord Ieſus Chriſt: therefore I command thée from hencefoorth come not in my ſight, for I wil haue no acquaintance nor conuerſation with a Traitor: if it be ſo that Croiſſant be poore, it is pitie and lamentable, and great ſin to doe him any ill, for I haue done him great ill, when I kéepe his Landes and Signiories wrongfully and without a cauſe, wherefore I thinke my ſelfe greatly culpable againſt the almighty God, for the ſinne that I haue done him, in that I hold the honour and Signiorie, that of reaſon ought to appertaine to him, this day is Eaſter day, vpon the which day euerie good Chriſtian man ought to humble himſelfe to God, crying him mercie and pardon for all their ſinnes: it is reaſon that I make peace with God, and doe ſo that hee may bee content with me.
            
            
               Chap. CLXXX.
               
                  ¶ How the Emperor Guymart ſpake & rebuked the Burgeſſe that ſpake ill of Croiſſant: and howe the Emperour bare meate and drinke to the place whereas Croiſſant ſlept. And of the maruailous Treaſure that hee found in a Chamber in the ſayde ould Pallaice: and of that which was ſhewed him by two Knights whome he found there.
               
               
                  
                     WHen the Burgeſſe vnderſtood the Emperour, hee was in great feare, and ſo departed right ſore abaſhed, & thought he had béene too haſty to report ſuch newes, & ſo right ſorowful departed, and l
                     •
                  ft the Emperour alone in a windowe right penſiue, &

ſayd to himſelfe. Oh verie God, the pouertie that Croiſſant is in, is by my cauſe, for all that I haue ought to bee his, and I kéepe it from him perforce, if I kéepe it ſtill, I may wel ſay that my ſoule ſhall neuer come into Paradice, but ſhall bee damned for euer. Thus the Emperour Guymart complained to himſelfe, and ſo went downe into his Pallaice, and there walked vp and downe by himſelfe before the olde Pallaice, the which was néere to his Pallaice, & he looked in at a gate, & ſaw a man lye ſléeping on a burden of ſtraw, and he thought incontinent that it ſhould be Croiſſant by the report of the Burgeſſe. When the Emperour ſaw him, he had ſuch great pitie of him that hée wept: and then he went into his Pallaice, and commaunded one to bring vnto him a Towell with bread and fleſh, & a bottell of wine, the which thing was done: then the Emperour tooke a Mantle furred with griſe, and did it about himſelfe, and tooke the wine and meat, and commaunded his men that none ſhould follow him, then he went downe the gréeces, and came to the Pallaice whereas Croiſſant ſlept, and the Emperour ſet the meat and wine néere by Croiſſant, and awoake him not: then he couered him with the mantle, and then he departed, and as the Emperour was departing, he looked on his right hand, and ſawe a dore open all of yron, & banded verie ſtrongly with yron barres, and hee ſaw a cléereneſſe within in ſuch wiſe, as though there had béene a Hundred torches burning, & he went thether and entred into the Chamber, the which was great & large, and hee ſawe all about the Chamber great Coffers, the which ſtood open and they were full of gould, and other Coffers full of iewels & rich ſtones, the which did ſhine with ſuch light that the Emperor greatly maruailed: alſo he ſaw great péeces of plate and monney lying on the earth, and beſides hee ſaw a great Veſſell of Cups, and pots of gould and ſiluer, and great péeces of gould bordered with precious ſtones. Alſo hee ſawe rich Gownes hanging on pearches, of cloth of gould and ſilke, in ſo great number, that the Emperour was ſore abaſhed, and ſayd: whoſoeuer left this Treaſure héere, might well be called a great Lord, for hee thought if all the gould in the world, and all the rich iewels were brought together, they might not bee

compared to the Treaſure that he ſaw there, and ſayd hee was happie to come thether.
               Then he paſſed foorth where he ſaw an Image of fine gold, and it was as bigge as a Child of two yéeres of age, and wheras the eyes ſhould ſtand, there was two great Carbuckles, the which caſt ſo great cléereneſſe, that all the Chamber was light therewith. When the Emperour ſaw that Image, he thought to haue taken it, and to haue borne it into his Pallaice, but he had much adoe to lift it: then hee looked towardes a little dore, out of the which he ſaw comming two Knights, well armed at all péeces with their ſwords in their handes, and they came to the Emperour, and ſayd. Beware Fréend, be not ſo hardy to beare any thing from hence, for the Treaſure that is héere is not yours, nor it belongeth not to you to haue it: therefore ſet downe againe that Image, for without you doe it ſhortly, you ſhall déerely buy it. The Emperour ſéeing the Two Knightes threatning him, he was in great feare, and he ſette downe the Image, and beheld the Knightes, and ſayd. Sirs, you ſpeake fiercely to me for the Treaſure, the which you warne me that I ſhold not take any part thereof: by al right it ought to be mine and none others, ſince I haue found it: and therefore I coniure you by the puiſſance of God, & of his Angels and Archangels, and of all Saints, that you ſhew me the troth, to whome this Treaſure doth belong, you ought to knowe it, ſince you haue the kéeping thereof: then the Two Knightes anſweared, and ſayd. Sir, this Treaſure that you ſée héere ought to appertain to Croiſſant, Sonne to the Emperour Ide, who alone lyeth on a burden of ſtrawe héere by not farre from this Chamber, hee lyeth right poorely and naked, the which Treaſure was iudged to him Fiue Hundred yeares paſſed, and neuer ſince that time hath there béene taken from it the value of one pennie, nor neuer ſince it was layd here, there neuer entred any earthly man but alonely you. Croiſſant (who ſléepeth without) is a valiant knight and full of troth: wherefore if you will know to whom this Treaſure appertaineth, I ſhall ſhew you the manner how you may know it: behold yonder heape of gould, goe and take thereof thrée Beſans, and put them into your purſe, then returne

into your Pallaice, and cauſe to be proclaimed throughout Roome, that all poore men come to your Court, and that to each of them you will giue a Florent of gould. When Croiſſant ſhall heare that, he will not be behind, but he will come among other to take that almes: and then the Thrée Beſans that ſhall be in your purſe, take and caſt them on the earth, one in one place, and another in another place, whereas the people muſt paſſe to come to receiue your almes: then Croiſſant ſhall come the ſame way and finde the thrée Beſans, the which by reaſon of his nobleneſſe and bounti
                     •
                  , hee will come and bring to you againe, thereby you ſhall know that the Treaſure that is heere before you, appertaineth to him, & ought to bee his. Then giue him your faire Daughter in marriage: and bringe him hether, and you ſhall ſée that he may take of this Treaſure at his pleaſure, for it is all his, no man ſhall ſay the contrarie: and doing thus as wée haue ſayd, you ſhall haue part of this Treaſure.
            
            
               Chap. CLXXXI.
               
                  ¶ How the two Knightes that kept this Treaſure, ſpake with the Emperor Guymart, and ſhewed him the manner how he ſhould know Croiſſant. And of the maruaile that Croiſſant had when he awoake, and ſaw the meat and drinke by him.
               
               
                  
                     WHen the Emperour had well heard the two Knightes, he went to the heape of gould, and tooke the thrée Beſans and put them into his purſe: and then he tooke his leaue of the twoo Knightes and departed, and when he was yſſued out, he looked behinde him, and he ſaw the dore faſt cloſed, whereof he had great maruaile, and found Croiſſant ſtill ſléeping, and ſo he paſſed by and would not awake him, and then he went to his Pallaice, and his Lords demanded of him where hee had béene that hée tarried ſo long, but hee would not

ſhew them any thing of the matter. Then the Emperor went to dinner, and was richly ſerued: and then Croiſſant (who lay and ſlept in the old Pallaice) ſuddainly awoake, and had great maruaile of the furred Mantle that he found vppon him, and he ſaw alſo lying by him a Napkin, and therein wrapped good white bread, Capon, roſted Feſant, & Partridge, and thereby he ſaw lying a great bottell full of wine: and when he ſaw this good chéere, he thanked God of that aduenture. Then hee did eate of the meat, and dranke of the wine at his pleaſure: and when he had well eaten and drunke, he departed from thence, and left the reſt behind him, and tooke nothing with him: and alſo hee left the furred Mantle, for hee durſt not weare it, but ſayd to himſelfe, that he had no right thereto, becauſe it was a thing that was none of his, and ſo he went downe through the ſtréets of the Towne.
            
            
               Chap. CLXXXII.
               
                  ¶ The proofe that the Emperor Guymart made to know Croiſſant, vnto whome he gaue his faire Daughter in marriage, and deliuered him all his Signiorie and Inheritance, whereof great ioye was made at Rome.
                  
               
               
                  
                     WHen the Emperor was riſen from dinner, he called to him Foure of his ſeruants, to whome he gaue in charge, that they ſhould cauſe to be proclaimed in euerie Stréete of the Towne, that all poore men that would come to the Emperor, ſhould haue in almes euerie man a Florent of gould, of the value of Ten Sons, the which crie was made in euerie ſtréete and Market-place in Roome, whereby euerie poore man drew towards the Pallaice. When this crie was made, Croiſſant heard it, whereof he was ioyfull and ſaid. howe hee would goe thether among others, to haue the Emperours almes, wherewith hee thought hee would pay his Hoſt, and then in haſt he went thether. The Emperour (who was

there readie) thought to ſée & prooue whether the two Knights ſayings were true or not: & ſo drew out of his purſe the Three Beſans of gould, the which he did caſt in diuers places, in the way as the poore men ſhould come to the Pallaice, but many poore men paſſed ouer them, and perceiued them not: & then Croiſſant came among others, and he ſaw among the mens féet one Beſan of gould faire and bright, and he ſtouped downe, and tooke it vp, and then he went forth: & within a little while after, he found the ſecond Beſan, the which alſo he tooke vp: and a little further among the mens feete, hée eſpyed the Third Beſan, the which alſo hee tooke vp: then hee thought within himſelfe, and ſayd. Alas, what a Caitiffe am I? if theſe had béene ſiluer, they had béen mine, but they are fine gould, wherefore I am beguiled, for they appertaine to the Emperour Guymart, who holdeth this Empire, I haue no right to kéepe them, becauſe they belong not to mee: therefore I will render them to the Emperour, vnto whome they doe appertaine: then hee came to the Emperour, & ſayd. Sir, I haue found by ye way as I came to your Pallaice thrée Beſans of gould, the which here I deliuer to you, for of right and reaſon they appertaine vnto you, bicauſe of the right and title that you haue to the Empire, but if they hadde béene ſiluer, I might haue kept them as mine owne without blame.
               When the right noble Emperour vnderſtood him, he beheld him, and ſighing he ſayd. Fréend, you are welcome, the bountie, nobleneſſe, and wiſedome that is in you, ſhall ayd you to come to the place wherof in reaſon you ought to be: for ye goodneſſe and troth that I haue ſéene in you, I will giue you my déere Daughter in Marriage, whome I loue entirely, and you ſhall take her to your Wife, and therewith I ſhal yéeld you the Crowne Emperiall of the noble Empire of Rome, the which of right appertaineth to you. When the noble Croiſſant had wel heard and vnderſtood the Emperor, he was right ioyfull, and kneeled downe to the earth in the preſence of all the Lords that were there preſent, thanking him of the honour that he offered him. The Emperour (who was a noble and a wiſe Prince) tooke him vp by the hand, and led him into a Chamber, wherin

hee cauſed a bathing to be prepared, in the which the noble Croiſſant was bathed: and then the Emperour brought him ſuch apparell as was méete for him to haue. When Croiſſant was thus richly apparelled, a fairer nor a better fourmed man could not be found in Eightéene Realmes chriſtened, whereof the Emperour Guymart had great ioy, and ſayd, how that in all his life he neuer ſaw a more goodlyer Prince, for he was great among other men, and well fourniſhed of all his members, he was bigge and large in the ſhoulders, and the ſkinne white mingled with red, his haire like golden wyre, and his face ſtraight with a large forehead, his eyes gray, and his noſe well made, long armes and bigge handes, his Legs faire and ſtraight, and his féete well proportioned and made: the Emperour Guymart could not bee ſatiſfied with the regarding of him: and then hee led him into the Pallaice where his Lordes were, who greatly lauded and praiſed him, and ſayd each to other, how that they had neuer ſéene before ſo goodly a Prince, nor better made nor fourmed of his members. Then the Emperour ſent for his Daughter by two great Lordes, and they went to her Chamber for her: then ſhe came to the Pallaice to the Emperour her Father, richly accompanied with Ladies & Damſels. Of their apparell I will make no long rehearſall, for it was as rich as might be, and ſhe was ſo faire, that God and nature could not amend her, nor no Painter in the world though he were neuer ſo ſkilfull, could not paint ye faſhion nor proportion of her beautifull bodie, and all that were there preſent, both young and old ſayd, that they neuer ſawe nor heard report of ſo faire a couple of Creatures, as the noble Croiſſant and this Ladie were, for euerie man thought that they were made for nothing elſe, but to cauſe men to behould them and their beautie.
            
            
               
               Chap. CLXXXIII.
               
                  ¶ Howe the Emperour Guymart promiſed Croiſſant, that within three dayes he ſhould haue his Daughter in mariage: And how the Emperour Guymart led Croiſſant to the olde Pallaice, and ſhewed him the great Treaſure that the two Knightes kept for him.
               
               
                  
                     WHen the Emperour Guymart
                   ſawe his Daughter come, hee tooke her by the hand, and ſayd. My right déere Daughter, I haue found for you a Huſband, to whome I haue giuen you, and you may well ſay, that a fairer man, nor a hardyer Knight you neuer ſawe before, and that is the noble Croiſſant, vnto whom this Empire appertaineth by rightfull enheritance, and he is Son to the noble Emperour Ide, who hath giuen this Empire to his Son Croiſſant, but when he was of no great age, he departed from this Cittie with a ſmall companie, and went to ſerue in ſtrang countreys, and when the Lords of this countrey ſaw that they were without a Lord, they ſent for me into Puille, and ſo they made mee héere Emperour wrongfully and without reaſon: but nowe ſince that Croiſſant the rightfull Inheritour is returned: for to diſcharge my ſoule towards God, I ſhall put into his hands al his Empire, without kéeping from him any part thereof, for as for me, I am rich and puiſſant ynough: and therefore Croiſſant, if it be your pleaſure, you ſhall haue my Daughter in mariage. Sir, (quoth Croiſſant) if it be her pleaſure I will not refuſe her, for I neuer ſawe a fairer, nor none that I had rather to haue. When the faire Damſell vnderſtood Croiſſant, ſhee was right ioyfull, and ſhe beheld Croiſſant, who ſéemed to her ſo faire, that her loue was enflamed vpon him, for the more ſhe beheld him, the more ſhe loued him, and ſhe thought it long vntill the matter was made perfect: then ſhee ſayd to the Kinge her Father.

Sir, then it is your will and pleaſure, that I ſhall haue Croiſſant in marriage, you may commaund mee as it pleaſe you, it were a folly for mee to make refuſe, and Sir, I require you to let vs be married ſhortly, for if I haue not him, I renounce all marriage for euer, for there is none other that euer ſhall ſet the King on my finger but onely Croiſſant. When the King vnderſtoode his Daughter, hee laughed hartely and ſayd. Déere Daughter, thinke not the contrarie, but that you ſhall haue him to your Huſband: then the King ſent for a Biſhoppe, who aſſured them together, whereof the Damſell was ſo ioyful that ſhee wiſt not what to doe, and priuily ſhee thanked our Lorde God: and if ſhe loued him well, Croiſſant loued her aſwell, and both of them deſired for the day that they might come together in wedlocke.
               When Thrée dayes were paſſed, and that the prouiſion was made readie for the Wedding, then King Guymart made them to ſweare each to other, and eſpecially he made Croiſſant to promiſe, that on the Third day hee ſhould take his Daughter in marriage, the which Croiſſant promiſed and ſware ſo to doe: then the King tooke Croiſſant by the hand, and ledde him to the old Pallaice, to prooue if the Treaſure that was there might be had away by Croiſſant, as the Two Knightes had ſhewed him: and then they two alone came to the ould Pallaice, when they were come thether, the King ſayd. Faire Sonne, I loue you well, and alſo you ought to beare me your loue, ſince you ſhall haue my Daughter in marriage, and becauſe I haue great affiance in you, I ſhall ſhew you what I thinke to ſay, and that which lyeth in my heart: it is of troth, that about foure dayes paſſed, as I came from ſeruice, I ſtoode and leaned out at a window of my Pallaice, and I beheld this ſame place whereas we be now, and where I ſaw you lye a ſléepe, repleat with famine and pouertie, I tooke of you great pitie, and I brought to you bread and drinke, and did ſette it by you, and I couered you with a furred mantle, and ſo I let you lye ſtill, for I would not awake you, and as I returned from you, I ſawe a dore open of this Chamber, the which you ſée now cloſed, out of the which I ſawe a great light yſſue: then I went thether and entred

into the Chamber, and there I ſawe ſo great Treaſure, yt I neuer ſaw none ſuch in all my life: there was a rich Image of gould, the which I thought to haue taken and borne with me, & as I had it in my handes, two Knights well armed came foorth, whereof I was afraide, then they ſayd vnto me, that I ſhould not be ſo hardy as to touch the Image, nor no part of the Treaſure that I ſaw there, for they ſayd, that it did not appertaine to me, and if I did the contrarie, I ſhould repent it, and they ſayd incontinent they would ſlay me: then I demaunded to whome that Treaſure did belong. Then they ſayd, that it did belong vnto Croiſſant, who lay héere without a ſléepe, and they commaunded me to take thrée Beſans of gould, to prooue thereby to whome the Treaſure ſhould appertaine, and then they aduiſed me to make a Dole to poore men, and that I ſhold caſt down the Beſans vppon the earth whereas the poore men ſhould paſſe by, and hee that found them and brought them to me, this Treaſure ſhould appertaine to him: wherefore I pray you let vs go thether to know the troth. Sir, (quoth Croiſſant) I pray you let vs goe thether.
               When they came there, they found the dore cloſed: and then Croiſſant knocked thereat, and ſayd. Yée Sirs that be within, I pray you in the name of God to open this dore, incontinent the dore opened, and there they found the two Knightes with their ſwords in their hands. Then Guymart and Croiſſant entred into the Chamber, and the two Knightes came to Croiſſant, & made him great chéere, and ſayd. Croiſſant, your great Proweſſe and Noblenes is greatly to be praiſed, we haue béen a longe time héere ſette to kéepe for you this Treaſure that you ſée héere, for it is Fiue Hundred yeares ſince that we were ſet héere by King Oberon, to kéepe this Treaſure for you, and hée ſhewed vs that it appertained to you, and neuer ſince it was touched by any man, but onely by King Guymart, whome (to the intent to ayd and ſuccour you) wee bad him take thrée Beſans of gould, and ſhewed him that this Treaſure appertained neither to King nor Emperour, but alonely to you, which is ſo great that no man liuing can eſtéeme it, you may take it & beare it away, or giue it whereas it ſhall pleaſe you, and whatſoeuer

you take from it, all your life it ſhall not diminiſh nor decreaſe. When Croiſſant vnderſtood them, hee was ioyfull, and thanked the Knightes in that they hadde ſo longe kept his Treaſures then they tooke leaue of Croiſſant, and embraced him and ſayd. Sir, we require you to bee courteous and liberall, and pitifull to the poore, and loue well all noble and wiſe men, and giue to them largely, and be good and true to your Father in law King Guymart, for he is a noble and a wiſe Prince, you ought to thanke him, & to loue him aboue all other men liuing. When Croiſſant thanked them of their good aduertiſement, and then they tooke their leaue, and ſo departed ſodenly, that neither Croiſſant nor Guymart wiſt not where they were become, whereof they were abaſhed, and made on them the ſigne of the croſſe: then they looked about the Chamber, and ſaw the Treaſure that was there, where of Croiſſant was ſo abaſhed, that he will not what to ſay, for there was a great light in the Chamber, as though there had béen Thirtie Torches lighted, by reaſon of the bright ſtones that were there: to ſpeake of the Treaſure that was in that Chamber, I cannot ſhewe it, for there 
                     〈◊〉
                   ſo much that they were thereof abaſhed to behold it.
               When Croiſſant ſawe this Treaſure, it was no maruaile though he was ioyfull, and thought to himſelfe, that he would not ſpa
                     •
                  e to giue to them that were worthy, & ſuch as did ſerue him truely, and ſo hee did, for hee gaue ſo largely, that all the 
                     〈◊〉
                   praiſed him: and when they had beene there a certaine ſpace, Croiſſant ſayd to King Guymart. Sir, of this Treaſure, I will that you haue the one halfe, & you ſhall haue the keys of that, and giue thereof at your pleaſure. Faire Sonne, (quoth the King) I thanke you, all that I haue is yours, and all that you haue is mine, wée will part nothing betwéene vs as longe as wee liue. Then they departed from thence, and Croiſſant tooke certaine of the iewels to giue to his Spouſe: and then they departed out of the Chamber, and locked the dore, & tooke the key with them, and ſo they returned to the Pallaice right ioyfull. Then Croiſſant gaue to his Lady the rich iewels, who right humbly thanked him therefore.
            
            
               
               Chap. CLXXXIIII.
               
                  ¶ Of the great Treaſure that they had, and how Croiſſant wedded the noble Damſell, daughter to King Guymart: and of the Feaſt that was there made.
               
               
                  
                     AFter that King Guymart and Croiſſant were returned to the Pallace, the Ladie was readie apparelled: and then the Two Louers were wedded together in the Chappell of the Pallaice. The great ioy and mirth that was made in the Pallaice and in the Citie, I make no mention thereof, they dyned: and of their ſeruice and rich apparell I make no rehearſall, for it were too longe to declare it. After dinner the young Knightes and Squiers Iuſted in the Cittie: of the ioy and ſport that was there made no man can expreſſe it at length. Then they went to ſupper, and if they were well ſerued at dinner, it was aſwell at Supper. And after ſupper, and that the dauncing was done, Croiſſant and his Ladie went to bed together in a rich Chamber, where the ſame night they accompliſhed their deſires: ſo faire a couple was neuer ſeene, as were Croiſſant and the Ladie Katherine his Wife: & when the night was paſſed, they aroſe and came into the Pallaice, whereas the feaſting and ioy began againe the whi
                     •
                  h 
                     〈◊〉
                   Fiftéen dayes. Great was the triumph that was there made: after that euerie man departed from the Court, except all ſuch as appertained to the Court. Of the good life that they led, all ſuch as loued them reioyced thereat, and longe time they liued together, ſo that at laſt through age King Guymart 
                  
                     •
                  ay ſicke in his bed, and ſo the Fourth day he dyed: great ſorow the Ladie Katherine his Daughter made, and ſo did Cro
                        •
                     ſſant who déerely loued him, and his body was borne to the Church of Saint P
                        •
                     
                     ter, and his obſequies done, and ſo layd in his Sepulture with ſore wéepings, for in his time he was a good Prince and a true

Iuſticer, hee was greatly complained for both with poore and with rich. Then after his death by the conſent of all the Lords of the Empire, Croiſſant was crowned Emperour, and the Ladie Katherine Empreſſe, at whoſe Coronation was made great feaſting and ioy, a godly life they led as longe as they liued. Croiſſant amended and encreaſed the Signiorie of Roome, and conquered diuers Realmes, as Ieruſalem and al Surrey, as more plainely you may knowe by the Cronicle that is made of him and of his déedes, and now héere of him I make no more mention: they that will know more, let them ſearch the Bookes of Cronicles making mention of his déedes. Thus endeth the Ancient, Honourable, Famous, and delightfull Hiſtorie of Huon of Bourdeaux one of the Péeres of Fraunce, and Duke of Guyenne: and of diuers Princes liuing in his time. Tranſlated out of French into Engliſh by Sir Iohn Bourchier Knight, Lord Berners, at the requeſt of the Lord Haſtings Earle of Huntington, in the yeare of our Lord God one Thouſand, Fiue Hundred, Thréeſcore & Ten: And now newly reuiſed and corrected, this preſent yeare 1601.
               
            
            FINIS.
            
         
      
   