
      
         
            
            
            A
TREATISE
CONCERNING
the Properties and Offices of
the true Church of
Christ. VVRITTEN
In Latin, by the Reuerend Father Iames Gordon
Huntley of Scotland, Doctour of
Diuinity, of the Society of
IESVS. And translated into English, by I. L.
of the same Society.
            The first Part of the second Controuersy.
            Permissu Superiorum, M.DC.XIV.
         
      
      
         
            
            
            THE
FIRST CHAPTER.
            Of the Properties and offices of the true
Church of Christ.
            
               IN the disputation of the
Church, that first of all is to
be obserued, that whereas
our Aduersaries haue
brought in, and do hold many
erroneous opinions, they do all proceed
out of the ignorance of the true definition
and Nature of the Church. It is
a true saying of the Apostle,1. ad Tim 
                     •
                   v. 6. & 7. that they which
erre and wander from the true faith are conuerted
into vaine talke, desirous to be Doctours of the 
                     •
                  aw,
not vnderstanding neyther what thinges they speake
nor of what they affirme. For if our Aduersaries
did well vnderstand or could conceyue,
what is imported by the Name & Nature

of the Church, they would neuer affirme
so many absurdities of the Church of
Christ. We will therfore first of all declare
and explicate, what is to be vnderstood
properly by the name of the
Church.
            2. But this best of all is declared by
the Properties of the Church of Christ, and
by her Offices, commended vnto vs in the
holy Scripture it selfe: and those we call
properties which do agree with the Church
as she hath relation vnto Christ her chiefe
head and Pastour. But those we call her
offices which the Church exerciseth towards
her Children. There are indeed
many properties of the Church assigned by
holy Scripture, but it shall suffice vs to
alleadge and note these fiue only.
            3. The first is, that the Church is
the spouse of Christ.Os
                     •
                  e 
                     •
                  . 19, & 20. I will betroth thee vnto me
for euer saith the Prophet Osee:) and againe:
I will betroth thee vnto me in faith: and Isaias:
The bridegrome will reioyce in his bride,Isaiae 62, v. 5. and thy
God she speaketh vnto the Church) shall
reioyce in thee. Christ also by the Prophet
Salomon sayth,
               Cant. 4. v. 8. Come o my spouse from Libanus.
In the new Testament also, the Church is
called the spouse of Christ. He which hath
the bryde,Ioan. 3. v. 
                     •
                  9. 
               saith S. Iohn Baptist, is the bridegroome.
And the Apostle, I haue despoused you to one

man to present you a chaste Virgin vnto Christ.2. ad Cor▪ 11. v. 2.
               Lastly, S. Iohn Euangelist in his Reuelations
saith,
               Apoc. vlt. v. 17. the brydegrome and bryde do say, Come.
            4. The second is,
               ad Rom. 12. v. 5. 
               that the Church
is the mysticall body of Christ. VVe being marry
(saith the Apostle) are one body in Christ:1. ad Cor. 1
                     •
                   v. 27. 
               and
againe, you are the body of Christ and members
of member:1. ad Ephes. 1. v. 22. & 23
                     •
                  
                  ▪
                
               and in another place. And he hath
made him (to wit Christ) head ouer all the
Church, which is his body.
            5. The third propertie is, that the
Church is the Kingdome of Christ. Our
Lord shall reygne ouer them (saith the Prophet
Micheas) in the mountaine of Syon from hence now
and euermore.
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   4
                     •
                   v. 7. 
               And the Angell as witnesseth
S. Luke,Luc. 1. v. 33. 
               speaketh thus of Christ.
He shall reigne in the house of Iacob for euer. Lastly
Christ himselfe saith vnto his Disciples,
               Luc. 17. v. 21.
the Kingdome of God is within you.
            6. The fourth propertie is, that the
Church is the Inheritance of Christ: Aske
of me (saith God the Father vnto his
Sonne) and I will giue thee all Nations for thyne
Inheritance.Psalm. 2. v. 8. 
               And againe the Prophet Dauid
sayth,
               Psalm. 27▪ vel 28. v. vlt. Saue thy people ô Lord▪ and blesse thyne Inheritance▪
               And Lastly,
               Psal. 32. vel 33. v. 1
                     •
                  
                Blessed is that Nation
whose Lord is God thereof, a people whome God
hath chosen for his Inheritance.
            7. The fifth property is, that the
Church is the Citty of God, and Christ.
               
glorious thinges are spoken of the Citty of God,Psalm. 86. vel. 87. v 3.
               sayth the Prophet Dauid. And againe, the
mayne streame of the riuer doth cōfort the Citty of
God:Psalm. 45. ve
                     •
                   46. v. 5. 
               and Christ himselfe saith, A Citty placed
vpon a mountaine cannot be hydde. And hence
it is, that the Church is called the heauē
                  ly
Ierusalem and Syon,Matth. 5. v. 14. 
               as also the Temple &
house of God. You are come, saith the Apostle,
               ad Hebr. 12 v. 22.
to mount Syon, and the Citty of the liuing God
heauenly Ierusalem.2 ad Cor. 6. v. 16. 
               And in another place:
You are the Temple of the liuing God. Lastly,
that thou mayest know how thou oughtest to conuerse
in the house of God,1. Tim. 3. v. 15. which is the Church of the liuing
God.
            8. But now the offices of the Church
are many the which may be reduced to
fiue heades.ad Gal. 4. v. 26. For the Church as witnesseth
the Apostle is our Mother.
            9. A Mother exerciseth fiue offices towards
her Children. First she conceyueth
them. Secondly she bringeth them forth.
Thirdly she nourisheth them. Fourthly
she gouerneth them. Fifthly she defēdeth
and preserueth them from all daungers
till they come to the vse of reason: all these
thinges the Church performeth vnto vs,
vntill we meete all with Christ the spouse of the
Church,
               
                  
                     •
                  d Ephes. 4. v. 13. 
               and our Father, into the vnity of faith and
knowledge of the Sonne of God into a perfect man
into the measure of the age of the fulnesse of Christ,
               
as the Apostle speaketh.
            10. The first office therfore of the
Church is to propound vnto all the word
of God, and that fully (as concerning
those thinges which are necessary to saluation)
sincerely clearly, and without
any errour. For the word of God is the
incorruptible seed wherby we are conceyued
and borne againe, as Christ and his
Apostles do testify. But the Church performeth
this both by word & writings
whiles she conuerteth Gentils, Mahumets▪
Heretikes,
               Marc. vlt. v. 15. and Atheists, and Christ enioyned
this office vnto the Church in those
wordes, preach you the Ghospell vnto euery creature.
            
            11. The second office of the Church,
is lawfully to administer the Sacraments▪
For by these also we are regenerated,Ad Titū vlt. v. 5. & Ioan. 6. v. 57. & 58. and
nourished, strenthened, gouerned, and
defended. This office also Christ enioyned
vnto his Church when he commaū
               ded
her to Baptize,
               Matt. vlt. v. 19. & administer the other
Sacraments.Mart. vlt. 
                     •
                  . 16. 
                     •
                  
               
            
            12. The third office of the Church
is to feed those who are borne to Christ
not only by the Sacraments,Luc. 22▪ v. 1 
                     •
                  
                  ▪
                but also by
the word of God.1. Cor. 3. v. 2. & ad Hebr. 5. 
                     •
                   12. & 14▪
                
               Feed, saith S. Peter, the
flock of God which is among you.
               Hebr. 5. 
                     〈◊〉
                   12. & 14. But the Church
feedeth the weaker and ruder sorte of

people with milke and not with stronger
meates, as the Apostle speaketh: hence it
commeth to passe that the Catholike Cathechismes
are taught so much in the
Church. But she nourisheth those
which are stronger in faith with sol
                  •
               de
meates, and not only, with milke.
            13. The fourth office of the Church
is,Act. 20. v. 28. to gouerne according to those wordes
of S. Paul. Take heede to your selues, and to the
whole flocke, wherein the holy Ghost hath placed
you Bishops to rule the Church of God. Hence it
ensueth, that there haue byn so many Assemblies
and Councells called togeather, that
heresyes might be condemned, manners
reformed, and Ecclesiasticall order well
established in all thinges: also that for
this office there are chosen Preachers▪
Pastors, Administrators of the Sacramēts,
and all other thinges are ordayned which
do concerne the right gouernment of the
Church.
            14. The fifth office of the Church
is,Matth. 10. v. 32. & 33. to defend her children. For this cause
she opposeth her selfe against the Aduersaries
of Christ.Genes. 5. v. 15. She professeth publickely
her faith, she fighteth cōtinually with the
serpēt and his seed,Isay 54. v. vlt. she suffereth much &
yet alwaies getteth the victory: No weapon,
saith the Propet Isay, that is made against

thee,Matth. 16▪ v. 18. shal proceed, or leuel right. And
Christ saith: Vpō this rocke I wil build my Church
& the gates of Hel soal not preuaile against it. And
in another p
                  •
               ace,Ioan. 16. v. vlt. 
               You shall suffer trouble and
pressure in this world, but be of good cheere, I haue
ouercome the world. By these propert
                  •
               es and
offices of the Church if they be well considered,
all the errors of our Aduersaries
may easily be confuted, as by that which
followeth will manifestly appeare.
         
         
            CHAP. II.
            That out of the true Church of Christ
there is no saluation.
            THE first error is of certaine Sectaries
of this tyme, who promise
men saluatiō out of the Church:
But this error is easily refuted by
the Scripture. For that is most cleare and
euident which Isaias the Prophet sayth,
speaking vnto the Church in the person
or name of God:Isai
                     •
                   6
                     •
                  
                  ▪ v. 12. 
               That Nati
                     •
                  n and Kingdome
saith he, which hath not serued thee, shall perish.
            
            2. The same also to be an errour, is
conuinced by the properties and offices

of the Church before alleadged.Ad Ephes. 5 v. 31. 32. For first
Christ hath but one spouse and acknowledgeth
no other. They shalbe two in one flesh,
but I (sayth the Apostle) speake in Christ &
in the Church.
               Cant. 6. v. 8. So also Christ speaketh of
the Church, my doue, and my perfect, is one;
Christ is not an adulterer, neyther doth
he beget any children of an adulteresse.
For this cause, saith S. Cyprian, the spouse of
Christ cannot be an adulteresse,
               S. Cypr. in tract. de vnitate Eccles. 
               she is not corrupted,
and she is chaste. And a little after, whosoeuer
being separated from the Church is ioyned to an adulteresse,
he is separated from the promises of the
Church Nerthe
                     •
                   shall he euer attaine to the rewards
of Christ who teares the Church of Christ.
               S. Aug. Tom. 9. de Symbol. ad Cathec. lib. 4. cap. vlt.
               He is an aliene, he is prophane, he is an enemy,
he cannot now haue God for his Father, who hath
not the Church for his Mother. These he, which
last words S. Augustin repeateth out of him.
            2. Secondly, he that is without the
body of Christ, cannot receiue the spirit
of Christ,Ad Rom. 8. v. 9. S. Aug. Tom. 9. tract. 26. in Ioan. nor be partaker of the lyfe and
merits of Christ. But he who hath not the spirit
of Christ, is not his, as witnesseth the Apostle.
S. Augustine declareth this very
well by the example of a mans body.
whose members cannot liue vnlesse they
be ioyn
                  •
               d to the body. Another reasō also
S. Augustine alledgeth taken from the foresaid
property of the Church. None, sayth

he,S. Aug. Tom. 7. de vnitat▪ Eccles. c. 19 
               obtaineth saluatiō & euerlasting lyfe but he who
hath Christ to be his head▪ But none can haue Christ
to be his head but he who is in his body, which is the
Church. So sayth S. Augustine.
            
            4. Thirdly the Name only of a Mother
doth proue this sufficiently. For none
can be conceyued nor borne without a
mother, and the child which is borne if
it leaue to sucke the mothers breasts will
perish for hunger. By which argument
euen our wisest Aduersaries are convinced.
For both Caluin and Beza doe: confesse
this,Calu. l. 4. Instit. c. 1. & Beza. cap. 5. sua conf
                     •
                  ss. Artic. 1. that euen the name only of a mother
doth conuince that which we haue sayd
to be true; yea also the Scripture doth oftē
testify that out of the boosome of the Church
we cannot hope for the remission of our
sinnes, nor euerlasting saluation: and that
the goyng out of the true Church was alwaies-hatefull.
And hence it commeth
to passe, that in the Creed of the Apostles, first
we beliue the holy Catholike Church,
and then the remission of sinnes, and lyfe
euerlasting, because indeed without this
Church none can obtaine eyther remissiō
of their sinnes, or life euerlasting.
         
         
            
            CHAP. III.
            That the Church of Christ is to continue
for euer.
            THE second error of our Aduersaries
is, that many of them affirme,
that the Church of Christ
hath not continually endured,
but that it sometymes fayled. This error
may also be easily refuted by the foresayd
propertyes & offices of the Church. For
first the Church is the spouse of Christ, of
which he speaketh by the Prophet, I will
betroth thee vnto me for euer.
               Osee 2. v. 19. Christ therfore
did not betroth his Church vnto him
for a few yeares only.
            2. Secondly the Church is the Body of
Christ,Ad Rom. 12. v. 5. but Christ cannot be without his
body, and truly it were a monstrous thing
to see a liuing head without a body.
            3. Thirdly the Church is the Kingdome
of Christ, but the Scriptures doe
teach in many places, that this Kingdome
of Christ shall continue for euer, as Micheae
4. v. 7.Psalm. 88. vel 89. v. 36. 
               Daniel. 2. v. 44. Ierem. 33. v. 20.
& 21. Luc. 1. 22. & 33. Lastly Christ sweateth
in his Holy One, that is to say, by his

               Holines, that the Kingdome of Christ shall
last for euer. Wherefore they endeauour to
make Christ himself periured, who affirme,
that the Kingdome of Christ sometymes
perished.
            4. Fourthly the Church is the house
of Christ,Matth. 17. v. 18. the which he built vpon a
rocke, against which the gates of hell shall neuer
preuaile.
            
            5. Fifthly this same is proued by the
offices of the Church,1. ad Cor. 11. v. 26. 
               The Church shall shew
the death of our Lord vntil he come. God also
gaue some as Apostles and Doctors, who should
teach and rule the Church vntill we meet
all in Christ in the end of the world. Whē
Christ also sent his Disciples to teach all
Nations,ad Ephes. 4. v. 11. and to administer the Sacramēts
he added this promise, Behould I am with
you all dayes, euen to the consūmation of the world.
By which words as S. Hierome wel noteth,
he sheweth that they are to liue alwayes,
and that he is neuer departed from the
faithfull belieuers.Matt. vlt 
                     •
                   v. vlt.
            
            6. Lastly our Aduersaries themselues
being cōuinced with the truth of this
matter,Calu. lib 4. Instit. c. 1. sect. 17. in fine. do acknowledge, that the holy
Scriptures do testify this in many places.
For Caluin and Beza to omit many
others, do acknowledge and proue this
out of the Scriptures. Seing that (sayth

               Beza) the Kingdome of Iesus Christ is continuall,
               Beza. c. 5. suae confess. art. 1. it
necessarily followeth that there haue alwaies bin
some to be found who did acknowledge him for
their King.
         
         
            CHAP. IIII.
            That this Church which hath alwaies continued,
hath alwaies byn visible.
            THE third error of our Aduersaries
is, that they deny the Church
of Christ to haue byn alwayes visible.
For seing that they cannot
deny, but that the Church of Christ hath
alwayes continued, as we haue declared in
in the precedent Chapter: and whē we demaund
of them where their Church was
for the space of a thousand yeares and
more, they fly vnto a certaine inuisible
Church which they say lay hidden for
many yeares. But this error also is easily
refuted by the soresaid properties, and offices
of the true Church.
            2. For first the Church is the body
of Christ:1. ad Cor. 
                     •
                  2. Vers. 27 but this body of Christ was visible,
for the Apostle spake vnto visible
men when he sayd, you are the body of Christ.
Moreouer we are made the body of Christ by

               baptisme and the receyuing of the Eucharist,1. ad Cor. 10. v 17. & 1. Cor. 12. v. 13. Ad Ephes. 4. v. 11. 12.
as witnesseth the Apostle. But these
Sacraments are visible. Also in this body
of Christ, there are Doctors and Pastors vntill
the consūmatiō of Saynts, vntil we meet with
Christ, but such persons are visible.
The building also of the Church is visible, this
consūmation of Saints is visible, that uorke of ministery
is visible, which the Apostle sayth
shall continue vntill the comming of
Christ.
            3. Secondly the Church is the Kingdome
of Christ, but euery Kingdome cō
               prehendeth
in it a visible company of mē
who all acknowledge one King. Hence
it is that God describing by the Prophet
Ieremy. this Kingdome of Christ, speaketh
in this sorte of the multitude of men
which shalbe in the Kingdome of Christ.
Euen as (saith our Lord) the starres of Heauē
cannot be numbred,
               Ierem. 33. v. 32. 
               and the sands of the sea measured,
so will I multiply the seed of my seruant
Dauid, and the Leuits my seruants. But such
and so great a multitude of men cannot
be inuisible.
            4. In like manner the Prophet Isay
describing the said Kingdome of Christ
and the couenant of God with it▪ thus
writeth.Isaiae 61. v. 8. & 
                     •
                  . 
               I will make a perpetuall league with
them, and their seed shalbe knowne in all Nations▪
               
               
and their ofspring in the middest of the
people; all that shall see them shall know
them, because this is the seede that God
hath blessed: where it is manifestly sayd
that all Nations, euen the Infidels, assoone
as they shall behould and see the Church
they shall easily know her by the benefits
of God bestowed vpon her. Caluin himselfe
acknowledgeth this to be spoken of the
Church,Calu. in haec verba Isayae. and he, addeth that this hath not
only once been fullfilled, but is dayly fulfilled.
            5. Lastly if this Kingdome of Christ
were sometymes inuisible, God himselfe
(which God forbidde we should say)
were periured, whō sweareth that the
throne of Christ,
               Psal. 88. vel 89. that is to say, his Kingdome
shalbe like the sunne, and as a perfect moone,
and that for euer: but the sunne, and the
perfect, or full moone are very visible planets,
easily to be seene of all men, and not
inuisible.
            6. Thirdly the Church of God is that
Citty which is situated vpon a most high
Mountayne,
               Isayae. 2. v. 2. Micheae 4. v. 1. Psal. 47. vel 48. v. 9. yea vpon a Mountayne which is
placed vpon the toppe of moūtayns, the which
our Lord will strēgthen for euer, wherof
Christ himselfe speaketh.Daniel. 2. v. 35. Mat. 5. v. 14. & 15. 
               A Citty placed vpon
a mountayne cannot be hidden: And agayne. You
are the light of the world, neyther do they light a

candle and put it vnder abushell, but vpon a candelsticke
that it may giue light vnto all which are in
the house.
               S. Aug. Tom. 9. in 1. Epist. S. Ioan. Tract. 2. Christ therefore hath made his
Church not to hyde it, but that it might
be perspicuous & manyfest vnto all: heerupon
S. Augustine. VVhat more (sayth he)
shall I say, but that they are blind who do not see
so great a mountayne, who shut their eyes against
a candle placed vpon a candlesticke.
               S. Aug. Tom. 7. de vnitat. Eccles. c. 16. And in
another place (saith he) that those who
see not the Church, had rather as it were blindfold
offend against this mountaine then climbe vp vnto it.
            
            7. Fourthly the same is proued by
the foresaid offices of the Church, for that
Church must necessarily be visible, which
conceyueth and bringeth forth Infidells
to Christ, by the preaching of the Ghospell,
for neyther they which do preach
are inuisible but visible, and the preaching
also it is visible and not inuisible.
That Church also is visible which
nourisheth Christians with her publicke
exhortations, instructions, and ministration
of Sacraments, and good examples;Luc. 10. v. 16.
which explicateth and keepeth the
Scriptures; who gouerneth and orescribeth
Lawes and precepts,Matth. 1
                     •
                   v. 17▪
                whome therfore
we must obey. And she is visible, vnto
whome according to the commaundment
of Christ, all complaints and causes

are to be brought. And Lastly she is visible,
of whome in our aduersities we
must demaund help and comfort,Supra c. 1. of whome in our aduersities we
must demaund help and comfort, who
publickly confesteth Christ, who fighteth
with the serpent, and getting the victory
triumpheth against him, and moreouer
she exerciseth all those offices which
are before alleadged.
            8. Fifthly, if the visible Church should
once perish, that article of the Greed were
false, I belieue in the Catholik Church, the
communion of Saints. For that▪ Church
which is Catholike or vniuersall, cannot
be inuisible;Psalm. 88. v. 38. that Church which is dilated
or spread abroad throughout the
whole world cannot be but very visible
and conspicuous, and that not in one only
place, but in many. And hence it commeth
to passe, that the true Church is cō
               pared
to the Sunne and the Moone the
which are very visible plannets, and easily
to be seene of all. Neyther can there be
this belieued cōmunion of Saints, vnlesse
the said Saints mutually be manifest and
visible one vnto another,
                  
                     •
                  . ad Cor. v. 12. 21. & 2
                     •
                  . seing that this
communication (as the Apostle saith)
consisteth in the continuall helpe which
one member affoardeth vnto another, but
none can affoard any help to that which
is inuisible and vnknowne. Moreouer

this communication of offices is very sensible
and visible.S. Aug. Tom. 2. Epist. 170. ad 
                     〈◊〉
                  . That also is visible
which is a corporall substance and generally
in many places. Wherfore S. Augustine
saith; Yt is an easy matter for thee to behold
and see that Citty which is situated vpon a mountaine,
of whome our Lord in the Ghospell saith,
that it cannot be hidden. For she is the Catholike
Church,
               Matth. 5. v. 14. 
               whereupon she is called in Greek 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  
because she is published and spread ouer all the
whole world, of whome it is not lawfull for any
to be ignorant, and therfore according to the saying
of our Lord Iesus Christ, she cannot be hidden. Hitherto
S. Augustine.
            
            9. Sixthly,Calu. l. 4. Institut c. 1. sect. 7, that Church is visible
which contayneth in it aswell the good
as the euill, and aswell the predestinate
as the reprobate, as our Aduersaries themselues
acknowledge, who will haue the
inuisible Church to consist of those only
which are predestinate.Matt. 13. v. 38. But that the
Church which containeth in it aswell
the euil as the good,Calu. l. 4. Instit. 
                     •
                  . 1. sect 13. in fine. & Beza c. 5. suae conf. Art. 7. shall continue vnto
the end of the world, those wordes of
Christ, suffer both to growe till haruest, do euidētly
demōstrate vnto vs. Yea euē out Aduersaries
themselues doe plainly confesse
that the holy Scripture doth declare this
by many Parables. Yt may therfore be gathered
out of holy Scriptures euen by the

iudgemēt of our Aduersaries, that there is
not only an inuisible, but also a visible
Church, to wit, wherein the good are
mixed with the bad, which shall alwaies
continue till the end of the world.
            10. Seauenthly, it is all one to affirme
the Church to be inuisible and to
affirme that it hath wholy perished, and
that there is no Church at all,Supra cap. 3. the which
as we haue declared before is most absurd.
For this inuisible Church of our Aduersaries,
can affoard no help to any, seeing
that she is not knowne to any but only
vnto God: according to that saying of
the Apostle, God knoweth who are his.
                  
                     •
                  . ad Tim. 
                     •
                  . v. 29.
For our Aduersaries will haue the predestinate
only to belong vnto this their inuisible
Church, as we haue now declared,
who are only knowne vnto God, and vnknowne
vnto all others.
            11. Hither also it belongeth, that those
could not be Saints & predestinated who
haue byn for these many ages past in that
inuisible Church of our Aduersaries. For
these (if peraduenture there were any)
neyther durst publikely professe Christ,
nor preach openly the Ghospell, but terrified
with humane feare, haue done all
thinges by dissimulation and hypocrisy,

                  •
               east they might be bewrayed and made

knowne vnto others (for otherwise they
should haue byn visible & not inuisible.)Luc. 9. v. 26.
But Christ saith, that he, that shall be ashamed
of me, and that which I teach, him the sonne of
man wilbe ashamed of when he shall come in his
Maiesty.
            12. Lastly our Aduersaries being
vrged with so many and inuincible reasons,
see well inough, especially the wiser
sort of them, how absurd the doctrine
of their inuisible Church is. And therfore
many of them now adayes acknowledge
the Church of Christ to haue byn alwaies
visible: and moreouer that this visible
Church remayned still in the Popedome,
as they speake. For they cānot assigne any
other visible & euer continuing Church,
besides that of Rome, but least they be
conuinced of falshood by the authority
of this visible Church, they seeke out some
other euasion, for they say this visible
Church may, yea hath often erred in matters
of faith.Cap. 7. seq. The which error we will
confute a little after, assoone as we haue
answered the arguments, obiected by our
Aduersaries against this Chapter.
         
         
            
            CHAP. V.
            The arguments against the visible Church
are confuted.
            MANY of our Aduersaries reasōs
do not so much proue that
the visible Church hath perished
& decayed,Infra hac ea
                     •
                  em controu. c. 7. as that it hath
erred in fayth; the which therefore shalbe
confuted afterward when we declare
that the Church cannot erre in matters
of fayth.Tom. 2. Epist. 48. & Tom. 7. de vnit. Eccles. c. 1,. & ad Donat. 
                     •
                  ost 
                     •
                  ol. c. 20. in fine. 3. Reg. 19. v. 10. The rest of their arguments are
almost all one with the old reasons of the
Donatists. For they in tymes past affirmed
that the Church of Christ perished
throughout the whole world, but only in
Africk. Vnto whom S. Augustine answereth
very well in many places. But we will
only heere briefly examine the more probable
arguments, and now a dayes more
vsed by our Aduersaries.
            2. The first argument is taken out
of those words of the Prophet Elias,
               
                  
                     〈◊〉
                  . in praf
                     •
                  t suarum 
                     •
                  nstit. Beza c. 5. 
                     〈◊〉
                   
                  
                     •
                  onfes. Art. 9. 
               I am left
alone, and they seeke my lyfe. I answere that
this argument is of no moment, albeit our
Aduersaries Caluin and Beza do often vse
it. For Elias doth not speake of the whole

Church, but only of the Kingdome of
Israell,
               3. Reg. 19. v. 18. wherein the wicked King Achab
then reigned, albeit in it also there were
seauen thousand men who did not adore
Baal, and who made a visible Church.
Moreouer at that very time Iosaphat a very
pious and goodly King reigned, & there
was also the temple of God, and Priests, and
Sacrifices, as also publike, solemne, and
daily seruice of God: yea out of the second
book of Paralippomenō
                we gather that King
Iosaphat laboured very much to conserue
and increase the honour and worship of
God:2 Paral. 19. v. 4. & seq. neyther was the number of them
litle, who professed publikely the true
Religion. For in the same booke are accounted
and numbred more then eleauen
hundred thousād strong souldiars, besides
women and others lesse fit for warr;2. Paral. 17. v. 14. & seq. by
which it appeareth that the Church of
God was not inuisible in Iosaphats Kingdome,
but rather very visible and cōspicuous.
But Elias only complayned of the
Kingdome of Israel:
               3. Reg. 19. v. 10. & 14 
               they, to wit, the children
of Israel, and not the children of Iuda, haue
forsaken thy Couenant. Neyther do we deny
but that in some one or other Kingdome
there might sometymes peraduenture
haue by
                  •
                few or no Christians, whils in
farre more places the Church of God was

very manyfest and visible. But that the
Church of Christ was no where to be foūd
in the whole world, is most absurd and
expresly against the holy Scriptures.
            3. The second argument is taken
out of many places of Isay & Ieremy, wherin
those Prophets complayne, that all the
Iewes did transgresse the Couenant made
with God. Moreouer they obiect the
small number of those who were sometymes
in the ancient Church before Christs
tyme, or euen in Christs tyme before the
Gospell was promulgated, and heere they
make many disgressions to Noë and Adam
himselfe. The very same argument the
Donatists also vsed, as the words of Bishop
Petilian 
               
                  •
               estify related by S. Augustine.
               Vid
                     •
                   S. August. Tom. 7. de vnitate Eccles. c. 13. But
S. Augustine answereth very well to those
generall complaints of the Prophets, that
the holy Scripture hath a peculiar phrase
or manner of speaking, who so reprehendeth
the euill as though euery one of that
company of people were wicked men,S. Aug. Tom. 7. in lib. ad Donat. post collat. c. 20. in fine.
& so cōmendeth the good, as if they were
all such: and this S. Augustine proueth in
the same chapter out of diuers places of
the holy Scripture.
            4. Our Aduersaries also who would
seeme skillfull and cunning in the Hebrew
and Greeke language, should call to mind

that as well the generall particle amongst
the Hebrews called col,
               De vo
                     ••
                   col, vid
                     •
                   Galat. l. 5. c. 4▪
                as that other which
answereth vnto it in the Greeke 
               
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               , or 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               ,
is often vsed in holy Scripture, not generally
for euery thing without any exception,Ioan Fost. Luth. & Io. Mer. calm. in radice. Calu. in c. 2. ad Philip v. 12. & Beza ibid. & in 1.
but for that which commonly is
wont to be done; as also, non prosingulis generum,
sedpro generibus singulorum, the which
not only the Hebrew Lexicons written by
our Aduersaries themselues doe playnly
demōstrat, but also their chiefe & principall
ringleaders Caluin & Beza. The later
wherof addeth also that we haue obserued,Tim. 2. v. 1. edit. Art. 1565. v. sed. in edit. an. 1598. v. 4. ibid.
that a generall particle is almost in every
leafe of holy Scripture vsed indefinitely.
It is therfore most true which S.
Augustine sayth, that this word (all) in these
kind of places is taken for many, or for
that which was common euery where,
as Caluin and Beza say:Isaiae 1. v. 
                     •
                  . Ozeae 1. v. 1. Amos. 1. v. 1. Mich
                     •
                  . 1. v. 1. for otherwise it
is well inough knowen that in the tyme
of the Prophet Isay there were some holy
Kings, as Ozias, and Ezechias in Iury, as also
those Prophets Ozeas, Amos, and Micheas:
moreouer in the time of Ieremy there liued
the good King Iosias,
               Ieremiae 1. v. 1. Ezechiel. 1. v. 2. Daniel. 1. v. 2. Sophon. 1. v. 1. and the good Prophets
Ezechiel, Daniel, and Sophonias. Therfore
those things which Isay and Hieremy
do say, cannot be vnderstood of all vniuersally.
            
               
5. The other places which our Aduersaries
alleadge,S. August. Tom. 2. Epist 48. ad Vincentium. do proue that there are
at sometymes but a few in the Church,
but, they do not proue that the sayd
Church was inuisible. Yea (as S. Augustine
disputing against the Donatists well
obserueth) when the Church of God is
most vexed with the persecutions of the
wicked, and seemeth to be almost oppressed
therewith, then is she most diuine in
such her members as are renewed for courage
and constancy: for fayth and obedience
towards God was more eminent in
one Noë or Abraham, then in ten thousand
others.
            6. Lastly this our disputatiō is not properly
of the auncient Church which was
before Christs time,Mat. 16. v. 18. but of that which
ensued the promulgation of the Gospell
till this our present age,Eusebius in cronic. Orofius in suahistoria Geneb. in sua conogr Sand. de visib. Monarch. l. 7. in princip. Coccius Tom. 1. lib. 8. Art. 2. whereof Christ
sayth, Vpon this rocke I will build my Church, and
the gates of hell shall not preuaile against it. For
albeit the Church hath beene alwayes visible
euen frō the beginning of the world
till the cōming of Christ, as Paulus, Orosius,
& Eusebius haue, out of the holy Scriptures
in euery age, declared. In this our age also
Genebrard, Sanders, and Coccius haue briefly
demonstrated the same. Yet notwithstanding
before the comming of Christ the

whole Church of God was in a manner
concluded into greater straits of persons
and place,Psal. 75. v. 2. & Psal. 147. v. vlt. according to those words of
the Prophet Dauid, God was knowne in Iury,
& againe, He hath not done thus to euery Nation,
and he hath not manifested, or made knowne his
iudgment vnto them. But amongst the
Gentils there were but a few who acnowledged
and rightly worshipped God.
Wherefore the true Church was often reduced
vnto a few persons in number,S. August. Tom. 2. Epist. 48. ad Vincēt. but
notwithstāding euer visible & those very
eminent in sanctity and holynesse, as is
declared by S. Augustins words already alledged.
But the state and condition of the
Church of Christ is farre differēt after the
promulgatiō of the Gospell frō that other:Genes. 22. v. 18.
for now that blessed seed of Abrahā
                is come,
wherin all the Natiōs of the earth were to
be Blessed. Now those prophecies of Christs
inheritaūce and Kingdomes are fullfilled.Psal. 2. v. 8.
               Aske of me thee & I wil giue, all Nations for thy inheritaunce,
               Psal. 71. v. 8.
               and the bounds of the whole earth for thy
possession. Also, He shall gouerne and reigne from
sea to sea, and from the ryuer to the end of the whole
world. And againe, All the Kings of the earth
shall adore him, and all Nations shall serue him.
Moreouer,Ibid. v. 11. Isay. 52. v. 10. 
               our Lord hath prepared his holy arme
in the eyes of all Nations, and all the limits of the
earth shall see the saluation of our Lord and God.
               
When S. Angustine had alledged this place
among others against the Donatists. admiring
their great madnesse and ignorance
who affirme the Church to be eyther inuisible
or to ly lurking in some od place
only, brake forth into these most true
words worthy of so great a Doctor, who is
sayth he,
               S. August. Tom. 7. de vnite Eccles. c. 7. 
               so deafe, who is so mad, and who is foolish
to contradict these so cleare & euident testimonies,
but he which knoweth not what he speaketh? And
truly that the Church of God was farre
more knowen and spread ouer the whole
world after the promulgation of the Gospell
euen in the Apostles tyme then it euer
was in the tyme of the law, those words
of the Apostle do sufficiently declare. But
Isay, haue they not heard? And certes into all earth
hath the sound of them gone forth, and vnto the
ends of the whole world the wordes of them. And
againe speaking vnto the Romā Church
he sayth,Ad Rom. 10. v. 18. 
               I giue thankes to my God through Iesus
Christ for all of you, because your fayth is renewed
in the whole world.
            
            7. Moreouer from the Apostles
tyme till this our present age,Ad Rom. 1. v. 8. the
Church of Christ hath byn not only visible
but also spread abroad, knowne and
most famous throughout diuers Kingdomes
of the world, as many historiographers,
as well Ecclesiasticall as prophane

doe testify, and the worthy Cardinall Caesar
Boronius hath euidently declared, and that
not only throughout all ages,S. August. Tom. 7, de vnit. Eccles. cap. 7. but also euery
yeare, in so much that those who
do not consent and agree heereunto, are
not only to be accounted Insidels, but as
S. Augustine speaketh very fitly and truely,
men out of their wittes.
            
         
         
            CHAP. VI.
            Other arguments of our Aduersaries
against the visible Church are
confuted.
            THE third argument of our Aduersaries
wherby they impugne
the visible Church, is this: the
holy Scripture compareth the
Church to the moone, but the moone
doth often tymes not appeare, as it hapneth
in the new moone, and in the Ecclips.
I answere that we must not seeke
for a similitude or likenesse in all thinge
                  •
               
betwixt the Church and the moone, for
otherwise the Church of Christ should
neyther see, nor vnderstand, nor belieue,

and it should be altogeather without life
as the moone is. But in this matter that
similitude or liknesse betwixt the Church
and the moone, is only to be sought out,
in which the Scripture compareth the
Church to the moone; but the Scripture
doth not compare the Church to the
moone as she is a mutable planet, but as
she is beautifull in her selfe.Cant. 
                     •
                  . v. 9. 
               Beautifull (saith
Salomon) as the moone, but in mutability the
Scripture compareth a soole to the moone,
but not the Church.Eccles. 27. v. 12. 
               A foole (saith the
Wisemen) is changed as the moone. Moreouer
the Church of Christ is not compared
to euery moone,Isaiae 60. v. 20. but only to the moone,
when she is in her fulnesse & perfection,
yea to the moone which is neuer diminished
nor fayleth: hēce are those words
of the Prophet Isar,
               Calu. in eadem verba. which Caluin acknowledgeth
are to be vnderstood of the
Church, Thy sunne shall neuer more be set, and
thy moone shall not be diminished (or as Caluin
translateth it) shall not be hidden. Lastly S.
Iohn saith, that the moone is vnder the feete of
the Church, that therby we may vnderstād
that the Church of Christ by the vertue
of the sunne (to wit Christ himselfe,
where withall she is wholy inuested and
adorned) is free from all mutability in
matters of faith.Apoe. 12. v. 1.
            
            
               
2. The fourth argument. Those
thinges which we belieue by faith are
inuisible, but by faith we belieue there is
a Catholike Church, as appeareth by the
Apostles Creed, therefore the Catholike
Church is inuisible and not visible. I answere
that this is a weake argument,Calu. l. 4. Inst. c. 1. sect. 2. in principio. albeit
Caluin also vseth it. For if it were not
it would proue that the holy Scripture
were also inuisible, because we belieue
also the holy Scripture by faith, yea it
would also proue euen our Aduersaries
Church to be as yet inuisible, for they as
yet belieue their Church by faith, and
yet they cōfesse that their Church is now
visible. And truely if their Church had
remayned still inuisible, they had neuer
caused so many tumults in the Christian
Common-wealth. But certainly euen as
in the holy Scriptures we see one thinge
and belieue another, we see the letters &
characters, the which the Infidels also see,
but we belieue that the Scripture is most
true in all thinges, the which they do not
belieue: so we se that the Church of Christ
is extant, the which also the Infidels do
see; for Turkes & Iewes do very well know
that there is a Pope, and that there are Bishops,
Princes, and Christian Nations,
but we belieue that this Church which

we see is an holy Church, is gouerned &
directed by the holy Ghost, and that she
cannot erre in matters of faith, all which
the Infidels do not belieue.
            3. The fifth argument. None is in
the Church but by faith, but faith is inuisible,
therfore the Church also inuisible.
I answere that this is a very weake
consequence, for otherwise we might
reason thus; None is a man but by a reasonable
soule, but the soule of man indued
with the vse of reason, is inuisible,
therfore the whole man also is inuisible.
Also, no Scripture is to be accounted holy
but by the authority of God, but this
authority is inuisible, therefore the Scripture
also is inuisible. For it is not necessarie
that a thing may be called visible
that the chiefe part or reason thereof be
visible but it sufficeth if any part therof
be visible, as manifestly appeareth in all
visible, substances, for their chiefe partes,
to wit, their substantiall matter and
forme are thinges inuisible.
            4. Secondly I answere that the faith
wherby a man is made a member of the
visible Church is not only an interiour
faith which is not to be seene, but that
which is euidently seene and declared by
exteriour signes; as for example by confessing

publikely the said faith, by receauing
the Sacraments, and such other exteriour
acts. The which is so true, that
this exteriour profession of our faith only,
without the interiour faith, sufficeth
that a man become a member of the visible
Church,Bell. l. 3. d
                     •
                   militante Eccles. c. 10. as Bellarmine well proueth:
seing that otherwise none could be certaine
of his Prelate or Pastour, because
none can see the faith or mind of āother.
            5. Hence also it is, that not only the
predestinate and iust men are members of
the visible Church, but also such as be hypocrit
                  •
               es
and wicked men who professe
their faith, according to those wordes of
Christ: Euery branch in me, not bearing fruit, he
will take it away, And, if any abide not in me, he
shal
                     •
                  e cast forth:
               Ioan. 15. v. 2. by which words Christ
sheweth that they also who doe not remayne
in him,Ibid. v. 6
                     •
                  
                that is to say, those which
are not predestinate, and those which
do not bring forth any fruit, that is to
say, bad Christians, are in him, that is
to say, in his visible body which is the
Church, the which also almost all our
Aduersaries confesse, as we haue said before,
and Bellarmine proueth more at large.
            6. The sixt argument our Aduersaries
deduce out of the Apocalyps,
               Apoc. 12. v. 6. & 14▪
                wherein
it is said, that a woman inuested with the

sunne which signifieth the true Church,
fled into the desert, and remayned there
for the space of 1260. dayes, that is to
say, as our Aduersaries interpret it, a
thousand two hundred and sixty yeares.
Out of which they infer, that the Church
remayned inuisible as it were in the desert
these thousand two hundred and sixty
yeares last past. I answere, that this is a
vitious argument for many reasons. For
first, it is very absurd, to thinke that the
Church of Christ did ly hidden and inuisible
these thousand two hundred sixty
yeares past. For therupon it would ensue
that the Church of Christ was inuisible
then when it most florished, & was spread
abroad ouer the whole world: as for example
in the tymes of S. Augustine, Ambrose,
Hilary, Athanasius, Hierome, Chrysostome, Cyril
&c. Yea in the tyme also of all the
auncient Councels,Confess. Rupellana Art. 6. the which our Aduersaries
themselues do admit in their
confession of faith. For all these Fathers
and ancient Councells, haue byn within
the space of the forsaid thousand two
hundred and sixty yeares, the which our
Aduersaries do account from Pope Siluester
till Luthers tyme, wherfore this place of
the Apocalyps is not to be vnderstood of
yeares, but literally of daies only.
            
               
7. Moreouer it is not certain that by this
word (desert) is vnderstood any solitary
place, or such as is depriued of all the society
or comfort of men.Primasius in cap. 12. Apocal. For Primasius S.
Augustines scholler saith, that by the foresayd
word is signified the whole world,
the which also that desert signified
through the which the Children of Israel
passed before they came to the land of
Promise:Nu
                     ••
                  r. 14. v. 34. Euen as by the sayd land of
Promise was also signified the euerlasting
lyfe. Some others will haue the foresayd
word (desert) to signify a departure or
forsaking of all sinnes and vices, and all other
pleasures of this world, according to
that saying of the Prophet Osee. I will carry
and lead her into the desert,
               Osee. v. 14. 
               and I 
                     •
                  ill speake vnto
her hart. And that of Dauid, Behould flying
away,
               Psalm, 1
                     •
                   v. 8. 
               I went farre off, and I remayned in the
desert.
            
            8. Lastly albeit we should graunt
that this desert were some wyld or forsaken
place, yet neuerthelesse it could not
be gathered thereby, that the Church of
Christ eyther was, or euer shalbe inuisible.
For neyther this womā which fled into
the wildernesse, signifyeth th
                  •
                whole
Church of Christ, but some one famous
Church the which Antichrist shal persecute
most of all, because it will strongly oppose

it selfe against his impiety and wickednesse.
And in the end of the forsaid vision
S. Iohn playnly affirmeth,Apoc. 12. v. 17. that the Dragon
after the deliuery of that woman shall
make warre against the rest of her seede
who keep the commandmēts of God, and
haue the testimony of Iesus Christ: therfore
besides that woman there willbe some
out of the desert who will publikely professe
the true faith of Christ, against whom
for that cause the Dragon will fight.
            9. But that we may now conclude
this controuersy of the visible Church,
seing that Christ our Lord came into this
world that he might make open and
knowen the way to eternall sauation not
to one Nation or age only, but inded to
the whole world and all posterity, it is
a very absurd thing to thinke that this
one only way to eternall saluatiō which
is the true Church of Christ, remayned
hidden and vnknowen to all Nations for
so many ages past.
         
         
            
            CHAP. VII.
            That this visible true Church of Christ
cannot erre in matters of
fayth.
            NOTHING can be sayd more absurdly,
thē that the true Church
of Christ can erre in matters of
fayth, and yet there is nothing
which the Sectaries of this tyme do hold
and defend with greater pertinancy, not
without iust cause, for they see very well
that it cannot be denyed, but that the true
Church of Christ hath for these many
yeares past remayned still among Catholikes
only visible, as afterward we shall
more clearly declare: but if they should
also graunt that this visible Church cannot
erre, they should ouerthow themselues
by their owne confession, Wherefore to
the end they may still haue some corner
or hole to slip out at, they affirme, that the
true Church of Christ both hath erred,
& still doth erre in points of faith. Then
the which nothig certainly is more absurd,
especially seing that they affirme
that it hath erred not in things of small

moment, but in the principall and chiefest
poynts of fayth, which are playnly necessary
to eternall saluation; yea also that it
hath fallen into manifest Idolatry. Moreouer,
that it hath not only fayled & staggered
in fayth, & hath publikely taught
many errors against fayth, but hath also
compelled and forced by threats and torments
all to Idolatry. And lastly that
it hath donne thus, not only for the
space of one yeare, but for a thousand or
at least 900. yeares. All which how absurd
they are, we will now declare.
            2. But to the end that all which we
are to say hereafter of this matter may be
the better vnderstood, we must note heere
that when we affirme that the Church
cannot erre in fayth, that by this word
(fayth) we vnderstand not only that inuisible
fayth which is in our mind, but also
visible, that is to say, the publike doctrine
of the whole Church, which is proposed
or set downe to be belieued of all. Wherfore
when we affirme, that the Church
cannot erre in matters of fayth, we affirme
also, that the doctrine or points of fayth,
the which the Church of God setteth
downe as the most certayne and vndoubted
word of God, cannot be false, but the
very word of God it selfe, which I will

clearly declare by these arguments.
            3. The first argument is deduced out
of all those properties and offices of the
true Church before alledged out of Scripture.Supra 
                     〈◊〉
                   ipsa Controuers. c. 1.
For the true fayth being once taken
away, all the foresayd properties of the
Church must needes perish, and all her
offices must cease. For the Church cā neyther
be the spouse of Christ, nor the body,
nor the Kingdome, nor the inheritance,
nor the tēple of Christ without faith, but
neyther can the Church without faith &
the true doctrine therof, eyther conceyue,
bring forth, nourish, gouerne, or defend
Christ
                  •
               es flocke. And in this manner the
church of Christ for so many ages had lost
all her properties,Supra eadō c. 1. huius Controu. & had intermitted all
her proper offices, contrary to so many
and so cleare promises of holy wit
                  •
                before
alleadged.
            4. The second argument is deduced
out of most cleare testimonyes of holy
Scripture, which teach, that the Church
cānot erre in faith. For first Christ himself
affirmeth,Matth. 16. v. 18. that the gates of hell shall not preuaile
against the Church. But if the Church could
erre in faith, the gates of hell for so many
ages past had preuailed against her.
            5. Moreouer God speaketh thus by
his Prophet Isay of the Couenant of theIsaiae 59. v. vlt.
               
new Testament. This is my league with them
saith our Lord, my spirit which is in thee, and my
words which I haue put in thy mouth, shall not depart
out of thy mouth, & out of the mouth of thy seed,
& out of the mouth of the seeds seed, saith our Lord,
frō hence forth euen to the worlds end. But in our
A
                  •••
               rsaries opiniō the words which God
hath put into the mouth of the Church,
had departed many ages out of her mouth.1. ad Tim. 3. v. 9.
            
            6. Lastly the Apostle affirmeth, that
the Church is the Pillar and stability of truth.
But if the Church could erre in faith, and
teach publikely against the word of God,
it should be the Pillar rather of falshood
then of truth. Some of our Aduersaries
do āswere vnto this place, that the Church
is called indeed the Pillar of truth, because
it doth not erre when it followeth,
and is agreable vnto the word of God,
yet neuerthelesse it erreth when it disagreeth
from the word of God. But this
is a very friuolous answere. For according
vnto this interpretation▪ euery Church of
Heretickes, of Iewes, Turkes, yea of the Diuels
themselues should be the Pillar of truth.
For none of these erreth, when it is agreable
to the word of God. But a Pillar is
that which necessarily and alwaies vpholdeth
that which it strenghtneth, and
whose pillar it is: wherfore the Church

should not be the Pillar of truth, vnlesse
it alwaies sticke and be ioyned with the
truth and vphould it.Calu. l. 4. Inst. c. 2. sect. 1. in fine. 
               Caluin therfore
conuinced by the euidency of the truth
writeth, that if true Church be the Pillar of truth,
it is most certaine that the Kingdome where lyes &
falshood reygneth, cannot be the true Church.
Thus Caluin.
            
            7. The third argument is deduced
out of diuers Absurdities which ensue
out of the doctrine of our Aduersaries.
The first adsurdity is, that the Apostles
Creed were false wherin we belieue the
holy Catholike Church. For that Church
cannot be holy which wanteth the true
faith, which teacheth falsities and wickednes,
which forceth all men to Idolatry.
            
            8. The second absurdity is, that Christ
himselfe and the holy Ghost should erre
and teach thinges both false and wicked.
For the doctrine of the Church is not so
much the doctrine of the Church as it is
of Christ & of the holy Ghost,Luc. 10. v. 16. 
               VVho heareth,
you (saith Christ) heareth me:
               Ioan 14. v. 26. and in another
place;Act. 15. v. 28. 
               The Paraclete the holy Ghost whome
my Father will send you in my name, he will teach
you all thinges. And the Apostles said, It seemeth
good to the holy Ghost, and to vs. Lastly
God himself by his Prophet speaking vnto
the Church affirmeth, that his holy Spirit

is in the Church, and that he hath put his words
into the mouth of the Church, which shall neuer
be taken out of her mouth, from henceforth till the
end of the world. Wherefore if the Church
could erre in the doctrine of faith, Christ
also, the holy Ghost, and God himselfe
should erre.
            9. The third absurdity is, that a building
could cōsist & stand without a foū
               dation.
For the sayth of Christ is the foū
               dation
of the Church, if yet, sayth the
Apostle,ad Collos. 1. v. 2
                     •
                  . you continue in the sayth grounded
and stable. And in another place he
teacheth, that the Church is grounded vpon
the doctrine of the Apostles and Prophets:ad Ephes. 2. v. 20.
but the foundation being taken
away, the building must needs fall. This
absurdity is so manyfest, that it forced Caluin
to confesse this very truth which now
we teach to be euidently conuinced out
of S. Pauls words.Calu. l. 4. Instit. c 2. sect. 1. 
               If, sayth he, the doctrine
of the Apostles and Prophets be the foundation of the
Church, take away that doctrine, and how can the
building stand? Thus Caluin.
            
            10. The fourth absurditie is, that
the true Church should consist and be
without her prop
                  •
               r and essentiall forme,
no otherwise then if one should say, that
a true and liuing man might consist and
be without his soule. For the true fayth

and the true preaching thereof, are as it
were the essentiall formes of the Church.Calu. l. 4. Instit. c. 2. sect 11.
               Caluin also acknowledgeth this absurdity
when he writeth, that the fayth of the
Church being taken away, there must
needes follow the vtter ouerthrow of
religion, euen as the life of man is ouerthrowen
and taken away, if he be stabbed
with a dagger, or deadly wounded at the
hart.
            11. The fourth argument is deduced
out of the manifest contradictions which
follow of the contrary doctrine. For they
who cōtēd that the true church of Christ
doth erre in fayth, do not indeed know
what they say: for that is the only true
Church of Christ which retayneth and kepeth
still the name, & the sincere fayth of
Christ; but that is the fal
                  •
               e Church of Christ
which only professeth the name of Christ
but erreth in fayth. Wherefore to say that
the Church of Christ erreth in fayth, is all
one, as to say, that the true Church is not
the true Church, but the false, which implieth
a contradiction.
            12. The fift argument is deduced
out of those things which our Aduersaries
do graunt vnto vs.Infra. 
                     •
                  . 18. huius Controu. For the common
doctrine of our Aduersaries is, as we
will shew hereafter, that the sincere preaching

of the word of God, and lawfull
administration of Sacraments, are the
markes and signes of the true Church,
without which it cannot consist: therfore
it necessarily followeth, that they must
also admit that the true Church cannot
erre in fayth, and in the true preaching of
the word of God. For that Church cānot
sincerely preach the word of God who
fouly erreth in points of fayth, and in the
true preaching therof.Calu. l. 4. Inst. cap. 2. sect. 1. & cap. 8. sect. 12. & 13. 
               Caluin also out of
diuers places of Scripture doth proue that
it is a false Church and not a true which
erreth in the principall points of fayth,
and 
                  •
               he acknowledgeth, that the true
Church cannot erre therein,Beza in l. de Ec
                     •
                  les. notis. volum. 3. Tract. Theolog. they being
necessary to saluation. Beza in like manner
writeth, that the true Church cannot
erre in the chiefe poyntes of fayth, albeit
he saith that it erreth in lesser matters, the
which distinction of poynts of fayth he
hath takē out of Caluin. The Church therfore
cānot erre at the least in chiefe points
of faith,Calu. l. 4. Instit. c. 1. sect. 12. euē in our Aduersaries iudgmēts.
            13. Our Aduersaries heape togeather
a great many of arguments, but they
are such as may easily be answered. For
wher
                  •
                as they know that their arguments
are but weake and almost nothing wor
                  •
               h▪
they endeauour by the multitude thereof

to oppresse the truth, or at the least to obscure
& 
                  •
               ide it. Many of them when they
manifestly see, that it is impossible that
the true Church can consist or be without
faith, they craftily feygne that the
Controuersy betwixt vs is not of this
matter,Calu. l. 4. Inst. cap. 2. sect. 1. but of some other far different,
that is to say, of that vvhereof none euer
doubteth: so dealeth Caluin with vs.
For when he had confessed that to be the
false Church and not the true which erreth
in principall poynts of fayth, & consequently
that the true Church cannot
erre herein, as out of his owne words we
haue already declared, at the last he feigneth
that the controuersy in this matter
is not whether the Church can erre or no,
but whether she may erre, if she take not
for her companion the word of God;Calu. l. 4. Instit. c. 8. sect. 13. & 15.
and that we affirme, that whatsoeuer she
shall decree eyther without or besids the
word of God, that the same is to be
accounted as a most certayne oracle of
God. But that he and his affirme, that
therefore the Church cannot erre because
it permitteth it selfe to be directed
and gouerned by the sayd word of God,
and because it teacheth nothing but out
of the word of God. But this is a meere
slander. F
                  •
               or there can no Catholike be

found, who doth not acknowledge that
the Church permitteth it selfe to be directed
in all things by the word of God,
seing that the sole word of God is the obiect
of 
                  •
               aith,Supra Controu. 1. c. 2. as we haue sayd be
                  •
               ore: wherfore
the true Church proposeth nothing
els vnto vs to be belie
                  •
               ued with a Catholike
fayth, but the most sincere and true
word of God. But in this matter only is
the controuersy betwixt vs and our Aduersaries,
that they acknowledg only the
written word of the holy Scripture to be
the true word of God: but we not only
acknowledge the written word,Supra Controu. 1. c. 25. & sequent. but also
that which was preached and deliuered
vnto vs by Christ and his Apostles:
Wherof we haue said inough in the precedent
disputation.
            14. Some others by friuolous distinctions
endeauour to hyde this their error,
and to obscure and darken most cleare
& perspicuous matters: wheras notwithstanding
in very truth they can say nothing
els but that which we haue already
taught. For they inuent and imagine
a twofold Church,Philip. de Mornay Tract. de Eccles. 
                     ••
                  p. 2. the one pure, the other
impure, wherein they place euen
Heretikes themselues: this which is impure,
say they, erreth in faith, but not that
which is pure. But we acknowledge only

one holy & Catholik Church of Christ
with the Creed of the Apostles, & that of
the Councel of Nice, & we willingly yield
vnto them their impure Church, wherin
the Heretikes are. For none doubteth but
that such a Church may erre. But as this
is a false & not the true Church of Christ;
so of it, is not this present Controuersy,
but only of the true and pure Church of
Christ.
            15. Others distinguish the Church
into visible and inuisible, and they say,
that the inuisible Church cannot erre, but
the visible may erre.Supra h
                     ••
                   i
                     •
                  sa Cont. cap. 4. But we haue now
already declared, that the true Church of
Christ must needes be visible. Wherfore
this distinction is now sufficiently refuted.
And truly it importeth but a little
whether that their inuisible Church can
erre or not erre, seing that it cannot be
seene or knowne of any, and consequently
cannot be profitable vnto any.
            16. There are also some of the later
Sectaries who distinguish, and deuide the
Church,Iunius 
                     〈◊〉
                   Dell
                     •
                  m. Contr 1. l. 4. c. 10. not
                     •
                   8. into the Church of the Saints which
are in Heauen, and into that which remayneth
fighting heere vpon earth. And they
say, that the Church triumphāt of Saints
cannot erre in faith, or in the doctrine of
faith: but the Church militant may erre.

But this is a ridiculous distinction.Ad Habr. 21. v. 1. First
because the Saints haue not fayth but a
cleare vision of God, for as the Apostle
witnesseth, Fayth concerneth things
which doe not appeare: wherefore if at
any tyme faith perished vpon earth, without
al doubt it could not be 
                  •
               ound in heauen,
neyther must we expect the doctrine
of fayth from heauen, as the Anabaptists doe
who seeke for reuelations from heauen
                  •
               ,
but we must looke to receiue it from the
Church militant vpon earth.Supra c. 1. bu
                     •
                  us controuersiae. Moreouer
the properties and offices of the Church
of Christ before alledged out of holy Scripture
do not agree, as is manifest, to the
Church triumphant of Saints, but to the
Church militāt vpon earth. For neither is
that Church of the Saints betrothed vnto
Christ by fayth, neyther are the Saynts
those who preach vnto vs the word of
God, who administer the Sacramēts vnto
vs, & who execute the other offices of the
Church, but men liuing vpō earth, wherfore
they runne in vaine to this heauenly
Church wherof we do not heere dispute.
            17. Moreouer that is also a very
weake reason,Iunius ibid. nota 
                     •
                  . wherby they thinke that
they conuince, that the Church militant
vpon earth may erre. This Church (sayth
he) militant vpon earth, is imperfect, and therfore

the may erre euen in explicating the doctrine of
fayth,1. ad Corinth. 13. pertotum caput. for otherwise a perfect effect might proceed
from an imperfect cause. So he. As though
forsooth, there could be no other imperfection
in the Church besid
                  •
                infidelity or
error in explicating the doctrine of fayth,
or as though the whole perfection of the
Church consisted in fayth only, and in the
doctrine thereof, and not also in charity
and other giftes of God, as the Apostle
declareth at large. Or lastly, as though this
perfection of the Church which consisteth
in a right fayth, and a good explication
of the doctrine thereof, could proceede
from the militant Church only,
and not rather from a most perfect cause,
to wit,Ad Rom▪ 8. v. 2
                     •
                  . from the holy Ghost who continually
gouerneth the Church, and as
the Apostle sayth, helpeth her infirmity
and imperfection.
            18. Lastly when our Aduersaries
can by no places of Scripture nor other
reasons proue,Ita Philip? Morn. that the Church hath erred
they goe about to perswade it by many
examples.Tract. de. Eccles. cap. 6. And heere they begin a discourse
frō our first Father Adam till these
our dayes.Genes. 3. v. 
                     •
                  . For first they say, that Adam 
               
                  •
               ost
his fayth, and so lyke wyfe his wyfe Eue,
when they both eate of the forbidden
fruit, & consequently the whole Church

then erred in fayth. Then they runne
through all the old testament till Christs
tyme, and heap togeather many places
which say, that those who liued in the
tyme of the Naturall & Mosaycall Laws, forsooke
God. Lastly out of some Historiographers
who haue writtē since Christs tyme,
they sc
                  ••
               pe togeather all such testimonies
as seeme to serue to this purpose in any
sort.
            19. But they labour in vayne. For
if these kinds of argumēts were good they
would also proue that the Church it selfe
also wholy perished; and was not to be
found in any place, as in tymes past the
Donatists contended, the which euen our
Aduersaries themselues acknowledge to
by very absurd, and against the holy Scriptures
as hath beene declared before. For
if all haue lost their fayth, then indeed the
true▪ Church could no longer be, which
without fayth cannot consist: and thus
the whole Church had perished.
            20. But that which they affirme of Adā
               
and Eue, to wit, that they lost their fayth
by sinning, is of no moment at all. For
to omit that they do not so much proue
by that argumēt that they lost their fayth,
then that after their sinne there remayned
neyther any fayth, nor Church in the

world, it is truly manyfest inough that
this belongeth nothing to this disputation
we now handle. For neyther do we
heere disput of the Church of Angells,
nor of that which was in Paradise before
the fall of our first parēts:Genes. 
                     •
                  . 
                     •
                  . 15. but of that only
which ensued that promise made vnto
all mankind after the sinne of Adam▪
               
wherein God foretould that there should
be perpetuall enmity betwixt the woman
and the serpent, that is to say, betwixt
the Church of Christ and Satan. And
wherein also God foretould, that the
Church should alwayes haue the victory
ouer Sathan,Supra. cō
                  tro. 1. cap. 16, 17. & 18. as we haue declared more at
larg before. Wherfore our Aduersaries
must needes shew this promise to be frustrate,
if they desire to conclude any thing
against vs.
            21. But those examples which they
alledge out of the old Testament are the
very arguments of the Donatists and other
auncient Heretikes, who by them went
about to proue, that the true Church
wholy decayed and perished, wherunto
we haue also sufficiently answered out of
S. Augustine.
               Supra cap. 5. in solut. 2. argument.
            
            22. And lastly those thinges which
they haue takē out of those Authors who
wrote after Christs tyme, are eyther corrupted

by our Aduersaries, or taken out
of apochriphall Authors,Baron. in 12. Tom. Annal. and such as are
not worthy of credit: as the worthy Cardinall
Baronius declareth manifestly in
euery age, in his Ecclesiasticall histories:
and the same hath Bellarmine donne before
him more briefly,
                  
                     〈◊〉
                  . l. 3. de Eccles. militante. vnto whome we
refer the Reader, because they do not appertaine
to this present question, but rather
vnto that which is of the continuall
duration of the Church, the which now
almost euery one doth acknowledge,Supra c. 3. & 4. 
                     〈◊〉
                   Contr. and
which we haue sufficiently declared before:
wherefore these arguments are of so
small worth, that they need no longer a
confutation.
         
         
            
            CHAP. VIII.
            That there is no lawfull calling of Preachers,
or Pastours of the Church, but
by the visible Church.
            ONE of the offices of the true
Church is to appoint lawfull
preachers of the Ghospell and
true administers of the Sacraments.
But because there is no small
Controuersy now a dayes concerning
this office, we will briefely dispatch
it. But to the end that which is in Controuersy
may the better be vnderstood,
heere are three thinges to be determined.
First, that the calling of God is necessarily
required, to the end one may become
a lawfull preacher, or administer the Sacraments.Ad Rom. 10. v. 15. Ad Hebr. 3. v. 4. & 5.
For those words of the Apostle
are very cleare and manifest. How shall they
preach, vnlesse they be sent? And againe. Neyther
doth any man take the honour to himselfe, but
he that is called of God, as Aaron. So Christ also
did not glorify himselfe, that he might be made a
high Priest but he that spake to him,
               Psal. 2. v. 7. 
               My sonne art
thou &c. Wherefore he who without this
lawfull calling and mission dareth presume

to intrude himself to meddle with
these diuine offices, preferreth himself before
Christ our Lord. For Christ came not
to these offices, but called and sent by his
eternall Father. Lastly if in humane and
wordly matters none dare meddle with
the affaires or busynes of a Prince without
his licence and consent, much lesse
must any deale with these supernaturall
and diuine offices, vnlesse he be called
and sent for that purpose by God himselfe.
            2. The second is, that there are two
kinds of callings by God, the one extraordinary,
the other ordinary. The extraordinary
calling is when God immediatly
by himselfe calleth any, & in this māner
God called Moyses, & the other Prophets, &
Christ called his Apostles. This is called
extraordinary, because it seldome hapneth.
It is tearmed also an immediate vocatiō,
because it is done immediatly by God
himselfe. The ordinary vocation is that
which cōtinueth alwaies in the Church
and is done immediatly by the Pastors of
the Church, and of God only by their
meanes. Hereupon also this is called a
mediate vocatiō, to wit in respect of God.
This diuision is taken out of S. Paul, who
writeth himselfe to be an Apostle, not of

men, neyther by man, but by Iesus Christ, and God
the Father.
               ad Gal. 1. v. 1. For by these wordes he sheweth
that some which are in the Church are
called to the diuine offices by me
                  •
               , and
some by God himselfe.
            3. The third is, that those who are
taken to Ecclesiasticall offices by the ordinary
vocation they receyue their calling
and authority from the Church. For this
ordinary vocation is not done but by the
ministers of the Church. But the whole
Controuersy is of the extraordinary vocation.
For those who in this age haue
brought in new opinions, seeing themselues
destitute of the ordinary vocation,
they fly vnto the extraordinary, the
which, say they, must not be subiect to
the censure, and approbation of the
Church, wherof they know themselues
to be destitute. But we of the other side
affirme, that the extraordinary vocation
also must necessarily be confirmed and
approued by such as haue ordinary vocation
in the Church of God. And we
know very well, that our Aduersaries
haue not truly this extraordinary vocation,
as afterward we will declare more
at large. But suppose we graunt them to
haue this extraordinary calling, neuerthelesse
by these ensuing arguments we will

manifestly proue, that it must needs be
confirmed and approued by those who
haue their ordinary vocation in the
Church of God.
            4. The first argument.Ad Galat. 
                     •
                  . v. 1. 
               S. Paul was
immediatly and extraordinarily called by
God, as he writeth himselfe, and yet he
was sent to Anainas who had the ordinary
vocation,Act. 9. v. 7. that by him he might be instructed
and baptized. And afterwards
together with S. Barnabas he was ordained
by the imposition of hands by those
who were the ordinary Pastors of the
Church.Act. 13. v. 
                     •
                  . Lastly he writeth, that according
to the reuelation which he had,v. 1. & 2. he
went to Ierusalem, and conferred the Gospell
which he preached, with the visible Church
and ordinary Pastors of the same, least he
might seeme to haue runne, or laboured in vaine:
they therefore who refuse the approbation
of the visible Church, albeit they
be neuer so extraordinarily called therunto,
they doe but labour in vayne.
            5. The second argument▪ We m
                  •
               st
not easily beleeue euery one who affirmeth
himselfe to be extraordinarily sent
by God,v. Ioan. 4. 
                     •
                  . 1. according to that admonition
of S. Iohn. Belieue not euery spirit, but proue the
spirits whether they be of God▪ because many false
Prophets are gone out into the world. But this

proofe or triall cannot be better done
then by Christs Church, which, is as S.
Paul writeth,
                  
                     •
                  . ad Tim. 3. v. 15. the pillar, and ground of truth.
The which also S. Iohn clearly sheweth
by the words following, when he sayth,
he that knoweth God heareth vs, he that is not of
God,
               1. Ioan. 4. v. 
                     •
                  . 
               heareth vs not: in this we know the spirit of
truth, and the spirit of error. It is therefore a
most certayne rule whereby this extraordinary
vocation is examined, to demaund,
whether it will submit it selfe
to the approbation of the visible Church,
and will heare her or no? For he who
heareth the Church, hath the spirit of
truth, and the true extraordinary vocation,
but he who will not heare the
Church, hath the spirit of error and the
false extraordinary vocation.
            6. The third argument. The holy
Ghost neuer contradicteth himselfe, for
otherwise (which God forbid) he should
not be the spirit of truth, but of falshood
for truth is neuer repugnant to truth but
to falshood: seeing that therfore it is manifest
that the ordinary vocation is from
the holy Ghost, that extraordinary cannot
be opposit vnto it which is truly
from the holy Ghost. For otherwise God
should be opposit vnto himselfe, which
were impiety to thinke; wherfore it necessarily

followeth, that the extraordinary
vocation must agree with the ordidinary,
and be subiect vnto it, as also
it must establish and confirme, but not
impugne it.1. ad Cor. 14. v. 32. Hereupon sayth the Apostle,
the spirits of the Prophets are subiect to the
Prophets: if they be subiect to the Prophets,
much more to the whole Church of
Christ.
            7. The fourth argument. There
would arise a greate confusion in the
Church of God, if euery one were permitted
to preach and administer the Sacraments,
that should affirme himselfe
to be extraordinarily called without any
other examine or approbation of the
Church. For so euery phantasticall fellow
might freely bragge and affirme
himselfe to be extraordinarily called by
God. And vnder that pretence and title
might preach, administer the Sacraments
and exercise all other Ecclesiasticall
offices.Calu. l. 4. Inst. cap. 3. sect. 14. Beza c. 5. suae confess.
            
            8. By these arguments some more
learned amongst our Aduersaries being
conuinced, do acknowledge, that all extraordinary
vocation should be examined
and approued by the ordinary Pastors of
Christs Church.Artic. 28. Bulling. decad. 5. Serm. 4. But they adde moreouer
that this is true when the Church it selfe

followeth the word of God, and as long
as the ordinary vocation remaineth in
her. But in vayne do they adde these conditions,Supra
                     •
                  c. prcedent▪ ad Ephes. 4. v. 12. & 13.
because we haue already proued
that the true Church alwayes followeth
the word of God, nor can departe or decline
in any sort from it. For otherwise
she were not the true Church of God, but
the Sinagogue of Satan. And the Apostle
also expresly saith, that the ordinary vocatiō
of Pastors & their continuall successiō
shall remayne alwayes in the Church of
God vntill we meete all with Christ in
the end of the world.Calu. & Beza in 
                     〈◊〉
                   verba ad Ephes. Item Calu. l. 4. Inst. c. 3. sect. 4. in Art. 25. By which wordes
of the Apostle Caluin also and Beza being
conuinced do confesse, that there must alwaies
be Pastors and Doctors in the
Church of God, and that the said Church
cannot consist without them. The same
also their confession made at Rochell acknowledgeth
in the 25. article.
            9. Some of our Aduersaries doe
heere obiect vnto vs the example of Christ
and his Apostles, for, say they, their doctrine
was neuer approued by the aunciēt
Church of the Iewes, whereas notwithstanding
it was extraordinary. But this
is a very friuolous and odious comparisō
of Christ and his Apostles with their ministers.
For it was expressely foretould

by the Prophets that Christ was to abr
                  •
               
               gate
the old Law, and the carnal vocation
and succession thereof,Ierem. 31. v. 31. & 3
                     •
                  . Isaiae 
                     •
                  . v. 
                     •
                  . 10. Malach. 2. v. 10. 11. Pal 109. v. 4. ad Heb. 7. v. 18. & cap. 8. v. 8. 23. and that he
was to ordayne another more excellent
and spirituall, the which he effected indeed.
Wherefore seing that now the Apostles
had another farre more excellent
vocation instituted by Christ, there was
no reason they should aske any vocation
from Moyses. But we read no where that
the vocation ordayned by Christ was
to be abrogated by any other whosoeuer▪
but contrarywise the holy Scriptures do
plainly teach that the vocation ordayned
by Christ should endure till the end of
the world:Matth. 28. v. vlt. Ad Ephes. 4. v. 2. & 
                     •
                  3. wherefore our Aduersaries can
proue nothing by this argument, vnlesse
they will bring in, and establish another
Messias, and a new Law-maker, who hath
authority to abrogate and chaunge the
law and vocation of Christ, which is the
blasphemy of both Turkes and Iewes.
            
            FINIS.
            
         
      
   