
      
         
            
            
            AN EXPOſition of certayne words of S. Paule, to the Romaynes, entiteled by an old wryter Hugo.
            A TREATISE OF the Workes of three dayes.
            
               Alſo an other Worke of the truth of Chriſtes naturall body.
            
            
               By Richarde Coorteſſe Doctor of Diuinitie, and Biſhop of Chicheſter.
            
            (⸪)
            ¶ Imprinted by Wylliam Brome. 1577.
         
         
            
            
            ¶ To the Chriſtian Reader.
            
               
                  HAVING INTELlygence of a certayne worke done out of laten into Engliſh, by the learned Father, the lord Biſhop of Chich
                  •
               ſter, at the requeſt of a learned & vertuous Ladye. And alſo vnderſtanding of an other treatiſe touching the truth of Chriſt his naturall body, made by him, both of them ſecretly going among ſome good men, who were greatlye delighted with the reading of the ſame: We labored by almeanes poſſible to obtayne the coppy of the ſayd 
                  •
               o
                  •
               ke, as well for the ſing
                  ••••
               r commendation that went of the exceliē
               cie of the matter as alſo for the worthineſſe of the perſon, who had trauailed therein, whoſe iudgement we know, to be ſuch, as could make beſt choyſy of arguments, and learning ſo profound, as might moſt clearckly bewtify the ſame.
            And peruſing the ſayd worke exactly,

as we found it both in ſubſtaunce & alſo in handling, aunſwerable to the reports geuen abroade thereof: ſo we thought it very meete, that the ſame ſhould be publiſhed to the commodity of many, which now being ſhutte vp in certayne mens kéeping, did profyte but a few.
            In the ſaid worke there is notably ſet forth, the maieſtie, the power & might of the eternall and euerlaſting GOD, the whole diſcourſe whereof ſéemeth to bee grounded vpon the words of S. Paule, in his Epiſtle to the Romaynes, the firſt Chapter.
            
               That the inuiſible thinges of God are from the beginning of the world, knowen by the viſible things made of God. his euerlaſting power alſo and diuinitie. So it conteineth very delightfull & alſo much profytable matter to the Chriſtian and Godly reader, in theſe dayes.
            The other treatiſe, intreating of the true preſence of the moſt ſacred, bleſſed and natural bodie of our ſauiour Chriſt, is a Jewell ſo precieus, of ſo great eſtimation and value, with each true Chriſtian,

that we thincke al men will more deſyre to reade the worke, then to heare the commendation thereof.
            Now touching the perſon, the fruites of whoſe ſtudy and paynes, we haue oftentimes heretofore, and doe now alſo reape to our great comforte, we thought good both for truth ſake, which euerye man is bound in cōſcience to mayntein, & alſo for confutation of ſuch bad & ſlaunderous ſpéeches, as by ſome lewde and euel diſpoſed people are ſpred at tables, Alehouſes, and ſuch other odde places, agaynſt ſo graue, wyſe, learned, & vertuous a paſtour, & alſo to ſet downe ſuch good vertues to the view of the world, as we of our aſſured and proper knoweledge haue experienced to be in him.
            And for that the glory of God is chiefly and principally to be ſet forth, by extirpation of ſtrange and irronious opynyons, and by planting of true religion, through dilligēt preaching, and teaching of the word of god: F
                  〈…〉
               ſt ouer and beſids his ordinary preaching vpon Sondayes and Holidayes, he hath gone thrée times

through this whole Dioceſſe of Ch
                  •
               cheſter (which is almoſt foureſcore myles in length) preaching himſelf at the greateſt townes, and many learned Preachers with him in other places: And this laſt Sommer was accepted of the ſubſtaunce, both of gentlemen preachers and people of the whole ſhire excéeding well, and in ſuch ſorte as the like hath not bene ſeene in the memory of man, to any of the calling in this countrey: Notwithſtanding, that there wāted not ſome, though not many, which priuily both by fayre meanes & foule, laboured the contrary.
            And whereas it was a rare thing before his time, to heare a learned Sermō in Suſſex, now the pulpittes in moſte places ſounde contynually with ye voyce of learned and Godly Preachers, he him ſelfe as Duxgregis, geuing good example vnto the reſt in ſo graue & learned manner, that the people with ardent zeale wonderfull reioycing, & in great number take farre and long iorneyes, to bée pertakers of his good and godly leſſons.
            
               We are aſſured, and the moſt irreligious and backwarde perſones that are acquaynted with his proceedinges, cannot but confeſſe (excepte they will willingly ſpeake agaynſt their owne Conſetences) that the 
                  •
               ooting out of bad and vnlearned Curattes, and the planting of zealous and learned Preachers, hath bene occaſion to him of great expenſes & charge: And ſo within theſe ſixe yeres, he hath brought into this Dioceſſe, and preferred, or ben the meanes of the preferring of twenty Preachers, which be well able to preache in anye learned Audience in this realme: And by the dilligent preaching and other excerciſyng of himſelf, and theſe in the ſcriptures, hath trayned vp a. xl. more, in ſuch ſort, that they be ſufficiente ynough to preach to any ordinary Audyence: and almoſte euery miniſter by hearing of theſe and ſuch trauayle in the Scriptures, as they haue bene by the ſayd paſtour, and other his officers put vnto, be growne ſo rype in the Scriptures, that they can and doe, ſo painfully, diligently▪
               
and competently inſtructe the ſimple ſorte in the principles of Religion, that euen children can now geue a better an accoumpt of the true fayth, thē in times paſt ſuch as were reputed great clearks could haue done.
            But becauſe it is not ynough to deliuer vnto the people of GOD holſome and godly doctrine, but alſo to confirme the ſame by example of good and vertuous life, how well he hath trauayled in both the ſuppreſſinge of Macheuils, Papiſtes, Libertines, Atheiſts, and ſuche other erronious perſons, the maynteyning of pore fatherleſſe children againſt the oppreſſor, y• pro
                  •
               ecting of widdowes from the vyolent, the releaſing of ſtrangers for the Goſpels ſake, the puniſhing of Fornicators & adulterers, the withſtanding of robbers and Pyrates, the reſtrayning of ſuch as vnnaturally carry away grayne, victuals, and other the commodities of the Realme, to foſter ſuch as be knowen enemies to GOD, and doubted to this gouernment, and the méeting with ſ
                  •
               moniacall practiſes

are a ſufficient teſtimony.
            For the which good déedes (ſuch is the malice of Sathan and 
                  •
               is 
                  •••
               s) moſt bitter and bad ſpéeches are throwne out againſt hym: yea, and certayne hyred and ſuborned to go from Noble man, to Noble man, from Juſticiaris, to Juſticiaris, from common table, to common table, and to be briefe, from place and perſon, to place and perſon, to carrye ſuch tales & ſurmiſes as the enformer knoweth to be falſe, and the reporter is méere ignorant of.
            But the ſcholler is not aboue hys maſter, and the worlde is ſuch that diſſembling Phariſes, godleſſe Saduces, Epicures, and ſuch other offenders and fauourers of offenders in the premiſſes, will euer hate thoſe that ſerue God and their prince dutifully.
            And ſurely we for our partes, haue oftentimes wondered at his conſtancie and pacience, that wheras we ſee others ſo ouercome with importunity of ſlaū
               derous and infamous reportes, & great enemies, when he heareth any lowde

and opprobrious ſpéeches ſpreade of him, he is no whitt
                  •
                mooued, but onely aunſwereth, it is for doyng my duetie: My mayſter Chriſt eſcaped not euill tongues, and ſaint Paule counſelleth vs to go on by good reportes, and euill reportes, 
                  
                     〈…〉
                  malis vituperari lauda
                     •
                  i eſt, And Benedi
                     •
                  it michi Deus propter mal
                     ••
                  ictiones iſ
                     •
                  as. God will bleſſe me for theſe curſes, & neuer thinketh more of the matter.
            It is alſo apparant to the eies of mē, what co
                  •••
                he 
                  •
               a
                  •
               h and doeth from tyme to tyme beſtowe, in repayring of hys houſes, and hoſpitalytie to men of all d
                  •
               gr
                  〈…〉
               s, a
                  ••
                eſpecially vppon the pore, whom he doth often and in great numbers ſeede in hys Hall, after his Sermons. Neyther can we but earneſtlye charge l
                  •
               che, whereſoeuer they be, as long haue heard wyth their eares, and ſawe wyth theyr eyes, hys learnyng and good conuerſation, and nowe ſo eaſely eyther credite or giue eare to ſuch reportes as knowen and iudicially cō
               uicted bad perſons carry vp and down▪
               
repining at his bolde and frée preaching of the Goſpell, and ſuppreſſing of vice.
            And here we moſte earneſtly beſéech almighty god, ſo to increaſe in him theſe good giftes which he hath already beſtowed vpon him, that neyther he 
                  •
               lake in furthering his Goſpell, nor be diſcouraged with the ſtraunge attemptes of bad perſons, from ſuppreſſing of ſinne and wickedneſſe.
            For Goliath may vaunte himſelfe in his helmet, his Armour, and his ſpeare, forty dayes, the wicked may glory in their fine deuiſes, and prating practiſes, in their ſlaunders and ratings for a ſeaſon, but yet let not Dauid, let not the beloued of the Lord faynt or feare: For the eyes of the Lord, are vpon ſuch as put their truſt in him, and they ſhall be ſafe vnder the winges of his Maieſty.
            And the God of all comforte and conſolation, grant vnto vs al the aſſiſtance of his holy ſpirite, that we may feare God, be dutifull to our moſte gracious Prince Quéene Elizabeth, loue Godlye and learned men, embrace vertue, and

hate and treade downe vice without reſpect of perſons to the glory of God, and the comforte of his people.
            
               In Suſſex. 
                  16. December. 1576.
               
            
            
               Your beloued in the Lord, the Preachers of the Dyoceſſe of Chicheſter.

                  
                     Henry Blaxton Mayſter of Arte, of Clare hall in Cambridge and preacher.
                  
                     Thomas Gillingham Mayſter of Arte of Corpus Chriſt. Colledge in Dr. forde and Preacher.
                  
                     Danyell Gardner Mayſter of Arte, of Clare hall in Cambridge, and preacher.
                  
                     Will. Coell Maiſter of Arte, of Saynt John his Colledge in Cambridge.
                  
                     Ric. Fletcher ſacrae theologiae Bacchalaureus, nuper ſocius et praeſes Coll. Cor. Chriſti in Accad. Cāt. nunc Miniſter. Ecclae
                     
                     Dei, quae eſt Reiae.
                  
                  
                     Willyam Hoſkinſon Mayſter of Arte of S. Johns in Cambridge, and Preacher.
                  
                     Thomas Kickebye Graduat of braſennoſe in Oxforde, and preacher.
                  
                     Iohn Motley Mayſter of Arte, of Trinity colledge in Cambridge, and Preacher.
                  
                     Thomas Mawdiſley Graduat of Lincoln Colledge in Oxfórd, and preacher.
                  
                     Stephen Bathurſt Graduat & preacher.
                  
                     Richard Burnoppe Preacher, and Uicar of Gaſt Gréeneſted.
                  
                     Iohannes Beeching, in Artibus Maiiſter.
                  
                  
                     Thomas Large, Perſon of Meſtéene Preacher.
                  
                     
                     Edward Rogers Preacher.
                  
                     Willyam Ridley, Graduat in the Quéenes colledge in Oxford & preacher.
                  
                     Thomas Frenchham Preacher.
                  
                     Henry Oliuer, Parſon of the churche at Dalington Preacher.
                  
                     Iohn Myles Paſtour of the Church at Heithfeld Preacher.
                  
                     Iohn Wharton, Paſtour of the Church at Tiſhurſt, and Preacher.
                  
                     Iohn Dodde Preacher of the word of God.
                  
                     Thomas Smith Preacher, and Paſtor of the Church of Henfeld.
                  
                     Denis Hurſt, Preacher and Miniſter of Alfri
                        ••
                     on.
                  
                     
                     Iohn Coorteſſe, Preacher and Miniſter of the church of Yapton.
                  
                     William Smith Preacher, Parſon of Foord.
                  
                     Edward Tickridge, Preacher and miniſter, in the Church at Nitimber.
                  
                     Thomas Willyamſon Graduat in the vniuerſity of Diforde in the Colledge of Braſenn
                        •
                     ſe Preacher.
                  
                     Richard Whealakar, Preacher, Miniſter of the Church of Auberly.
                  
                     Richard Strong, Miniſter of the church of climping and Preacher.
                  
                     Anthony Hobſon Preacher, Miniſter of the Church of Lymiſtar.
                  By mee Chriſtofer Wraye, Parſon of 
                        •
                     ſtwith
                        •
                     ring, and Preacher.
                  
                     Thomas Godlyf Preacher, Miniſter of the Church of Garneley.
                  
                     Henry Wiſ
                           •
                        man, Curate of B
                        •
                     ſham and Preacher.
                  
                     
                     Richarde Hickes, Batcheler of Arte of Trinitie Colledge in Cambridge Preacher.
                  
                     Iohn Goodman, Miniſter of Ferring and precher.
                  
                     Matthaeus Allen miniſter, & concionator Horſhamiae.
                  
                  
                     Phillip Muſtian miniſter, Preacher of Slindfolde.
                  
                     Iohn L
                           ••
                        kyn Preacher, and Paſtor of the Church of I chingf
                        •
                     lde.
                  
                     Samuel Norden, mayſter of Arte of Peterhouſe in Cambridge & Preacher.
                  
                     George Sympſon, Uicar of Syndon and Preacher.
                  
                     Thomas Michell, Parſon of Hurſt; and Preacher.
                  
                     Iohn Hudſon, mayſter of Arte, of Brodegates in Oxforde, and Uicar of Patcham.
                  
                     Anthony Dowglas, Parſon of Sowthwike, and Preacher.
               
            
         
      
      
         
            
            
               ¶ The inuiſible thinges of
                  Rom. 1. 
                        〈…〉
                     
                   GOD, that is, his eternall power and Godheade, be ſeene by the Creation of the worlde, beyng conſydered in hys woorkes.
            
            
               
                  ❧ 
                  The `Préface.
               
               
                  
                     THE INVISIBLE or not to be ſéene graces in GOD, be playnely knowne by the thinges, which haue béene made, and done ſince the making of the worlde.
               The ſayde graces be thrée, Power, Wiſdome and Mercy. From theſe three doe all things ſpring, in theſe thrée do all things ſtande, by theſe thrée be al things guyded.
               Power maketh, Wiſdome guydeth, Mercie preſerueth.
               Which thrée as they be in God after a maner, which cannot be vttered, ſo in working they cannot be ſundered.
               The power by the mercie doth wifely make▪
               
               
                  The wiſdome by the power, doth mercifully guyde.
               The mercye by the wyſedome, doeth mightely preſerue.
               The infiniteneſſe of creatures doth ſhewe the power.
               The bewty doth ſhewe the wiſdome, and the profitableneſſe the mercie.
               The infiniteneſſe of the Creatures, re
                     ••
                  eth in the number and greatneſſe, the number conſiſteth in lyke thinges, vnlyke things and mirte.
               The greatneſſe is in the bigneſſe and ſpace, the bigneſſe is in the lumpe, and weight, the ſpace ſtandeth in the length, bredth, depth, and heigth.
               The bewtie of the creatures, lyeth in the ſight, moouing, ſhape, and qualitie: the ſight in the framing and order: the order in the properneſſe, the tyme and the place.
               Mouing is of fower ſortes. The firſt of place, the ſecond of nature, the thirde of lyfe, the fourth of reaſon.
               The mouing of place is forewarde and backwarde, to the right hande, and to the left hande, vpward, downeward,

and rounde aboute.
               The mouing of nature is in growing and decaying.
               The mouing of lyf
                     •
                   is in ſence, and appetite.
               The mouing of reaſon is in déeds and counſell.
               The ſhape is in the ſéene forme, which the eye beholdeth, as colours and ſhapes of bodyes. The qualitie is in the inner properneſſe, which is perceiued by other ſences, as pleaſantneſſe in the ſownde, by the hearing of the care: ſweteneſſe in ſauorie, by the taſting of the mouth: delightfulneſſe in ſmelles, by the ſmelling of the noſe: Softneſſe in the body by the touching of the hande.
               The profitableneſſe of the creatures doth ſtande in that, that is delight ſome, fitte, commodious, and neceſſarie.
               Delightſome is that which pleaſeth.
               Fitte, is that which agréeth.
               Commodious is that which profyteth.
               Neceſſary, is that wythout the which a thing cannot be.
               Nowe let vs runne ouer againe from the beginning, the foreſaide braunches,

and let vs ſearch in euery one, howe eyther the power of the maker is plainely knewne by the number of things made, or hys wiſedome by the beauty, or hys mercie by the profitableneſſe. And bycauſe the number was the firſt in parting, it ought to be the firſt in ſearching. Therfore marke well what I ſhall ſay.
            
            
               
                  ❧ 
                  The firſt branche.
               
               WHen there was nothyng, to make ſomthing, how great power was it? yea, what ſence can perceaue, what power it is, ſo of nothing to make ſomething, yea ſome one thing, although verie little? if then it be ſuch power of nothing, to make ſome verye little thing, that it cannot be taken by anye ſence, what power is it to be thought to be, to make ſo many things?
               Howe manye? Number the ſtarres of the ſkie, the ſande of the ſea, the duſt of the earth, the droppes of water, the feathers of birdes, the ſeales of fyſhes, the heires of beaſts, the graſſes of fields, the leaues or fruites of trées, and thouſandes thouſandes moe, that cannot

be reckened.
               Things that cannot be numbred, be like things, vnlyke things, or both together, which be lyke things. Things of one kinde: As man and man, Lion and Lion, Egle and Egle, Babion and Babion, euerye of theſe, and other ſuch in their kinde be like.
               Which be vnlyke things? ſuch as be indued with diuers qualities, as a man, and a Lion, a Lion & an Egle, an Egle and a Babian: theſe be one vnlyke to another.
               Which be of both ſortes? All things vewed together.
               Nowe marke howe there be innumerable in things like, things vnlyke, and things of both ſortes.
               Man is one kind, but there is not one onely man. for who can ſette downe the iuſt number of men? Lyon is one kind, but there is not one only Lyon, for who can ſet down the iuſt number of Lions? And ſo there be infynite kinds of things in other things without number, and in euery kinde, infynite lyke things. And altogether infynite & without number.
               
                  But peraduenture ſome will ſay, that he yt made ſo manye things, made them little things, but coulde not make many and great together. Let him conſyder, what it is to meaſure the hugenes of the mountaynes, the courſes of the waters, the ſpaces of the feyldes, the heyght of heauen, the depth of the ſea. Thou marueyleſt that thou canſt not doe it. But thou ſhalte doe better to eſpye that occaſion is miniſtred vnto thée, to prayſe GOD in that thou canſt not do it. To thoſe that conſyder of the number of the creatures, we haue giuen a kind of taſt. Nowe will we go about to ſet forth the beautie of the ſame.
               Although the beautie of the creatures reſteth in many and diuers pointes, yet there be ſome chiefely, in the which all the beautie of the ſame doeth ſtande. Sight, mouing, ſhape, and quality. The which if a man were able fully to ſearch out, he ſhould fynde with all them, the meruaylous light of God his wiſdome. And woulde God, I coulde as plainely ſpie them, and as fully ſet them downe, as I doe earneſtlie loue them, for it delighteth

me greatly, bicauſe it is excéeding ſweete and pleaſant, often to deale about thoſe things: for both the ſence is taught by reaſon, and the minde delighted with ſwéetenes, and the affection ſtirred vp with further deſire, inſomuch that amazed and meruayling, we crye oute with good King Dauid: How maruaylous are thy workes, O Lorde, in thy wiſdome haſt thou made all things, thou haſt delyghted me with thy handye workes of thy hands, and in the works of thy handes wyll I reioyce. An vnwiſe man doth not knowe this, and a foole doth not conſider of it.
               For the whole world which is knowne by ſence, is as it were a booke written with the fynger of God: That is to ſay, made by the power of God: And euery y• creatures be, as it were certaine letters founde out not by the ſkill of man, but ordeyned by the iudgement of God, to make knowne, and as it were after a certaine maner to ſignify the inuyſible wiſdome of God. And as an vnlearned man ſée a booke open, he looketh vpon the letters, but knoweth not what they

meane: So a fooliſhe man and carnall, doth not vnderſtande the things that be of God, but in theſe ſéene creatures, he beholdeth the outwarde ſhape, but doth not perceyue the wiſedome of God in them. But he that is of the ſpirite, and can giue true iudgement of all things, in that, that is outward doth beholde the beautie of the worke, and inwardlye ſpyeth how marueylouſly the wiſedome of the maker is. And therefore there is none but he meruayleth at GOD hys works. For the fooliſh and vnwiſe man doth wonder at only the outward ſhape: but the wiſe man by that which he ſéeth outwardlye, doeth picke out the déepe knowledge of God his wiſedome, as if in one and the ſelfe ſame wryting, one man praiſe the colour and proportion of the letters, and an other the ſence and meaning.
               Therfore it is very good continually, to beholde and looke vppon the workes of God, but ſo him which cannot tourne the beautie of bodily thinges to an heauenlye vſe, for therefore the worde of God doth ſo often moue vs to think vpon

the wonderfull workes of God, that by the outward things which we ſée, we may come to the knowledge of inward truth. Wherevpon King Dauid doeth tell it often, as a great matter, that he hath ſo done, and promyſeth ſtyll ſo to doe, ſaying: I haue remembered thy dayes of olde, and haue muſed vpon the workes of thy handes, and will be exerciſed in thy wiſedomes. Herevpon alſo the Prophete Eſay doth ſay to certayne, which not knowing their Creator, doe giue vnto the creatures the honor due to God. Who hath meaſured the waters in his fyſt, and compaſſed the Heauens with his ſpanne? and comprehended the duſt of the earth with his fyngers? or hath weyghed the Mountaynes in hys ſkayles, and the hilles in ballances? He that ſitteth vpon the circle of the earth, and before whom the inhabitants therof be as Graſhoppers, he that ſtretcheth out the heauens as a Curtaine, & ſpreadeth thē out as a Tent to dwell in. And agayne, King Dauid ſayeth in another place, reproouing the worſhipping of Images: All the Gods of the gentyls be

Deuils, but the Lorde hath made the heauens.
               Why then doe you thinke, that the workes of God be ſo plainly aduouched to maintaine the true goohead, and that it is ſaide, the Lorde made the heauens: but bicauſe the creature well cōſidered, doth teach a man to know his Creator.
               Let vs alſo therfore note the wonderfull workes of God, & by the bewtyfulneſſe of the things made, let vs ſeeke out that bewtiful, moſt bewtiful of al bewtifull things, which is ſo merueylous, & vnſpeakable, that al bewty in reſpect of it is nothing. And if it were any thing in déede, yet in no poynt to be cōpared to it.
               And bicauſe we haue ſayd before, that all bewtie of things ſéene, doeth conſiſt in fower pointes. Let vs nowe runne ouer euerye one of them in order, and learne how by them the hid wiſdome of God doth appeare.
               I know truely, that I can ſpeake nothing worthy enough: yet notwithſtanding it is not méete, that we ſhoulde be altogither dumbe in that point, of the which we are moſt bound to ſpeak moſt,
            
            
               
               
                  ❧ 
                  The ſecond branch.
               
               
                  I Made mention of fower: Sight, moouing, ſhape, and qualitie.
               Let vs fyrſt diſcuſſe the fyrſt.
               Sight is in compownding and order, that is to ſay, in ſetting things together, and placing them in order.
               Compownding ought to haue two pointes, fitneſſe & fyrmneſſe, that things to be compownded or put together, may fittely, & méetely agrée, and beyng compownded or put together, may fyrmely ſticke together. Such compownding is verie commendable.
               Fitneſſe is reputed to be in the quantitie & quality, In quantity, leſſe things very thin and ſmale be ioyned to things thicke and corpulent. In qualitie leaſt things verie moyſte, be mirt to things dry, very hote to colde, very light to heauy, and ſo forth without diſcreation.
               Marke if any of theſe fower be wanting in the beautifulneſſe of GOD hys works, and if thou fynde nothing wanting, now haſt thou ſomthing, wherupō thou mayeſt in this behalf glorify God.
               
                  And fyrſt truely, if you note the frame of this whole worlde, you ſhall ſée howe maruaylouſly, & wiſely the compownding of all thinges is perfected. Howe fyttely, agréeingly and fyrmely, and in all poyntes abſolutely. In the which not only lyke things do agree: but alſo thoſe which the power hath made diuers and differing, the wiſedome hath tyed & lincked as it were in one friendſhyp & true.
               What can be more contrarie then fyre and water? which yet in the nature of things, the wiſdome of God hath ſo tempered together, that not onely they doe breake the common band of friendſhip, but alſo yéelde liuely nouriſhment to all things newly born, y• they may cōtinue.
               What ſhould I ſpeake of the frame of man his bodye, in the which eche parte ioyned together, do ſo agree among thē
                  ſelues, that no member at all can be founde, which doth not helpe an other. So euery nature, loueth the ſelfe, and y• agréeing of many, and diuers thinges merueylouſly pacte together in one, maketh one harmony in all.
               I graunte ſay you, that the compounding

of thinges is fit and agréeing: but how is the ſame fyrme and ſtrong, who doth not wonder at it? Behold the Heauens which imbraſe all thinges, howe firme and ſtrong they be, and as it were ſpred and powred downe round aboute of molten braſſe. The earth ballanced with her weight in the middeſt, doth euer continew vnmoueable, that on the one ſyde the fyrmeneſſe of the Heauen, and on the other ſyde, the ſtableneſſe of the earth, may kéepe together, and as it were, binde together all other thinges flowing in the middeſt, leaſt they running out of their bowndes, breake the concord of the world.
               Behold, how the vaynes of water inwardly ſpred through the bowels of the earth, and outwardly brought forth by Channels or ſtreames into diuers places, do inwardly giue together the earth thinking, leaſt it ſhould be ſeuered, and outwardly water it being drye, leaſt it ſhould 
                     •
                  hinke or choppe.
               Beholde how in the frame of mans body, the bondes of the ſinewes, do bind together the ioyntes of the bones, and

the Marowe being inwardly diſperſed by the pipes of the bones, the Conduites of the vaynes, doe carry liuely blood, through the whole body, and then wrappeth the tender fleſhe within the ſkin, that both the ſtrength of the bones may inwardly beare vp the body, and the fence of the ſkin may outwardly defend and kéepe harmeleſſe the ſame.
               Who can expreſſe the hardneſſe of the ſtones? or the fyrmneſſe of Mettals? the ſtrength of Okes? the holding faſte of Glue? and infinite ſuch others: whereby it appeareth how fyrme the bondes of thinges be, and how all thinges very ſtrongly coupled together do mainteine their nature and being. Neither can they euer be ſeuered at once, from the concord of their fellowſhip.
               Now that we haue ſpoken of the compounding & putting together of thinges: Let vs ſpeake of the diſpoſing and ſetting of them in order, for this muſt needes bréede great admiration, if any will dilligently marke, that the wiſedome of GOD hath appointed to euery place, to euery time, to euery thing their

courſe, ſo that the order of thinges in no poynt is broken.
               Behold, the Firmament is aboue, and the earth beneath, God hath ſet the Sun and the Moone, and the Starres in the Firmament, that they may geue lighte to all thinges belowe: God hath made pathes in the ayre, for the windes, and the clowdes, that they being diſperſed through their mouing mighte poure rayne downward.
               God hath commaunded the heapes of waters to be kept in the boſome of the Earth, that at his becke they might run any whether.
               God hath appoynted the ayre for the Byrdes, the water for the Fiſhes, the earth for the Beaſtes and Serpentes, and infinite thinges that créepe, and Wormes.
               God hath inryched ſome Countreyes with Corne, ſome with Vines, ſome with Rootes, ſome with Cattell, ſome with Hearbs of great vertue, ſome with precious Stones, ſome with monſtrous Beaſtes, ſome with diuers coloures, ſome with the knowledge of dyuers

Artes, ſome with Mettalles, ſome with diuers kinds of Spices and perfumes, in ſo much, that there is no Country in the world, that hath not ſome rare, and ſpeciall thing, that the other haue not. And yet maye each Countrey receaue ſome other rare and ſpectall thing from another.
               What néede I tell howe the prouidence of God hath layde thoſe thinges open, which be neceſſary for mans vſe, but thoſe thinges which nature doth not deſyre for neceſſity, but appetite for pleaſure, it hath hid in the ſecret bowels of the earth, that whome the loue of vertue cannot reſtrayne, the tediouſneſſe of laboure might bridle.
            
            
               
                  ❧ 
                  The thirde branch.
               
               THus much of the diſpoſing of the places. Now to the diſpoſing of times.
               Who can ſufficiently commend and ſet forth the prouidence of God? that hath ſo ex
                     •
                  elently diſtinguiſhed tymes.
               Behold, after the nighte commeth the day, that laboure may excerciſe ſuch as haue bene ſluggiſh, after day followeth

night, that reſt may comfort and refreſh the weary. Neyther the day is euer, or the night euer, nor the day and the night euer equall. Leaſte eyther to much labour ſhould 
                     •
                  il the weakned, or to much caſe bréede diſeaſes, or the ſame continuing 
                     〈…〉
                  ll, ſhould grow tedious, and yrkeſome to the minde.
               Alſo, euen as the mutuall rechange of day and nighte, doth refreſhe all liuing thinges: So the fower ſeaſons of the yeare, following one an other in courſe, dee alter the 
                     〈…〉
                  te of the whole yeare.
               Firſt, by warmneſſe of the Spring, the world is after a ſorte, borne againe.
               Then by the heat of Sommer, it groweth as it were, into ſtrong youth.
               Afterward in the fall, it wareth rype.
               Laſt of all in Winter, it doth as it were dye.
               Therefore it doth euer decay, that after the decay, it may be amended agayn. For except the old ſhould firſte wyther, the new could not ſpring, y• old keeping the place.
               Alſo, this diſpoſing paſſeth all prayſe, that the times ſo chaungeable doe kéepe

their courſe, and ſeaſons ſo vnchaungeably, y• not at any time, they leaue their offices vndone, or breake the order of their courſe or appoyntment.
            
            
               
                  ❧ 
                  The fourth braunch.
               
               AND thus much ſhall ſuffice for the diſcourſe of times. Now will I ſet down that order, which is in euery thing according to a meete diſpoſing of y• parts, one inwardly, mo outwardly, according to the time and place. And in this poynt appeareth the moſt excellent force of the wiſdom of god, which hath placed euery thing in this world ſo fit
                     •
                  y, y• the ioining together of parts doth not at any time breede any diſagréeing of qualities. As of many, for examples ſake to ſet downe few. In the ioyning together of the parts of mans body, how clearely doth y• wiſedome of the maker ſhew the ſelfe. Vpward man is of one ſorte: Downeward of two. For the ground of the mind, that is reaſon, is of one ſorte, and reſpecteth Heauenly thinges. But the ſoule hath two qualities, anger, and deſyre, which looke downeward to carthly thinges.
               
                  Moreouer the frame of mans body, is ſtreatched out in breadth by the armes, and pitched downwarde by the legges, for both the excerciſe of working doeth ſtretch out the mind, and the affections of deſyres doth pitch it.
               Alſo the ſame body of man is ſtreatched forth, and bownded according to the bredth one way, by the fingers of the handes, and downwardes another way by the toes of the féete into fiue. Becauſe that whether the minde doeth couet to work abrode by intention of the worke, or deſyre to looke downward by affection, there be fyue ſences by the which it may worke the purpoſe.
               Alſo the fingers, and the toes haue ech one their ioyntes ſeuered in ſpace, which in the hands grow out of one palme, and in the feete out of one ſole. Becauſe that out of one Fountayne of ſence, doe fyue ſences ſpring, in y• which by thrée ſteps, 
                     ••
                  rſt the force of féeling, next the action of féeling, thirdly the thing to be felte is 
                     •
                  ound. Laſt of al the head or end of euery 
                     •
                  ird ioynt, either of fynger or toe, hath 
                     •
                  nayle as it were an Helmet, that eyther

the hand being reached out, or the foote ſet forward ſhould hit agaynſt any thing, i
                     •
                   might keepe the ſelf whole, and defend the ſelfe with the own helmet.
               So alſo theſe earthly thinges which cl
                     •
                  aue to the ſences outwardly, according to the reſemblaunce of the nayles, doe as it were neceſſarily helpe vs in ſome par
                     •
                  e. But further and aboue the neceſſarie vſe, they ought to be pared away, as growne aboue the fleſhe, and without ſence.
               Note alſo in man his face, behold how plamely the inſtrument of the ſences be placed. The ſight in the eyes is higheſt, next the hearing in the care, then ſmelling in the noſe, and after that taſting in the mouth. And we knowe that all other ſcnces worke by receauing outwarde thinges in warde. Dnely the ſight worketh outwardly, and being ſet a farre of doth much more quickly then any of the reſt perceaue and ſée. And therefore like a good watchman, vpon good conſidera
                  
                     •
                  ion, is ſet in higher place, that it mighte forſée the danger, which may happen to the other ſences.
               
                  The hearing is ſecond, both in place and quickneſſe, then the ſmelling, but the taſt which can feele nothing, but that it toucheth, as ſlower then the other ſences, is iuſtly ſet beneath them all in the bottome.
               Touching hath no ſpecial ſeat or place, and is made vniuerſall, becauſe it worketh with all the ſences, and therefore the Thumbe, which repreſenteth touching, whereas the fingers be all rooted together, aunſwereth them all, becauſe none of the ſences can be without touching.
               Note alſo in mans body, how ye bones be placed within, becauſe the ſtrength of them, doth beare the weight of the body, then the fleſh doeth cloth the bones, that the hardneſſe of them, ſhould not hinder touching. Laſt of all, the ſkinne doth couer the fleſh, that after a ſort with the fyrmeneſſe it might defend the body from things that would outwardly hurt it. And marke wel this, that that which is ſoft and weake, is placed in the middeſt, as in a ſafe place, leaſt either inwardly it wanting ſtay ſhould fall, or

out wardly not hauing defence, ſhoulde decay.
               And that y• I haue ſet down in one, is true in all kind of things, for the barke defendeth the trées, and the feathers and beakes, the Byrds, and ſcales the fiſhes, and God hath appoynted to euery thing a defence, according to the propriety of the nature.
            
            
               
                  ❧ 
                  The fifte branch.
               
               THus farre of the ſight. Now let vs come to the mouing: Mouing is of 
                     •
                  ower ſortes. Place, Nature, Life, and Reaſon.
               Of the which ſeuerally I cannot ſpeak much, but briefely I will run ouer each one. Weygh how the wiſdom of the maker doeth appeare in the mouing from place to place. Conſider how the waters runne ſtil from y• ſpring. Conſider from whēce y• motion of the winds doth come.
               Who canne meaſure the perpetuall courſe of the ſtarres?
               Who doth commaund the Sunne to goe downe by the Winter ſignes? and to goe vp agayne by the ſummer ſignes

and ſtarres.
               Who bringeth the Sunne from the Eaſt to the Weſt, and from the Weſt to the Eaſt agayne? onely God can do theſe me
                     •
                  ucyleus thinges.
               What ſhall I ſpeake of the mouing of nature? Who doth n
                     •
                  uriſh all thinges growing, and bring them Ludding as it were out of a certayne ſecrete wombe of nature, in 
                     •
                  ight agayne?
               And agayne when they wither, doeth cauſe them retourne from whence they came: He that pondreth theſe thinges well, ſhall fynd them to too wonderfull.
               Now the mouing of life, which conſiſteth in féeling and deſyring. Thinke with your ſelfe, how mighty he muſt néedes be, which geueth ſence to euery liuing thing, & ordreth what euery one ſhall deſyre.
               In breefe, the moouing of reaſen in déedes, and counſayles paſſeth al prayſe, if a man will marke how notable that wiſedome is, which doth frame all the déedes of men, and temper all the willes and thoughtes of hartes ſo to the owne purpoſe that 
                     〈…〉
                   can be done in the

whole worlde, wherewith Wiſedome doth bewtify her workes, either by commaunding or ſuffering.
            
            
               
                  ❧ 
                  The ſixte branch.
               
               NOw followrth the ſhape, which is the ſeene forme, conteining fygures and colloures.
               The figures of things be merueylous, ſometime for the greatneſſe, ſometimes for the littlenes, ſomtimes for the rareneſſe, ſometimes for the be wilfulneſſe, ſometime becauſe they be ill ſ
                     •
                  uoured, ſometimes be in one is many, ſometime becauſe many be in one.
               Let vs ſpeake of ech one of theſe in order. And fyrſt the greatneſſe is, when any one thing is bigger then any other thing of that kind, as a Cyau
                     ••
                   among men, a Whale among Fiſhes a Griffin among Byrdes, a Elephaunte among Beaſtes, a Dragon among ſerpentes.
               Littleneſſe is when a thing is leſſe then all other of that kind, as the When and the Moth, the Flye & the Gnat, and ſuch like which liue as other things do, & yet be the leaſt of all other.
               
                  Tell me which is more ſtraunge, the téeth of the Bore, or of the Moath, the winges of the Griffin, or of the Gnat: The head of the Horſe, or of the Graſſehopper: The thigh of an Elephaunt, or of a Flye: The ſnowte of a Sow, or the beake of a Wrenne: An Eagle, or an Ante: A Lyon, or a Gnat: A Tiger or of a Snayle: You muſe at the bigneſſe of the one, & the littleneſſe of the other.
               A little body made with great wyſedome. Great wiſdom in the which there is no ouerſight, but hath geuen them eyes, which the eye can ſcantely ſpye, and in ſo little bodyes, all the partes be ſo fitly, & fully fyniſhed, that there wanteth nothing in the leaſt of all the ſame thinges, wherewith nature hath bewtifyed the greateſt.
            
            
               
                  ❧ 
                  The ſeuenth branch.
               
               NExt followeth thinges rare, which therfore bréede meruayle. For there be foure things, y• therfore men y• rather wōder at, becauſe they ſée them ſeldom, eyther becauſe there be fewe of yt kind, or elſe becauſe they be farre of, or hid in

the ſecrete places of nature, which the wiſedome of the maker ſetteth alone: that the followſhip of man, ſhoulde not be hurte, with thoſe that be noyſome: that the deſyre of man, ſhould be tryed with the bewty of ſuch as be precious: that the ſlownes of mā ſhould be quickned with ye nouelty of ſuch as be ſtrange to conſider the wiſedome of God. Laſte of all, that theſe both good and euill ſette together, as it were a far of, might after a ſorte ſpeake vnto man, and councell him earneſtly to flye eternall euill, and deſyre eternall God, ſith that he taketh ſo great paynes to get fading goods, and flye the euils that laſt not long.
               Now follow ſuch as be reckned of, for 
                     •
                  he bewtifulneſſe. Of certayne thinges the proportion is liked greatly, becauſe that they be ſo ſeemely, and properly framed, that the very proportion doth ſhew a ſpeciall care in the maker.
               Agayne, ſome things we like, becauſe they be monſtrous or ridiculous, the making whereof, the more ſtraunge if is to mans vnderſtanding, the leſſe force it hath to cauſe man to prayſe God: As

that the Codrill eating, doeth not moue the lower iawe, nor the Salamander burne the fyre.
               Who gaue the Hedghogge prickes, & taught it to wallow it ſelf in apples ſhaken downe with the winde, with the which being loden, and going, it maketh a noyſe like a carte.
               And the Ante which ſore ſéeing winter to come, fylleth her barnes with corne: And how the Spyder weaueth her web out of her bowels to take her praye in. Theſe be witneſſes of GOD his wyſedome.
               There is yet an other true and plaine argument of God his wiſedome, that euery like bréedeth the like, and that one likeneſſe diſpearſed into ſo many doeth kéepe ſtil the fourm of the fyrſt original.
               An Ewe doth not bring forth a Calfe, nor a Cow a Lambe, nor a Do a Hare, nor a Lyon a Fore, but ech thing doeth extend the propagation into the like.
               This order kéepeth nature that wanteth ſence. The Aſhe is of one kinde, the Béech of another, & the Oke of the thire, and euery one of them hath their ſeuerall

kinde, and euery one kéepeth y• likeneſſe of the kinde.
               Marke the leafe, how it is rounde about, as it were iegged like the téeth of a ſaw, how within it is wouen with certaine r
                     •
                  es or lines. Tell the one, tell the other, euerye one that is of the ſame kinde is a like, ſo many teeth in the one as in the other, ſuch forme in the one as in the other, ſuch colour in the one as in the other.
               Behold the Mulberies, & the Strawberies, howe being knit together, they are diſtinguiſhed by certayne heades, ſuch as the one is, ſuch is the other, and ech nature, as though it followed the commaundement of ſome inwardly directing, at no time goeth about to break their bondes.
               This alſo is merueylous, that in one body, there be ſo many partes, and ſo many ſhapes, places, and offices of the partes: As in mans body, the eare, the tongue, the eye, the noſe, the foote, the hand, and ech one of thoſe, hath a ſeuerall ſhape, place, and office. And though they be ſo diuers one from another, yet

they together make all thinges.
            
            
               
                  ❧ 
                  The eyght branch.
               
               AFter the figure, followeth y• coloure. It is not néedefull to ſpeake much of the collour of things, ſéeing that ſight proueth what nature getteth, when ſhe is bewtifyed with ſundry colloures.
               What is goodlier then lighte? which though it haue no collour in it, yet after a ſorte by lighting, it doth colloure the collour of all thinges.
               What is more pleaſaunt to beholde then the ſkye? when it is fayre, which ſhineth as the Saphyre, and doth much delight the eye with the moſt pleaſaunt cléereneſſe.
               The Sunne gliſtreth like Golde, the Moone ſhyneth lyke Amber, the ſtarres ſome of them looke as red as fyre, and ſome of them be as bright as the Roſe, and ſome of them ſéeme ſometimes red, ſometimes gréene, and ſomtime whyte.
               What ſhoulde I ſpeake of precious ſtones, whoſe vertue is profytable, and collour goodly?
               The earth be ſet with flowers, howe

pleaſant is it to the ſight? how ſwéete to y• ſmel? how doth it comfort the ſpirites, to ſée the Roſe red, the Lilly white, the Uyolet purple, in all the which, not onely the bewty, but alſo the ſpringing is wonderfull, how the wiſedome of God ſhall fetch ſo good a thing out of the duſt of the earth. Fynally, aboue all the reſt, gréeneſſe delighteth the mind of ſuch as looke vpon the earth, when as in y• new ſpring, buddes come forth, as it were in a new life, and rearing them ſelues vpward in ſpyndal
                     •
                  es, and afterward troden downe, as it were by death, ſhew an Image of the reſurrection to come. But what ſhould we ſpeake ſo much of God his workes? ſith that we doe wonder at the ſubtilties of man: when by a counterfeyte ſhew, he doth deceaue the ſight.
            
            
               
                  ❧ 
                  The ninth branch.
               
               NExte to the ſhape, I am to ſpeake of the quallity. For this cauſe hath the prouidence of GOD giuen ſo many diuers qualities to thinges, that ech ſence of man might fynde ſome thing to delight it.
               
                  The ſight perceaueth one thing, the hearing an other, the ſmelling the third, the taſte the fourth, and the feeling the fyfte.
               The bewty of colloures doth féede y• eye.
               The pleaſantneſſe of Muſicke delighteth the eare.
               The excelency of ſauours the ſmeling.
               The ſweeteneſſe of that that is ſauory the taſte.
               Softneſſe the féeling. And nowe who can recken vp all the delights of the ſences, which be ſo many in ech one, that if a man do conſider euery one by it ſelfe, he ſhall fynd euery one by it ſelfe very rich, for we fynde ſo many delightes, in diuerſities of ſounds for the eare, as we fynde diuerſities of collours for the eye.
               Among the which the chiefe is y• ſweete conference of ſpeeches, by the which mē breaking together their minds, declare thinges paſt, ſhew things preſent, foretell thinges to come, open things hidde, in ſo much, that if mans life wanted theſe, it were no better thē the beaſtes.
               
                  
                     •
                  hat ſhould I ſpeake of the ſinging of Byrdes? of the ſwéeteneſſe of mans

voyce? of the pleaſaunte tunes of all ſowndes? for the ſortes of the harmonies be ſo many, y• neyther the tongue can expreſſe them, nor the thoughts conceaue them, which all feede the hearing, and are deuiſed to delight the ſame.
               And ſo in ſmelling, Perfumes haue their peculyer pleaſauntneſſe, Oyntments another, and ſo borders of Roſes, and likewiſe bryars, Mountes, Medowes, Woodes, flowers, and fruites, and all thinges which bréede a pleaſant ſmell, and make the ayre ſwéete, doe feede the ſmelling, and are created for the ſame.
               In like manner the taſt and touching haue their delightes, which may eaſilye be conceiued by the likeneſſe of the firſt.
            
            
               
                  ❧ 
                  The tenth branch.
               
               
                  I Haue ſpoken of the infiniteneſſe of creatures and bewty, as I could, but not as I would.
               Now muſt I intreate of the profytableneſſe of the ſame.
               The profytableneſſe looketh to four
                     •
                   things.
               
                  Néedefulneſſe, Commodiouſneſſe, Con
                  
                     •••
                  ientneſſe, and Delightſomneſſe.
               That is neceſſary to euery thing, without the which the ſame cannot wel be. As in the diet of man, bread and water, in his apparell, cloth or leather, or ſome ſuch Garmentes.
               That is commodious, which although it carry with it ſometimes a further delight, yet without that a man may liue: As in the diet of man, wyne and Fleſh, in his apparell, Silke and fine Linnen, and ſuch other ſofte apparell.
               That is méete and conuenient, which though it be not profytable to the vſers, yet it is ſéemely to the vſe, as colloures, and precious ſtones, and ſuch like.
               That is delightſome, which is not to any great vſe, and yet is pleaſaunte to the ſhew, as hearbes, and flowers, certaine beaſtes, and fyſhes, and ſuch like.
               It is worthy ſearching out, why God would make thoſe thinges, which he foreſaw would not be neceſſary for the vſe of man, for whō he made all things. But this will ſoone appeare, if we conſider of the cauſe and manner of mans

eſtate.
               God made man for himſelfe, and al other thinges for man.
               God made man for him ſelfe, not becauſe he néeded man, but to geue himſelfe to be inioye
                     •
                   of man, becauſe he could geue no better thing.
               Ech other creature is ſo made, that both it is ſubiect to man by the ſtate, and lyable to his profyte. So man being ſet as it were in the middeſt, hath God aboue him, & the world vnderneath him. And by body is ioyned downeward to the world, but by the ſpirite he is lifted vpward to God. And therefore it was neceſſary that the ſtate of thinges ſeene ſhould be ſo appoynted, that man might by them outwardly ſee, which a thing the vnſéene good were, which he ought outwardly to deſyre, that is to ſay, that he might ſee in the world below, what he ſhould deſyre in heauen aboue.
               Therefore it were not conueniente, that there ſhould be any want of things ſeene, to this end and purpoſe, that the plentifulneſſe of the ſame, might ſhew
                     •
                   the ineſtimable abundaunce of euerlaſting

good thinges. This is the cauſe, why as I haue ſayd, God would alſo make thinges, which he foreſaw, ſhould not be neceſſary for the vſe of man.
               For if GOD had geuen man one
                     ••
                   thinges neceſſary, he ſhould haue ſhewed himſelfe good, but not rich. But now that he geueth ouer and aboue neceſſary thinges, alſo commodious, he ſheweth the riches of his goodneſſe. But when 
                     •
                  e putteth to thinges neceſſary, and commodious, alſo thinges conuenient, he ſheweth the aboundaunt riches of his goodneſſe. And fynally when to thoſe thrée, he addeth thinges delight ſome, what doth he elſe but make knowne the aboue aboundant riches of his goodnes.
            
            
               
                  ❧ 
                  The eleuenth branch.
               
               AND thus much briefely ſhall ſuffice for the profytableneſſe of the creatures.
               But for the better ſetting forth of the prayſe of God: Let vs marke wel, how merueilouſly god doth ſtil kéepe togither thoſe thrée thinges in his worke, which we ſhall ſo more eaſily ſée, how merueylous

it is, if afterwards we view, 
                     ••
                  w the ſame cannot be together in mans worke.
               Truely, as man doth deſyre to do many things, ſo he cannot do great things, for ſo much the leſſe he doth preuayle or proſper in euery one, as the thinges be more in number, vpō the which he doth imploy the force of his indeuour.
               Agayne when he coueteth the greatnes, he is hindered by the number, for he is not able to beſtow ſtrength vppon many, which he hath ſpente vpon one. Likewiſe he may afoard the leſſe labor to the bewtifying of the worke, ye more he beateth his minde vpon the diſpatche eyther of the number, or of ye greatnes. We fynd by common experyence, that the Scriuener doth more readily write little letters, and is more payned with the greater, and the faſter the Pen runneth, the worſe the letters be, that be written.
               Alſo in making of Garmentes, ſuch as ſéeke to haue them to fine, often looſe the profyte, and they that ſéeke profite▪ often want hanſomneſſe.
               
                  But in the workes of God, neyther the number doth hinder the greatneſſe, neither the greatneſſe the number neyther the number and the greatneſſe, the bewtifulneſſe. But they all be made ſo fully, as though, that but one were made, that when man doeth looke vpon all, he may wonder at euery one of thē.
               But it may be that ſome will thinke this to much of ſéene thinges: it maye pleaſe them to conſider, that ſo large a matter cannot be eaſily compryſed in few wordes.
               For wheras the Apoſtle doth ſay, yt by thinges ſéene in the world, the inuiſible, and the not to be ſéene graces in God be playnely known: It is neceſſary, that whoſoeuer would come to the knowlege of the not ſéene by the ſéene, ſhould fyrſt know the ſéene.
               And therfore I, according to my ſmal ability, thought alſo this the beſt way, to fynd out the not thrée ſéene thinges, ſet downe in the beginning by the thrée thinges ſéene, appoſed agaynſte them, that firſt, I ſhoulde ſomewhat make knowne the thinges ſéene, and afterwardes

when the dore of contemplation were as it were opened, then to goe on to find out the thinges not ſéene.
               And now for that I haue made an end of that I had to ſay of the thinges ſéene, it remayneth to ſée, how by theſe we maye goe vp to the knowledge of the thinges not ſeene.
            
            
               
                  ❧ 
                  The twelfe branch.
               
               THE graces in God not ſéene, I ſayd were Power, Wyſdome, and Mercy. Therfore it is to be ſought, which of theſe is fyrſt to be knowne in contemplation, and I think, that that not ſéene grace, will fyrſt appeare in contemplation, which is moſt liuely and playnly reſembled, or expreſſed in the ſéene Image. And the ſéene things be called the Images of the not ſéene, as the number of creatures, is the Image of the not ſéene power: The bewty of ye creatures is the Image of the not ſeene Wiſdom: The profytableneſſe of the creatures is the Image of ye not ſéene mercy. And euery creature ye nearer it commeth to the likenes of the creator, ſo much more

plainly doth it reſemble and expreſſe the creator.
               So that, the ſéene Image ought fyrſt to ſhew the not ſeene patterne, which holdeth in himſelfe, the Image of the Godhead more liuely ſet out.
               The number of the creatures doth rather expreſſe the ſubſtaunce or matter. The bewty of the creatures doth rather expreſſe the fourme and the ſubſtaunce, or matter immagined without form, is formeles. And that that is formleſſe in reſpect of the ſubſtaunce, is like vnto God. But that, that hath forme is more like vnto God, thē that, yt wāteth forme.
               Wherevpon it is playne, that the bewty of creatures, which reſembleth fourme is a more euidente Image, then theſe the number of creatures, which reſembleth ſubſtaunce.
               Alſo the bewty of creatures, through the naturall forme, belongeth to the habite, the profitableneſſe to the action, for in that his creatures be profytable, that they be lyable to the vſe and commodity of man.
               But that, that belongeth to the habite

is more proper, that is more certayne, then that that belongeth to the action. Becauſe nature hath ingraffed the habite, but excercyſe hath bred the action. Therfore ye Image of bewty doth excell in knowledge both the number, and the profytablenes. And therfore as fyrſt in knowledge, becauſe it is more euydent in repreſentation, or reſemblaunce.
               Fyrſt therfore in this Image, ye foundation of contemplation is to be layd, that when we haue layd the foundation of ſearching thorow the direction therof, we may more ſtrongly, and readily buyld the reſt of the worke.
               And now in ſearching out wiſedome, the beginning of the ſearching is excellently well taken from the very Image of wiſedome, becauſe the father is made manifeſt thorow his wiſedome, not only, when he ſent his wiſedome to take fleſh vpon him, but then alſo, when by his wiſedome he made the world.
               The bewty of creatures, which we haue eftſoones ſayd to be the Image of God, his wiſdome, doth conſiſt in foure thinges.
               
                  Sight, Moouing, Shape, and Quality. But in theſe foure thinges, it is manyfeſt, that Moouing hath the preheminēce, for that, things that can mooue, are nearer vnto life, then thinges that cannot mooue.
               Moouing is of foure ſorts, Place, Life, Nature, and Reaſon.
               But moouing of Nature, is better thē moouing of place, becauſe that in mouing of nature, not only y• Image of life is expreſſed, but lyfe it ſelfe after a ſorte is begone.
               Agayne mouing of lyfs, doth ſo farre out goe mouing of nature, as that, that cā foele, doth paſſe that that cannot féele.
               Laſt of al, mouing of reaſon doth ſurmount all, becauſe in that, not only the ſences be moued to quicken, and geue life, but alſo reaſon to vnderſtand. Among all creatures, there is no Image more euident then this, becauſe that, which ſauoureth of wiſdome, doth moſt playnly ſhewe the not ſéene wiſedome. Therefore the fyrſt & principall Image of wiſdome unmade, is wiſedom made, that is the creature indewed with reaſon,

which becauſe it is in ſome reſpecte ſéene, and in ſome reſpect not ſéene, it is both the gate of contemplation, and the way.
               The gate in that, that it is ſeeue, the way in that, that it is not ſéene.
               The Gate becauſe it doth ſhewe the entry to the mind, that entreth into contemplation.
               The waye, becauſe it bringeth tho minde running in contemplation to the ende.
               The Gate, becauſe after a ſorte, it doth ſhew thinges inuiſible; viſibly.
               The way, becauſe it doth bring man going by the viſible to the inuiſible, to ſee the maker of both viſible; a inuiſible.
               This man may ſée in himſelfe. For fyrſt none can be reckned to haue any witte, that doth not▪ ſée that he is, and yet if a man will wrigh with himſelfe, that that he is, he ſhal fynd that he is nothing of the thinges, which eyther bée ſéene, or can be ſéene in hym. For that which in vs is partaker of reaſon, and as I might ſay poured into vs and mixed with the fleſh, doth yet of it ſelfeſeuer

the ſelfe from the ſubſtance of the fleſh, & iudge the ſelfe to be diuers from 
                     •
                  f. Why then ſhould man doubt of the thinges not ſéene? which ſéeth that, that is not ſéene, which in deede man is, of the being of y• which he doth not doubt.
               Therefore a Gate of contemplation is opened to man, when he beginneth to enter to know himſelfe by direction of his own reaſon. And when he is entred in the way, to run to the end, doeth remayne that euery one may come by the knowledge of his maker.
               For that in vs, which hath not the ſubſtaunce of fleſh, hath no matter from the fleſh, but as it is parted from y• fleſh. And yet it doeth moſt certeinly knowe, that it hath a beginning in that that it doth know that it is, and doth not remember that it hath bene euer, where as the knowing vnderſtanding cannot be certayne.
               Therefore if the vnderſtanding can not be, except it doth vnderſtand, it followeth that thoſe thinges, which we knowe, haue not euer vnderſtoode, we ſhould belee
                     ••
                   haue not euer bene, that

is to ſay, at ſometimes haue had a beginning.
               But euē as I ſayd before, that which hath a ſpirituall ſubſtance, cannot haue a bodily beginning. For whatſoeuer is brought from the former matter, is approued to be bodily. Therefore if that which is not ſéene in vs haue a beginning, it muſt néedes fal out, that it was not made of a former matter, but of nothing.
               And that which is nothing, cannot geue ſubſtaunce to the ſelfe, and therefore, whatſoeuer hath had a beginning, certaynly hath receiued ſubſtance from another. And that which is not of it ſelf, cannot geue being to an other: And therefore whoſoeuer he is, that hath geuen being to other thinges, hath not receiued his being of an other thing. Which may be euidently proued thus, if that we beléeue that euery thing that is, is a creature, there will neuer be end founde.
               Therefore our nature doth teach vs, that our Maker is euerlaſting, which hath hys owne and proper: that is to

ſay, he is of himſelf. For if he had taken his being from an other thing, he coulde not be called truely the firſt originall of things: For if at any time he were not, he had not beginning of himſelfe, neyther can be called firſt, if he toke his beginning of an other. Therefore if he be the fyrſt maker, he was euer.
               Alſo that, which is of the leſſe, muſte néeds be. For whoſoeuer is of the ſelfe, to that it is one thing to be, & that that it is. This is playne, bycauſe nothing can be parted or ſeuered from the ſelfe: That therefore, to the which it is the ſame, the being, and that that it is, muſt néedes be euer, becauſe nothing can be ſeuered from the ſelfe. If therfore whatſoeuer be of the ſelfe, to the ſame the being, and that that it is be all one, he that hath not receaued his being from an other, muſt conſequently of neceſſitie be euer. Neither can be taken away from another, that was not giuen of another.
               So that it muſt néeds follow, that the thinges, which we beleue the maker to be, that we confeſſe the ſame, can neyther haue beginning or ending: for that

hath no beginning which was euer, and that hath no ending, which endeth neuer. Then neyther is there eternall beſides the maker, neyther can the maker be but eternall.
               This knowledge haue we founde in the mouing of reaſon, which we haue according to the eternall maker, which lacketh beginning, becauſe it was euer. The other mouings doe confyrme this knowledge, I mean the mouing of life, nature, and place. For in the mouing of lyfe, be féeling and deſyre, and eche naturall deſyre may be ſatiſfyed, neyther is there any ordinary deſyre, but it may compaſſe the deſyre. For example ſake: Lyuing thinges hunger, and they finde thinges which 
                     •
                  lake their hunger, they thirſt, and finde things which quenche their thirſte, they be colde, and fynde things to warme them. Therefore thys is plaine, that the prouidence of God is gon before, by whoſe aduiſe this is decréede, that no neceſſary reliefe ſhoulde be wanting.
               For he that made the deſyre, hath prepared nouriſhment for the deſyres, neyther

coulde it in any wiſe be, if thinges went by chaunce, that the coutentations ſhould ſo iuſtly & fully ſatiſfy the deſires
               The mouing of nature proueth the ſame, for as it is vnpoſſible, that anyething by the ſelfe ſhould be made of nothing, ſo is it altogether vnpoſſible, that any thing ſhould take increaſe of the ſelfe, I meane yt, that, which cānot giue it ſelf beginning, cannot giue it ſelfe increaſe, for whatſoeuer doth increaſe a thing growing, muſt néedes be an other from that, which by it ſelfe before onely was without increaſe. Then if nothing can grow, except there be put to it ſomething, which it had not before, it is apparant, that nothing growing taketh increaſe of it ſelfe▪ Therfore he that giueth increaſe of thinges growing, gaue the increaſe of things being.
               The mouing of place doth proue thys alſo, for we ſée, that certaine creatures moue continually, and ſome by tymes, & ſome after one ſort, & ſome after another. And although thinges moue in ſo dyuers maners, yet the order of thinge is neuer broken. Wherevpon it is euident,

that there is inwardly ſome direction of the Gouernour, which doth moderate all the things by a certaine law.
               Howe then can we denye the prouydence? if that euerie natural deſyre find foode prepared for it naturally. Neither falleth it out, at any time, that nature deſireth that in one thing, but it maye haue it in an other.
               Likewiſe ſythe that mouing and increaſe, grow outwardly by ſundry and diuers wayes, doe neuer yet breake the generall order, howe can we denie that there is in them ſome direction: Therfore it cannot be doubted, but the inuiſible Gouernor doth rule within, which both by his prouidence doeth foreſee the ſequels of all thinges, and by his wiſedome doth order the ſame.
            
            
               
                  ❧ 
                  The thirteene branch.
               
               ONe Gouernour I ſay. For this nature alſo teacheth, that there is in ſubſtaunce one workeman of al things, and one ruler. For if there were diuers determinations of the inward rulers, the effectes, or ſequels of thinges would

ſomtimes alſo differ amōg themſelues. But now all thinges doe ſo agréeingly run to one end, that they playnlye ſhew that there is one ſpring, & original from whence they come.
               But bicauſe one is takē diuers waies, it is to be declared, how the maker of all things is one.
               There is one by gathering together, and one by compounding, and one by likeneſſe, and one by ſubſtance, and one by identitie or ſameneſſe.
               One by gathering together is, as we call that one ſtock in the which be many ſhéepe.
               One by compounding is, as we cal it one body, in the which be many partes.
               One by lykeneſſe, as we call it, one voyce, which is vttered of many. But of all thoſe things, none is truely one: but they be called one after a ſorte, becauſe after a maner they reſemble vnitie or oneneſſe.
               It is not tollerable, that we ſhoulde thinke the maker of thinges to be one, eyther by gathering together of diuers, or compounding of partes, or likeneſſe

of many, ſéeing that, that, which in vs is pertaker of reaſon, can fynd none of the foure it ſelfe. For that in vs which is made of diuers parts, is proued by reaſon not to be pertaker of reaſon, but ioyned to that, which is pertaker of reaſon.
               If therefore that in vs, that is pertaker of reaſon be one truely, howe much more ought we to beléeue, that the maker of the ſame is truely one. And that is truly one, which is one in ſubſtance, to the which it is all one, to be one, and to be ſimply, that it is.
               Therefore whatſoeuer is truely one, is ſimple, and cannot be in any reſpecte cut into partes. It cannot be cut into partes, becauſe it was neuer made by ioyning of partes together. Therefore it is true, that the maker of thinges is truely, that which is, becauſe his being is all one, and ſimple.
            
            
               
                  ❧ 
                  The fourteenth branch.
               
               AND yet we are to marke, that ſome thinges there be, that be one truely, yet not one abſolutely, and altogether. For the liues or ſoules, which be one

ſubſtauntially, are not one interchaunably, but that, which is truely and fully one, is ſubſtauntially, & interchaungeably one. Therefore it remayneth that ſith we beléeue God to be truely one, we learn whether alſo he may be called abſolutely one, which we ſhall playnely ſhew, if we proue him to be altogether interchaungeable.
               But becauſe, we cannot knowe how God is interchaungeable, excepte we firſt know, how many wayes thinges may be chaunged, we are fyrſt to ſette downe all the kinds of changeableneſſe, and then to declare how that not one of them doth agrée vnto God.
            
            
               
                  ❧ 
                  The fifteenth branch.
               
               CHaungeableneſſe is in thrée poynts. Place, Forme, and Tyme.
               Ech thing is chaunged in Place, whē it is remoued frō one place to another, that is to ſay, when it leaueth to be in the place, in the which it was, and beginneth to be in the place, in the which it was not. And this chaunging is outward, and doth not alter any whit of the

ſubſtaunce, or being of the thing. For although it leaue to be where it was, it leaueth not to be that which it was. And although it beginne to be where it was not, yet it doeth not begin to be that which it was not.
               In forme ech thing is chaunged, when as a thing continueth in the ſame place according to the ſubſtaunce, and yet eyther to the increaſe getteth ſome thing, which it had not before, or to ye decreaſe looſeth ſomething, which it had before, or elſe according to the altering begynneth to haue ſomething, that it had before, otherwiſe then it had it before.
               I wyll not ſpeake of chaunging in tyme, becauſe that is bredde of the two firſt. For nothing can be chaunged in tyme, but it muſt be chaunged eyther in forme or place. If therefore it ſhall appeare, that God can be changed neither in forme nor place. Then it wil be moſt certaine, that GOD is altogether vnchaungeable.
               We ſhal eaſily proue, that God is not chaunged, according to the chaunging of place, if we proue yt he is euery where.

For that which is euery where, is in euery place. And that which is in euerye place, cannot go from place to place. There be many profes that God is euery where: And fyrſt our owne ſoule, the which both reaſon doth playnely fynde, that it is a ſymple ſubſtaunce, and ſence doth proue, that it is diſpearſed through all that which doeth quicken the bodye. For whatſoeuer parte of the quick body is hurte, it is one ſpirite, to the which feeling of ech payne is caryed, the which coulde not be, if the one and the ſame ſpirite where not diſpearſed thorow the whole.
               If therefore the reaſonable ſpirite of man being ſymple, is diſpearſed thorow the whole bodye which it guydeth, it is not conuenient, that that creating ſpirite, which guydeth and poſſeſſetth all things, ſhoulde be tyed, and bounde to ſome one place, but rather ſhoulde be thought to fyll all places.
               For the very mouinges of all thinges which doe run euery where, with ſo certayne and reaſonable moderation doth ſhew life quick within. Yet may not we

in any caſe beléeue, that as the ſpirite of man is perſonally ioyned to the body, which it quickneth, that ſo ech creating ſpirite to be coupled perſonaly to the body of this ſenſible world. For God filleth the world one way, and the ſoule the body an other.
               The ſoule fylleth the body & is conteyned in it, bicauſe it maye be compaſſed about.
               God fylleth the world, but is not conteyned, becauſe being preſente euerye where, he cannot beholden any where.
            
            
               
                  ❧ 
                  The ſixteenth branch.
               
               FUrthermore, ſythence we ſée the effect of God his power to be wanting no where, why ſhoulde we not thinke, that the ſame power of GOD is in all thinges. And if Gods power be euerye where, and if alſo God his power, and God be all one, it is moſt playne that God is euery where, for God doeth not néede any others ayde to doe any thing, as a manne doeth, for man often tymes doth that by the helpe of another, which he cannot do by his own power. Whervpon

after a certaine maner of ſpéeche, man is oftentimes ſaide to doe a thing, in that place, where it is manifeſt, that he is abſent bodily.
               As the king oftentimes making hys aboade in his owne citie is reported, to fyght in another place with his enimies, and to ouercome, or be ouercommed: bicauſe the kings ſouldiours vpon his pleaſure or commaundement, doe fight, & do ouercome, or be ouercommed.
               Likewiſe, when a man hitteth with his ſtaffe, or with a ſtone, a thing farre from him, the man is ſayd to hit that, which his ſtaffe or ſtone did hit. There be many of this ſorte, but none of theſe be ſpoken properly: becauſe, that which the one doth is aſcribed to the other.
               But God which thorow his own vertue, by his own ſelfe doeth all thinges, whereſoeuer he is preſente in worke, muſt néedes be there alſo preſente in Godhead.
               Now if any man would aſke, howe God being a ſymple ſubſtaunce, can be euery where? He is to vnderſtand that the ſpirite is called ſymple one waye,

and the body ſimple another way.
               For the body is called ſimple for ye littleneſſe, but the ſpirite is called ſimple, not for the littleneſſe, but in reſpecte of the vnity or oneneſſe. Therfore the maker both is ſimple becauſe he is one, and euery where, becauſe he is God. And being in euery place, can be holden of no place, for fylling all thinges, he doth cō
                  t
                     •
                  me, and is not conteyned. Therefore becauſe he is in euery place, he cannot be moued from place to place, and becauſe he is holden in no place, he is not locall.
               But the chaunging that is according to forme, is eyther mereſed, or decieſed, or altered. But none of theſe canne be found in the nature of God, which the ſeuerall diſcourſe of each will make playne.
               Whatſoeuer groweth or increaſeth, taketh ſome thing beſides it ſelfe. And whatſoeuer taketh any thing more, thē that which is in it ſelfe, muſt néedes take it from another. For nothing can geue to it ſelfe that which it hath not.
               And of whome can the maker of all

thinges take any thing that it hath not, ſeeing that euery thing that is, commeth from him. Then he cannot increaſe, becauſe he cannot take any thing more then himſelfe. Neyther can he decreaſe or be dominiſhed. For whatſoeuer can be made leſſe then it ſelfe, is not truely one. For that which deuideth it ſelfe in ſeuering, was neuer the ſame in commiction.
               Therefore God to whome it is all one to be that which he is, can by no meanes be made leſſe thē it ſelfe. Neyther therefore ye perfectneſſe of God can be increaſed, nor the vnity deminiſhed, nor the immenſity comprehended, nor he, that is preſent in euery place, can be chaunged from place to place.
               Now I am to teach, how God cannot be altered, and becauſe the altering of bodyes is one, & the altering of ſpirites another, and becauſe alſo it is playne by that, which is ſayd before, that God is no body, but a ſpirite, ſi
                     ••
                   we intreat of God, it is néedeleſſe to ſpeake much of the alteration of bodies, and yet I will much the ſame briefely, becauſe I may

more commodiouſly come to the alteration of the ſpirites.
               The alteration of the bodies doth conſiſt in the compounding of the parts, and mutuall chaunge of the qualities. The alteratiō of ſpirite is by knowledge and affection.
               The ſpirits be chaunged according to affection, in becomming ſomtimes merry, ſometimes ſad, according to knowledge, to be ſometimes more, and ſometimes leſſe wiſe.
               There be two thinges chiefely, which alter the affection of the worker, eyther if he hath done any thing heretofore to be repented of, or doe appoynt to do any thing hereafter out of order. But that God doth nothing to repent of, doth this vnchaungeable courſe of thinges plainly proue, which do ſo kéepe by a perpetuall law, the order of their fyrſt appoyntment. And that God doth purpoſe or couet to doe nothing out of order. Doeth the reaſonable ſequell proue, which in the whole body of nature doeth in no poynt diſagrée vnto it ſelfe.
               Therefore God his will is vnmoueable,

becauſe he doth neuer chaunge eyther his councell of that, which is paſt, or his purpoſe of that which is to come & ſo we ought to beleeue that God is vnchaungeable in knowledge.
            
            
               
                  ❧ 
                  The ſeuententh branch.
               
               MAns knowledge doth chaunge three wayes: By increaſe, decreaſe, and ech after other.
               By increaſe, when we learne that we know not.
               By decreaſe, when we forget that we know.
               Ech after other happeneth iiij. wayes.
               Subſtaunce, Forme, Place & Time.
               In ſubſtaunce when we thinke nowe this, now that, becauſe mans ſence cannot comprehend all thinges at once.
               In forme, when we learne fyrſt one quality of a thing, and then an other becauſe we cannot learne both at once.
               In place, when our mind is now fixed vpon one place, and afterwardes vpon an other, becauſe it cannot be vppon all places at once.
               In time, when we at one tyme view

thinges paſt, and at an other tyme thinges to come, becauſe we cannot doe all together.
               Then alſo our knowledge is chaunged in tyme, when we doe leaue of for a while our ſtudye, and afterwardes begin the ſame agayne, becauſe we be not able to ſtudy euer.
               But none of theſe is found in God his knowledge.
            
            
               
                  ❧ 
                  The eighteenth branch.
               
               GOD his knowledge is not increaſed becauſe it is full. For neyther can he be ignoraunt of any thing, which maketh, which guideth, which ſéeth thorow which beareth all thinges, and being preſent to al by vertue of his Godhead: muſt needes ſee and behold all.
               It cannot be diminiſhed, becauſe it is not of other, whatſoeuer it is, but the whole ſame, what ſoeuer it is, it is of the ſelfe from one, and one all that it is.
               What ſhoulde I ſpeake of mutuall chaunge. How can that wiſedome be ſubiect to mutuall chaunge, which doth comprehend all thinges together, and at

once vnder one beame of ſight, I ſay together, becauſe it comprehendeth eche ſubſtaunce, ech forme, ech, place, and ech time. I ſay at once, becauſe it doth neyther ſée agayne, that it hath lefte to ſée, nor leaue to ſée that which it ſeeth. But that which it is once, that it is euer, and that it is euer, that it is whole. It ſéeth all thinges, and ſeeth all thinges in all thinges, and in euery time, and in euery place. There is nothing new vnto it, there is nothing ſtraunge, there is nothing departeth vnknowne. It doeth foreſée all that is to come, when it is preſent, it beholdeth it, when it is paſt, it holdeth it, and to it al is one, to foreſée, to behold, and hold ſtill.
               That, that falleth out in tyme was in prouydence, and that that is paſt in tyme remayneth in knowledge.
               Euen as if your whole body were an eye, & your being and ſeing were al one, whether ſoeuer you ſhould tourne you, you muſt needes ſee your ſelfe, and with one twinckling of the eie neuer mouing you ſhould ſée round about, whatſoeuer could be ſéene. Nay rather you ſhould ſée

ſtyll before your ſelfe, whatſoeuer were any way, the thing might paſſe awaye, but the ſyght ſhoulde ſtande ſtill, and whether ſoeuer the thing ſhoulde tnrne the ſelfe, you ſhoulde be preſent to your ſelfe ſtanding.
               But nowe becauſe you ſée in part, ye ſee chaungeably, and when the thing goeth out of ſight, eyther it leaueth to be ſeene, or it is ſometimes ſeene, and ſometymes not ſéene. But if you were all an eye, ye ſhould not ſo ſée, & not ſée.
               Therefore what ſoeuer is in parte, is chaungeable, and whatſoeuer is not in part, cannot be chaunged. But God to whome it is the ſame to be, to lyue, and vnderſtand, ſyth neyther he can be in parte by ſubſtaunce, neyther in part by wiſedome, but euen as he is vnchaungeable in ſubſtaunce, ſo he is vnchaungeable in wiſedome. And thus much for the knowledge of God.
            
            
               
                  ❧ 
                  The ninetenth branch.
               
               BUt we are to vnderſtande, that this knowledge is called ſometimes Viſion, ſometimes wiſedome, ſometimes

foreknowledge, and ſometymes prouydence.
               Viſion bicauſe it ſeeth.
               Wiſdome, bicauſe it vnderſtandeth.
               Foreknowledge, becauſe it preuēteth
               Prouydence, becauſe it ordereth. Of the which there ariſe to to harde, and 
                     •
                  o to doubtfull queſtions, the which I am afearde to ſet downe in thys treatiſe, and therefore will go to that, which remayneth.
               And nowe that I haue entred by the eye of knowledge, and gone frō thinges ſéene, to thinges not ſéene, thus far this method hath led vs, that we are ſure that the maker of all thinges is one, without beginning, without ende, and without chaunge, and theſe thinges we haue found, not without our ſelues, but within our ſelues.
            
            
               
                  ❧ 
                  The .xx. branch.
               
               LEt vs therefore now yet ſée whether this the ſame our nature, doth teach vs any further thing of our maker. For it may be that it doth not only ſhew him one: But alſo eternall.
               
                  Truely the reaſonable minde is one, and being one, ingendreth of the ſelfe one vnderſtanding. Which oftentimes, whiles it doth beholde, how ſubtile, how true, how agréeing, how pleaſant it is, by and by, it loueth it, and pleaſeth the ſelfe in the ſelfe, it ſeeth together and wondereth, and doth marueyle, that it hath founde out any ſuch thing.
               The whole ioy is euer to delight in it, euer to haue it, euer to inioy it.
               It pleaſeth for the ſelfe, it pleaſeth by the ſelfe, neyther is there any thing, that is deſyred beſids it: bicauſe it is wholy loued in the ſelfe.
               In that the ſight of truth is pleaſaunt to behold, ſwéete to haue, and moſte delightfull to inioy: the mind reſteth, and ioyeth in it, and with it, as the ſelfe, neither euer is weary of the owne ſecrete, which delighteth in one only, and yet no ſolitary company.
               Weight therefore theſe together, the mind, the vnderſtanding, the loue.
               Of the mind commeth the vnderſtanding, of the mind together & vnderſtanding, ſpringeth loue.
               
                  Of the onely minde commeth vnderſtanding, becauſe the minde hath begotten of it ſelfe vnderſtanding. But of both, the mind is firſt, and the mind and vnderſtanding, and thirdly the minde, vnderſtanding, and loue. And this is thus in vs.
               But in the maker, reaſon is of another nature, for becauſe we beléeue, that he hath ben euer. We muſt néedes confeſſe that he had euer wiſedome: For if he hath ben at any time without wiſdome, who made him wiſe afterwards? or of whome he receiued wiſedome cannot be founde. And as this is moſt abſurde, and contrary to all reaſon, to beléeue that he that is the fountayne, and and originall of all wiſdome was ſometimes without wiſedome: So muſt it néedes be, that wiſedome was euer in him, wiſedome euer came from hym, and was euer with him.
               Wiſedome was euer with hym, for he had wiſedome euer, which was wiſe euer, wiſedome euer came from him, becauſe he begat the wiſdome, which he hath. Wiſedome was euer with hym▪
                  
becauſe the begotten neuer leaueth the begetter. Wiſedome is euer begotten, and is euer in begetting, & yet neyther beginning, when it is begetting, nor ending when it is begotten.
               It is euer in begetting, becauſe it is eternall, it is euer begotten becauſe it is perfect: ſo there is one that begetteth, and one that is begotten. The Father begetteth, the ſonne is begotten, and becauſe he that did beget, did beget from eternall, the Father is eternall. And becauſe, he that is begotten, is begotten from eternall, the ſonne is coeternall with the father eternall.
               He that had wiſdome, euer loued wiſdome euer, and that which loued euer, had loue euer. Therefore loue is coeternall with the eternall father and ſonne. For the father is of none, the ſonne is of the father alone: But loue procéedeth from the father and the ſonne together.
               Becauſe we haue auouched before, that the maker of all thinges is abſolutely and truely one, we muſt therfore confeſſe, that theſe thrée be one ſubſtantially. Therefore becauſe he that is begotten,

cannot be the ſame of whom he was begotten, neyther he that proceedeth from the begetter and the begotten can be, eyther the begetter or the begotten, the inexpugnable ground of truth doth compell vs to acknowledge in the Godhead both the trinity of the perſon, and the vnity of the ſubſtance. Therfore to thrée in one Godhead is commō both equal eternity, and eternall equallity. For that cannot be diuers in euery one, which one Godhead maketh common to euery one.
               Then threée be one, becauſe in thrée perſons there is one ſubſtaunce, but the thrée perſons be not one perſon.
               For euen as the diſtinction of ech perſon doth not deuide the vnity of ye Godhead: ſo the vnity of the Godhead doeth not confound the diſtinction of the perſons.
            
            
               
                  ❧ 
                  The. xxj. branch.
               
               BUt I thinke good a little more dilligently, to weigh this former ſpéech: That the father loueth his wiſedome.
               For men be wont to loue their knowledge

for the profyte, not the profyte for the knowledge. As the knowledge of huſbandry, of weauing, of paynting, &c. where the knowledge is reckued, altogether vnprofytable, except the profyte followeth of it.
               If it were ſo about the wiſedome of God, then ſhould the worke be better, then the workman. Therfore we muſt bold that wiſedome is euer to be loued for the ſelfe.
               Now if it ſometimes falleth out that the worke is preferred before wiſdom, it groweth not of the iudgement of the truth, but of the errour of man, for wiſdome is lyfe, and the lous of wiſedome is the bleſſedneſſe of life.
               Wherefore when it is ſayde, that the father of wiſedome, delighteth himſelfe in wiſedome, God forbid, that it ſhould be thought that we beléeue, that God loueth his wiſedome for the workes ſake which he made by it: Nay rather he loued none of his workes, but for his wiſdomes ſake. And therfore he ſayd this is my beloued ſonne, in whome I haue ſet my delight, and not in the earth or in the

heauen, or the Sunne, or the Moone, or the Starres, or the Aunpeis, or in any of the moſt excellent creatures. For although theſe things he after their manner delightfull, yet they cannot delight but in him and for him. For ſo much more doe I loue them, as they come 
                     ••
                  
                  rer to his likeneſſe. Not therefore God loueth his wiſedome for his works, but his workes for his wiſedome. For in that is euery thing bewtifull, and true, and is wholy his deſire. 
                     •
                  ight vnuiſible and life immortall, whoſe 
                     •
                  ight is ſo much deſyred, that it maye delight the eyes of God. Simple, and perfect, not redundant, and yet full: Sole, but not ſolitary: One, 
                     •
                   conteyning al thinges.
            
            
               
                  ❧ 
                  The. xxij. branch.
               
               BEcauſe we beléeue thrée perſons in one Godhead▪ it is to be 
                     •
                  ought out. whether that, which agreeth to any of theſe agréeth to the other.
               It was ſaide, that the father loueth the ſonne. Let vs nowe conſyder, whether it maye likewiſe be ſaide, that the loue of the father, and the sonne, loueth

the ſonne: That the ſonne loueth hymſelfe, that the father loueth hymſelfe, that the ſonne loueth the father, that the loue of the father, & the ſonne loueth the father, that the loue of the father, and the ſonne loueth it ſelfe, yt the father loueth his loue, & his ſonnes, that the ſonne loueth his loue & the fathers. And to make an ende, whether it be one, and the ſame loue, with the which euerye one loueth himſelfe, and that, with the which euery one loueth another.
               But this will be more eaſie, if we call to rememberaunce the thinges, that be ſpoken of before. For in ye former treatiſe it is proued that GOD is the fyrſt cauſe, and originall of all good things, neyther can there be anye Nobler good, then that, which is the Fountaine and beginning of all. So that it followeth, that God is the chiefe good. Therefore God is bleſſed alone, and properly, and principally. And how can he be bleſſed, which loueth not the ſame, which he is. Whoſoeuer therefore is bleſſed, bothe loueth the ſelfe and the ſubſtaunce. If then the father and the Sonne be one,

and be one God, ſithence, that true bleſſedneſſe is in God alone: It is vnpoſſible, but ye both ech one ſhould loue the ſelfe, and eche one ſhould loue another.
               For it were no true bleſſedneſſe, nay rather it were the chiefe vnhappineſſe, if they ſhould parte themſelues by contrarie will, and could not be parted one from another for the ſame ſubſtance.
               As therefore the father and the ſonne, and the loue of the father and the ſonne, by nature, and ſubſtance be one: ſo alſo by will and loue, they muſt néedes be one. Ech one loueth the ſelfe with one loue, bicauſe they be one. Neyther is it any other thing, yt eche one loueth in an other, but that, which eche one loueth in the ſelfe: bicauſe it is no other thing, that eche one is, but the ſame, that the other is.
               That which the Father loueth in the ſonne, the ſame the ſonne loueth in him ſelfe, and that which the loue of the father & the ſonne loueth in the ſonne, the verie ſame the ſonne loueth in himſelf.
               Agayne, that which the ſonne loueth in the father, the verie ſame loueth the

father in himſelfe. And that which the loue of the father, and the ſonne, loue in the father, that the father loueth in himſelfe. Alſo that which the father, and the ſonne loue in their loue that the loue of the father, and the ſonne loueth in the ſelfe.
               Laſt of all, that, that ſhe father loueth in himſelfe, the very ſame doth he loue in the ſame, & in his loue. And y• which the ſonne loueth in himſelfe, the very ſame doth he loue in the father, and in his loue. And that which the loue of the father, and of the ſonne loueth in it ſelf, the verie ſame doth it loue in the ſonne, and in the father.
            
            
               
                  ❧ 
                  The. xxiij. branch.
               
               MArke whether the voyce of the Father doth confyrme this? Thys is (ſayeth he) my beloued ſonne, in whom I haue together delighted my ſelfe. He did not ſaye, alone, I haue together delighted my ſelfe, neyther did he ſaye alene he hath together delighted me, neyther did he ſay both, I together haue delighted my ſelfe, and he together hath

delighted me. But he ſaide, I together haue delighted my ſelfe in him. That is to ſay, that which lyketh me in my ſeife, is in him, & without him no iote of it, for that, that I am, he is, and becauſe I am nothing, but that which he is, I cannot lyke my ſelfe without him. Then this is my beloued ſonne, in whome I haue together liked my ſelfe. Whatſoeuer pleſeth me, the ſame in him, and for him pleaſeth me. He is the wiſedome, by the which I made all things, and in him did I diſpoſe eternally, that, which I made temporally. And ſo much the more do I loue euery my worke the liker I ſée it to the fyrſt courſe.
               Thinke not that he is onely a mediatoure for the recōciling of men, becauſe thorow him the condition of eache creature is made commendable, and pleaſaunt to my ſight, in him doe I eramine all my workes which I doe. And I cannot but loue that, which I ſée like vnto him, which I loue. Onely he miſliketh me, which is vnlike vnto him.
               If therefore you wil pleaſe me, heare him. And if you become vnlike vnto him

thorough your euell deedes, retourne by following him. In him is geuen the commaundement, and in him councell. The cōmaundement th
                     •
                  t you ſhould go on. Councell that you ſhould retourne: I would you had kept the commaundement. But becauſe ye haue broken the commaundement, follow the councell, heare him.
               He is ſent vnto vs, as the Aungell of the great councell, that as he was geuen vnto vs fyrſ
                     •
                   made to glory, ſo ſhould he be vnto vs loſt, a medicine: Heare him.
               He is your maker, he is your redéemer, he y• ſayd God made you with me, which with you man alone cōmeth vnto you: heare him.
               He is the forme, he is the ſalue, he is the example, he is the remedy: heare him.
               It had bene better to haue kept ſtill his likeneſſe: But now it wilbe no leſſe glorieus to retourne to the incitation of him: heate him.
               O man why doeſt theu blame thy ignoraunce, beholde thy nature doeth reproue thée, the ſame doeth confounde théee,

thou knoweſt which a one thou art, whēce thou commeſt, what maker thou haſte, what Mediatour thou needeſt, and doeſt thou crye agaynſt the Lord impudent
                     •
                  y defending thy ſelfe?
               Thou knoweſt thou arte naught, and waſte made good, of a good workeman, and doeſt thou ceaſe and not crye to him that made thee, to come & repayre thee, which made thee, to redeeme thée, doubt not of his power: Sée his workes how great they be. Doubt not of his wiſdom: See his works how faire they be. Doubt not of his mercy: See his workes how profytable they be. So God doth ſhe we his workes, how mighty he is in thy redemption. He doth alſo ſhew thee, how dreadfull a Judge thou arte to looke for, if thou refuſe him for thy redéemer.
               None can withſtand him, for he is almighty.
               None cā deceue him, for he is moſt wiſe.
               None can corrupt him, for he is beſt.
               None can flye from him, becauſe he is euery where.
               None can take him away, becauſe he is eiernall.
               
                  None can bow him, becauſe he is vnchaungeable.
               If therefore we like not to haue ſuch a Judge, let vs ſéeke and imbraſe him as our redeemer.
            
            
               
                  ❧ 
                  The .xxiiij. branch.
               
               WHen of late I begone to learne thinges not ſeene, by things ſeene, I went from the creature hauing body, to the creature that had no body, I mean the creature pertaker of reaſon. And then from the creature pertaker of reaſon, I came to the wiſedome of God. But now going backe agayne, I meane to procéede, fyrſt from the wiſedome of God, to the creature, pertaker of reaſon and next from the creature pertaker of reaſon, to the creature hauing body.
               The one is the order of knowledge, the other of condicion. For the bodilye creature, which is ſéene, is firſt known, then by the bodily creature, we learn to know that without body. Fynally this way of knowledge opened, leadeth vs to the Creator and maker of both.
               But touching condition and ſtate,

for the fyrſt ſteppe. The creature pertaker of reaſō was made after the Image of God, afterwardes was made the bodily creature, that the creature pertaker of reaſō ſhould acknowledge within it, outwardly that, which inwardly it had receaued of the maker.
               In the wiſedome of God is trueth, in the creature pertaker of reaſon, is the Image of truth. In the creature hauing body, is the ſhadow of the Image.
               The creature pertaker of reaſon was made after the wiſedome of God. The creature hauing body was made after the creature pertaker of reaſon. And therefore all mouing and tourning of the bodily creature is after the becke of the reaſonable creature. And euery mouing and tourning of ye bodily creature, ſhould be after the beck of the wiſdome of God. That whilſt ech one doth ſtill obey the ſuperioure, they ſhoulde neuer leaue the order of the firſt condition, nor the ſimilitude of the fyrſt example.
               So that whoſoeuer will followe the method of knowledge frō thinges ſeene, to thinges not ſéene, muſt goe by knowledge

of the bo
                     •
                  ily creature, to the reaſonable creature: And by the knowledge of the reaſonable creature, to the knowledge of the maker.
               But he that retourneth from the not ſeene, to the ſeene, muſt fyrſt goe downe from the Creator, to the reaſonable creature, next frō the reaſonable creature, to the bodily creature.
               The courſe of knowledge in mans mind, doth goe before the order of condition. For we that are without, cannot retourne from the thinges within, except fyrſt we Pearce the thinges within with the eye of our mind.
               The order of condition, doth follow the courſe of knowledge, for although mans weakneſſe doth ſomtimes a little enter in, to conſider of inward thinges, yet his infyrmity is ſuch, that he cannot long continue in the ſame.
            
            
               
                  ❧ 
                  The .xxv. branch.
               
               AFter that I haue made knowne the things not ſéene, by the things ſéene, ſo farre forth as GOD hath giuen mée grace. Nowe let the minde retourne to

the ſelfe and ſee, what pr
                     •
                  ſy
                     •
                  e it maye reape by this knowledge. For what doth it preuayle, if we knowe the highneſſe of God his maieſtie, and take no profyte thereby.
               And therefore beholde, whiles we retourne from that 
                     〈◊〉
                   deepe ſecrete of the contemplation of God▪ what bring we thence with vs, 
                     〈…〉
                  hat b
                     〈…〉
                   
                  
                     〈…〉
                  t, comming out of the region of light
                     〈…〉
                  , this is both conuenient and neceſſarie, that comming out of the region of lighte, we ſhoulde carry light with vs, to dryue away our darkneſſe, and who can know, that we haue bene there, except we retourne lightened?
               Let it therfore appeare, that we haue bene there, let it therfore appeare what we haue ſéene there.
               If we haue ſéene power, let vs carry away the light of the feare of God.
               If we haue ſéene wiſdome, let vs carry away the light of truth.
               If we haue ſeene mercy, let vs carry away the light of loue.
               Power doth ſtirre vp ſluggiſh to loue.
               Wiſedome doeth lighten theſe that

were blinded with darkeneſſe of ignoraunce.
               Mercy doth kindle the cold, with the heate of loue.
               Now conſider I pray you, whether light be any thing elſe, but day, & darkeneſſe but night: And euen as the eye of the body hath the daye, and the night, ſo the eye of the mind hath the day and the night.
            
            
               
                  ❧ 
                  The. xxvj. branch.
               
               THere be thrée dayes of the not ſéene light, by the which, the courſe of the ſpiritual life is inwardly diſtinguiſhed.
               The fyrſt day is feare, the ſecōd truth, the thirde loue. The ſunne of the fyrſt day is power, of the ſeconde daye wiſedome, of the thirde day mercie.
               Power belongeth vnto the father.
               Wiſedome to the ſonne.
               And mercie to the holy ghoſt.
               Our outwarde dayes, and our inwarde dayes differ much.
               Our outewarde dayes paſſe awaye againſt our will.
               Our inward dayes may returne for

euer, if we will.
               Of the feare of God it is written, that it abideth for euer, and euer. Alſo there is no doubt, but truth may continewe for cuer: For albeit, it beginne in this life, yet then it ſhall be full, and perf
                     ••••
                   in vs, when after the end of the worlde he, which is truth ſhall more manifeſtly appeare. Likewiſe of loue, it is written that loue neuer dyeth.
               Theſe be good dayes, that neuer haue ende, the other dayes be naught, which not onely, not abide euer, but cannot ſtay a little.
               Of theſe the Prophete ſpeaketh, the dayes of man be as graſſe. The fyrſte dayes be the deſert & rewarde of ſinne, the ſecond be the gifte of mercy. Of the ſecond ſpeaketh the Prophete. In my dayes will I call vpon God. For if hee ment of the other, why doth he not ſaye, I will call vpon him in the night, ſeeing that he ſayeth in an other place. At midnight did I riſe to prayſe thee. But he calleth theſe his dayes, becauſe hée doth not loue the other.
               According to the ſaying of Jeremy.

Lord thou knoweſt that I neuer cared for the day of man. Thoſe be the dayes of the which Jobe was full. Of whome it is written that he dyed old, and full of daies, for he could not be ful of the other dayes which were not yet paſt.
               Onely euil men know the dayes that be outward, and good mē the dayes that be inward.
               Good men doe not onely not loue the outward dayes, but curſe them. Curſed be that day, ſayeth bleſſed Jobe, in the which I was borne, and the nighte in the which it was ſayd, a man childe is conceaued, let that daye be tourned to darckneſſe, and be had no more in remembraunce, nor ſee light.
               Then we ought rather to loue the inward dayes where light and darckneſſe goe not together where the beames of the eternall ſonne doe lighten ye inward eyes of the heart of the world.
            
            
               
                  ❧ 
                  The. xxvij. branch.
               
               KIng Dauid ſpake of thoſe daies ſaying, declare his ſauiour from day to day▪ What is his ſauiour but his Jeſus,

for Jeſus is expounded Sauyoure. And he is called ſauyoure, becauſe he doeth ſaue men from ſinne and death, to lyfe. For of him ſo ſayeth Saint John, the law was geuen by Moyſes. But mercy and truth came by Jeſus Chriſt. Likewiſe Paule calleth Chriſt Jeſus the power of God, and the wiſedome of God.
               If therefore Jeſus Chriſt be the wiſdome of God, and truth came by Jeſus Chriſt, it is euident, that truth came by the wiſedome of God. So truth is ye day of wiſedome.
               Wiſedome it ſelfe ſpeaketh to the Jewes thus of this day: Your Father Abraham did deſyre to ſée my day, he ſaw it and was glad of it, for the trueth of God is the redemption of mankinde, which he fyrſt promiſed, which ſéeing he afterwardes performed, what did he elſe, but ſhew himſelfe true.
               Then truth was fulfilled by this wiſdome, from the which all truth doth ſpring, neyther was any other ſente to fulfill truth, but he in whom the fulneſſe of al truth was. Therfore did Abraham well reioyce at the day of truth, becauſe

he deſyred trueth to be fulfilled, which daye then he ſaw by the holy ghoſt, whē he did beleeue that the ſonne of GOD ſhould be incarnate to redeeme man.
               Let it be ſaide: Declare his ſaluation from day to day, the ſecond day from the fyrſt daye to the thirde, the daye of truth, from the day of feare, to the days of loue.
               Firſt there was but one day, the day of feare. Then came the ſeconde daye, the daye of truth. It came I ſaye, it dyd not ſuccéede, for the fyrſt did not depart, ſo haue you two dayes. The third ſprang out, the daye of loue. But when that thirde day came, it did not dryue away the two fyrſt. Bleſſed are theſe dayes, in the which men maye growe to perfection, where things to come doe come, and preſent doe not depart, where the number is increaſte, and the brightneſſe multiplyed.
               Firſt men being vnder ſinne, were reproued by the lawe, and beganne to feare GOD as the Judge, becauſe they ſawe their owne guiltineſſe. Then 
                     〈◊〉
                   feare him, is to know him, for truely

they cannot feare him, excepte they know him.
               Now this knowledge was ſome light. Nowe was it daye, but not bright day, for they were yet dimme thorowe the darkeneſſe of ſinne.
               Then came the day of truth, the day of ſaluation, to deſtroy ſinne, to lighten the brightneſſe of the fyrſt daye, and to engender feare, & not to take it away, but to turne it into better.
               Neyther was the brightneſſe yet full, till loue was ioyned to it. For the truth it ſelfe ſayeth. I haue many thinges to ſay vnto you, but you cannot yet beare them, but when that ſpirite of truth ſhal come, he ſhall teach you all truth. So all truth is to this end, to take away the euell, and to rectify the good.
               Behold there be thrée dayes, the daye of feare, which maketh the euell knowe the day of truth, which taketh away the euell, & the day of loue, which reſtoreth the good.
               The daye of truth doeth make bright the day of feare. The day of loue doeth make bright both the day of feare, and

the day of truth, vntill loue ſhall be perfected, and all truth known manifeſtly, and the feare of payne be tourned into the feare of reuerence. Declare therefore his ſaluation from day to day.
            
            
               
                  ❧ 
                  The. xxviij. branch.
               
               THe Prophete Oſea ſpake of theſe dayes: He ſhall quicken vs after two dayes, and in the third day he ſhall rayſe vs vp. For euen as our Lord Jeſus Chriſt riſing the third day from the dead, did himſelfe quicken vs, and raiſe vs vp: So we hearing and being glad of this, it is conuenient that we ſhoulde be thankefull vnto him for this greate benefite. And like as we haue riſen agayne, with him riſing againe the third day, ſo we riſing agayne this thirde day for him, and thorowe him ſhoulde cauſe him to riſe agayne in vs.
               Neyther may we thinke, but that he would haue that payed agayne, which he fyrſt lent vs. Therefore euen as hee would haue thrée daies to worke in him ſelfe, and by himſelfe our ſaluation. Euen ſo he hath geuen vs thrée dayes to

worke in our ſelues by faith in his mercy our ſaluation.
               But becauſe that which he did, was not onely a medicine, but alſo an example, and a ſacrament, it was to be done outwardly, to teach vs what we ſhould doe inwardly. So his dayes were outwardly, but ours are to be 
                     •
                  oughte inwardly.
            
            
               
                  ❧ 
                  The .xxix. branch.
               
               WEhaue thrée dayes inwardly, in the which our ſoule may be lightned: Death doth appertayne to the firſt day, Buryall to the ſecond, and riſing agayne to the third.
               The firſt daye is feare, the ſeconde is truth, and the thirde loue.
               The day of feare is the daye of power, and the day of the father.
               The daye of wiſedome, is the daye of truth, and the day of the ſonne.
               The daye of loue, is the day of mercie, and the daye of the holye ghoſt.
               Surely the daye of the father, and the daye of the ſonne, and the day of the holye ghoſt is all one in brightneſſe of the

Godhead, but in lightening our minds, the father hath one daye, the ſonne an other, and the holy ghoſt the thirde. Not that in any reſpect we ought to beleeue, that the trinity which in ſubſtance cannot be ſeuered, in working maye be ſeuered, but that the diſtinction of the perſons maye be vnderſtoode, by the difference of the workes.
               When the conſyderation of the Almightie power of God doth ſtirre our hartes to prayſe God, it is the day of the father. But when the wiſdome of God, doth light our harts with ye ſéene knowledge of the truth, it is the day of the ſon. And when the mercy of God conſydered doth fyre our hartes with loue, it is the day of the holy ghoſ
                     •
                  .
               Power doth terrify, Wiſedome doth lighten, Mercy doth glad.
               In the day of power, we die by feare.
               In the daye of wyſedome, we be buryed from the noyſe of thys worlde, by the contemplation of truth.
               In the day of mercie we riſe agayne, by the loue and deſyre of eternall ioy.
               For therefore Chriſt died the ſixt day,

laye in the graue the ſeuenth daye, and roſe agayne the eyght daye, that in ſemblable maner, firſt power in that day by feare, ſhould outwardly kil vs from carnall deſyres, and then wiſedome the next daye ſhoulde inwardly burie vs in the graue of contemplation: And laſt of all mercie in that day, ſhould cauſe vs quickned to ariſe agayne by Fayth, and by the deſyre of ye loue of God. For that the ſixt day is the day of labour, the ſeuenth day, the day of reſt, and the eyght daye, the daye of ryſing againe.
            
         
         
            
               
               
                  ❧ 
                  A Prayer.
               
               
                  SHyne we beſéech thée, O almighty and mercifull God, of our Lorde Jeſus Chriſt that father of glory, vpon our minds, and hearts, with the beames of thy heauenly grace, and geue vs the ſpirite of wiſedome and vnderſtanding, thorough the knowledge of thee, that the eyes of our heartes being lighted, we may knowe what is the hope of the calling, and howe riche is the glory of the heritage of thy ſayntes, and that excellent greatneſſe of thy power towardes vs, which beléeue according to the might of ye force of thy ſtrength, which thou ſhewed in Chriſt, whē thou diddeſt raiſe him from the dead, and diddeſt ſet him at thy right hand in heauen, farre aboue all Empyre, power, aucthoryty, and dominion, and euery name that is named, not onely in this world, but alſo in the world to come. Graunt this moſte mercifull father, for thy beſt beloued ſonnes ſake our onely aduocate and ſauioure Chriſt Jeſus. So be it.
            
            
               
               
                  ❧ 
                  Whether the naturall aud glorifyed body of Chriſt, is in all or manye places, at one, and the ſame time.
               
                  
                     NIc
                        •
                     pherus doeth write yt 
                  Vtiches and Dioſchorus the greate enemyes of the councell of Calcedon, went to Alamordaru
                        •
                     
                   a King of the Saracenes, a little before conuerted to the fayth, and babtized, to infect him with their heriſyes. But the good King well inſtructed, and ſtrongly propt vp, with the grace of God, contynued a zelous and conſtant profeſſour of Chriſt. At the laſt when by no meanes he could rid himſelfe of the crafty, and importune ſouldyours of Sathan, he fayned, that he muſt needes goe ſpeake with certayne ſtraungers, & ſoone after retourning to Vtiches and Dioſchorus, tould them that he had receaued ſtrange newes, that Michaell the Archaungell was dead: Vtiches and Dioſchorus cryed out, and ſayd they were lyes: For it was vnpoſſible yt an Angell ſhould dye.

Then ſayd the King what mad men be yee, that confeſſe that Chriſt was crucified, and dead, and yet denye that he was a man.
               The ſame in déede, though not in euery reſpect falleth out with them, which graunt that Chriſt hath a natural body, but deny that the ſame body is compriſed in one place.
               
                  Vtiches denied that Chriſt was a mā, but he doeth not denye that he was crucifyed and dead: Theſe doe denye that Chriſtes body is bounded, or in one place, but they doe not deny that it is a naturall body: I doe not therefore ſée how they can ſhifte their ſelues of the 
                     •
                  utikian hereſy, or the confounding of the two natures in Chriſt, which take away place and circumſcription from the naturall body of Chriſt: In worde they ſay, that the two natures in Chriſt be diſtincte, and that the ſeueral properties of ech of the natures be diſtinct, but in déede they confound them all in trāſferring the whole force of ye Godhead into the body.
               Truth it is that the glorifyed body is

moreſubtill and nimble, then the not glorifyed body, as S. Auguſtine doeth wel ſay. But yet a body, and a body boū
                  ded with the boundes of place.
               
                  Ariſtotle doth ſay, and very truely,Auguſt▪ ad Dardanum. that euerybody muſte needes be as it were hedged about with a place, & the ſame S. Auſten writeth to Dardanus, take away ſpaces of places frō bodyes, and they ſhalbe no where, and becauſe they ſhall be no where, they ſhall not be at all.
               But if the nature of the body of Chriſt be weighed by it ſelfe, it is ſo as you ſay. Notwithſtanding if you looke to the power of God, by that and from that, it may haue force to be euery where. For who can ſet any bounde to the power of God, which made the heauens, ye earths, the ſeas of nothing: The aunſwere is eaſie, no manne calleth in queſtion the ſtrength and power of God, but we inquire what his will is, our queſtion is not, whether God coulde haue the naturall body of Chriſt to be in euery place at one time, but whether God woulde haue it ſo. Wherefore, that I maye be

frée from al quarels and ſlaunders, euen at the dore of my ſpéeche, I doe openly and plainely proteſt, that we doe not thruſt or binde the bodye of Chriſt into any ſtraight priſon of the Firmament, but that we beléeue and confeſſe, that the ſame is in the moſt large and noble Countrie of the lyuing, farre aboue all the heauens, ſubiect to the ſences. Alſo that we do not part the manhood frō the Godheade, or the Godheade from the Manhood, but that we doe moſt certainly beléeue that theſe two natures be euer knitte and lincked together, in one parſon of Chriſt, perfyte God and perfyte man. Thirdly, that we doe not in any reſpect diminiſhe that great and infinite power of the great and mightye God, but that we do honour him as god almightie and eternall. And yet we are loth to be reckned in ye number of thoſe which the Poet Horaſe doeth ſpeake. Whilſt Fooles doth auoyde one faulte, they fall into another, I meane, that I would neither ſpeake more narrowly, nor more nobly of the moſt noble & bleſſed body of Chriſt, there the word of god

doth teach me. For our may
                     ••
                  er Chriſt geueth the ſame for a rule. Searche the ſcriptures: For they beare witneſſe of me.
               And truely the aunciente Fathers doe playnly teache, that argumentes drawen from the power of God, be both very weake and to to daungerous, firſtTertullianus adu
                        •
                     rgus Prax
                     
                        •
                     am. 
                  Tertullian againſt Praxias the Heretick ſayd, it is not hard for God to make him ſelfe both Father and ſonne contrary to the courſe of nature, as it was not hard for GOD to cauſe the barren to bring forth a childe, and the virgin an other. Certaynly there is nothing harde vnto God, but and if we ſhall vſe theſe preſumptions and geſſes ſo abruptly & haſ
                     •
                  ely. We may ſurmiſe any thing of god that God hath done it, becauſe he coulde doe it: But not becauſe God can doe all thinges, therefore are we bounde to beléeue, that God hath done that, which he hath not done, but it is our duety toHi
                        •
                     ron▪ tomo. 1. epiſt. ad Euſtoch. ſerch out by Gods worde, whether he haue done it or no: Secondly S. Ierome, writing to Euſtochius of the kéeping of virginity, doth ſay (I ſpeake boldly) although

God can doe all thinges, yet can he not rayſe vp a Ʋirgin after her fall.
               Thirdly ſaint Auſten againſt Fauſtus,
                  Aug. lib. 26. cap. 5. whoſoeuer ſayth, if God be almighity, he can cauſe, that thoſe things which be done, be not done, he doth not ſée, that he ſayth thus much in effect, if God be almightie, he can cauſe, that the ſame things which be true, in that, that they be true be alſo falſe. Laſt of all Theodorete
                  Theodor. in. 3. dial. in his thirde Dialogue, which is called Impatibilis: doeth ſaye, that we ought not to ſay definitely and abſolutely, that all things be poſſible vnto God. By the which it appeareth that we may auouch without impechmente of Gods almighty power▪ that God hath not done all thinges which he coulde haue done, neyther doth the word teach yt, but this, God hath done whatſoeuer hee would, yt is to ſaye, whatſoeuer it ſéemed good to his wiſdome to haue done: Thē we are to ſéeke out, whether it be Gods will & pleaſure that the humayne and natural body of Chriſt ſhould be in euery place, at one time. For if Gods will be ſo, it is without all doubt, but if Gods will bée

not ſo, it is great ſinne to teach or thinke the contrary. If Gods will be to haue the naturall body of Chriſt, a made body, an humayne body, and a natural body, a body diſtinguiſhed with partes, then Gods will is not that Chriſtes naturall body ſhould be in many places at one time: For then it ſhould breake the boundes, marckes, and limmittes, and ſhould leaue to be an humayne and naturall body. Nowe nothing can at the ſawe time be a humayne body, and a not humayne body, a naturall body, and a not naturall body. But you will ſay, you may not leaue to reaſon in matters of religion: Truth it is, if the booke of God teach otherwiſe: But the body of Chriſte hath this peculier and priuate grace, to be in many places at once, not locally: it is as much to ſay, as it hath this peculier grace, to be a body and not bodily: Wherefore I will goe on thus: It can by no meanes be, that a thing made ſhould be euery where, but the body of Chriſt is a thing made, then it can by no meanes be, that the body of Chriſt ſhould be euery where.
               
                  
                  Baſillus the great doth proue the propoſitionBaſillius lib. de 
                        ••
                     . 5. in his booke of the holy Ghoſt: The Aungell that ſtoode by Cornelius, was not the ſame tyme with Phillip, neyther he that ſpake to Zachary at the Aulter, was the ſame time in heauen.
               But the holy ghoſt did work in ye ſame moment in Abacuck and in Danyel, and was at the ſame time with Ieremy in the dungen & with Ezechiell in Choua
                        •
                     : For the ſpirite of the Lord hath filled ye whole world. But he that is in all places, 
                     •
                   p
                     •
                  eſſt with God, of what nature or condition oughte he to be beléeued to be, of that, which contayneth all things, or of that which is contayned in ſome perticuler place.
               
                  Vigillius doeth proue the ſame, ſpeakingVigilius in d
                        •
                     all. in the perſon of Athanaſius in his Dialogue, in the which, the ſpeakers be S
                        •
                     b
                        •
                     llius, Photinus, Arius, and Athanaſius: Thereby it is playne, that the holy ghoſt is God, becauſe it is euery where, and is contayned in no place, as the Prophete ſpeaketh to God the Father: Whether ſhall I gee from the ſpirite? For to be euery where, and in one and

the ſame momente to fill the heauens, the earthes, the Seas, and lowe places belongeth not to any creature, but only to God: And a little afterward, it cannot be in one nature to lye in the boſom of the M
                     •
                  nger, and to be ſhewed by the ſtarres, to be ſubiecte to men, and to bee ſerued by the Aungels, to flye frō place to place, and to be preſēt in euery place, to dwel in Earth, and not to leaue 
                     〈…〉
                  auen. To cōclude Cirillus proueth it thus,Cirillus lib. 
                        〈…〉
                      cap. 1. if God fill all places, and that by the holy ghoſt, the holy ghoſt is God, and not a creature.
               Theſe may be briefely knit vp thus, according to Baſill, the body of Chriſt or ther is of that nature and condition, which contayneth all thinges, that is to ſay, diuine, or God, or of that nature and condition, which is contayned in ſome perticuler place: But it is not the diuine nature or God, therfore it is contayned in ſome perticuler place. According to Vigill, if it be euery where, and contayned in no place, it is God, but it is not god, therefore it is contayned in ſome place: According to Cirillus, if it

fyll all places, it is not a creature, but it is a creature, therefore it doth not fil all places. I grant ſay you, that a creature ſhould be God, if by the owne power it could be euer where, but the body of Chriſt, hath not that of the ſelfe, but by the maieſty of the Godhead adioyned to it. The hereticke graunted the ſame of the holy ghoſt, and therefore the aucthority of theſe ancient Fathers doth preſſe you as much as them. No ſave you, I doe not ſpeake of the body of Chriſt, as of a ſimple and common creature, but as of a creature coupled to the godhead by vnion or oning of perſon, and ye ſame alſo being glorifyed by reſurrection and aſcention, which I ſaye hath by force of the godhead this grace geuen to it, that it ſhould be in euery place preſent with the Godhead, and neuer parted from it, and ſo cannot be compriſed in any one place. Then heare what Theodorete
                  Theodo. dial. 2. doth ſay in his ſecōd Dialogue. The body of our Lord is riſen againe, frée from corruption and deſtruction, and is impatible and immortall, and glorifyed & worſhipped of the heauēly powers, and

yet it is a body and hath the ſame circumſcription which it had before. Here Cirillus in his ſecond booke of the Trinity,Cirillus lib. 2. & tom 
                        •
                     . de Trinitate if the Trinity coulde be parted, it ſhould be a body, and if it were a body, it ſhould be abſolutely in place, and it ſhould be great, and haue quantity, and if it had quantt
                     •
                  y, it could not auoyde circumſcription.
               Here Auſten in his thirteth TreatiſeAuguſt in Iohan. tract. 30. vpon ſaint John, the Lorde Jeſus is aboue, but here is alſo the truth, ye Lorde. For the bodie of the Lorde, in the which he roſe againe, muſt needes be in one place, but the truth is diſperſed.
               I reaſon thus out of Theodorete, theTheodoretus. incorruptible, the impatible, the immortall, the glorifyed, the worſhipped body of the Lorde is circumſcribed as it was being vpon earth: Therfore whatſoeuer bodye of Chriſt you meane, it is comprehended in one place: Out of Cirill thus: If the Trinity be a body, it isCirillus. in place, it hath quantitie, it hath circumſcription. But the humaine natureAuguſt. of Chriſt ioyned with the Godhead, and being glorifyed and made immortall is

a body. Therefore it is in place, it hath quantitie, it hath circumſcription.
               Out of Auſten the body of the Lorde in the which he roſe againe, muſt be in one place: Ergo the immortall and glorifyed bodye of Chriſt, is contained in one place. Neyther is this to part the natures of the manhoode and Godhead of Chriſt, but to ſet downe the ſeuerall properties of eche nature: For I doe not meane, that the humane nature is in place ſeuered from the deuine nature, but is euer ioyned to it. But yet the humanitie doth not fyll all places, which the Deity doeth fill. This maye well appere by this ſimilitude, although it be not like in all pointes, for you be to vnderſtande, that a ſymilitude néedeth not to be like in all pointes, but onely in thoſe properties, the which is vſed to make plaine.
               The bodie of the ſunne abydeth euer in the globe or circle in the Firmamēt, but the beames of the ſunne doe walke thorow the whole worlde, the vertue of the ſunne doth comfort, féede, and nouriſhe euerye lyuing creature vppon the

face of the whole earth, and yet neyther the beames nor the vertue of the ſunne be parted from the bodie of the ſunne. Euen ſo the body of Chriſt is placed in heauen, as in a moſt bewtifull and gorgee
                     •
                  s Throne, but ye godhead of Chriſt doth not onely fill the heauens, the ayre, the ſea, the earth, and the places vnder the earth, but alſo doeth comfort & nouriſhe all and euerye creature, in all and euery the ſaide places, and yet the godhead is not parted from the bodye, although the body fyll not ſo many places as the godhead doth. That famous and learned prince Iuſtinian ſpied thys, that two thinges might be ioyned together, and yet the one not to fyll ſo manye or the ſame places, as the other. And thervpon in his moſt excellent booke: Called the Inſtitutions of Iuſtinian, doeth moſt wiſely and diſcreetely order, that whenIuſtinianus. lib. inſtitut. the bodies & bowes of the trée hang ouer one mans cloſe, and the roote of the trée hangeth in an other: That the trée ſhould be his in whoſe cloſe the roote groweth. For this purpoſe then the body & bowes of the trée be in M
                        •
                     uius his cloſe, ye roote

of the trée groweth in Titius his cloſe, and yet the body and the bowes be not ſeuered from the roote, but ioyned to the roote, although the roote doth not fill any place in Me
                        •••
                     s his cloſe, as the body and bowes doe: Euen ſo then the body of Chriſt reſteth in Heauen, but the godhead doth fyll al other cloſes & places, & they be not ſeuered, but remayn ioyned together. For although the Godhead being of much more excell
                     ••
                  y and efficacy than the beames of the ſunne, and more fruitefull then the rootes of trees, doe poure the force vppon all places and thinges, notwithſtanding the body is not preſent, neither doeth 
                     •
                  il al the ſame place. This is a more familier reſemblaunce. The body of the Candle is ſet in the Candle ſticke, but the light of the Candle fylleth the whole houſe. The body of Chriſt abydeth in heauen, the light of the Godhead fylleth the whole world: The light of the Candell is not parted from the body of the candle, neither is the Godhead of Chriſte parted from the body of Chriſt, but as the light ſhineth ouer all the houſe, and is not ſeuered

from the Candle, being onely in the Candleſtick, for the godhead ſhineth ouer the whole world, and yet is not ſeuered from the bodye, being onely in Heauen.
               Neyther be theſe my deuiſes, but that great Clearke S. Auguſtine doth plainly diſtinguiſh the two natures of ChriſtAug. ad Dard. in the ſelfe ſame manner, writing to Dardanus. We do not think that it was ſayd according to the humayne nature, which God the word tooke of the Virgin Mary. This day thou ſhalt be with me in Paradiſe, for Chriſt as man was not that day in Paradiſe, but in Hell according to his ſoule, in the graue according to his fleſh. Nowe if by S. Auguſtine. Chriſt according to his Godhead were in Paradice or heauen, according to his fleſh in the graue, and yet his Godhead and fleſh not parted, what partition ſhould this bréede of the Godhead and Manhood, to ſay that the naturall body of Chriſt is now only in heauen, and his Godhead both in heauen, and all other places. Alſo it is right to beleeue, and without any partitiō of ye two natures,

that when his naturall body was here vpon earth onely, and not in Heauen: (For according to that Chriſte ſayd, I haue not yet gone vp to your God, and my god, your Father, and my Father.) His Godhead was then both in Earth, and in Heauen. And why doth it not as well ſtand with right fayth, and without any particiō of ye two natures: Now to beleeue that his body is onely in Heauen, according to the ſaying of the Aungell, in the Acts of the Apoſtles: Whom the Heauens muſt holde, &c. and yet his Godhead to be both in Heauen and in Earth, and in euery place. For the ſame S. Auguſtine ſayeth a little afterwards to the ſame effect: Doubte not that man Chriſt, that is chriſt according to his humayn nature is now there, from whēce he ſhall come, by the teſtimony of the Aungell in the ſame ſorte, as hée was ſéene to goe, that is in the ſame fourme and ſubſtaunce of fleſhe. According to this fourme we may not beleue ye Chriſt is euery where. For we muſt take great héede, that we maynteyne not the deity of the man ſo, that we take awaye

the truth of the body. Neither doth it follow, that euery thing that is in▪ GOD ſhould be euery where, where as God is: For the Scripture ſpeaketh moſteAct. 17. truely of vs, that we liue, mooue, and be in God, and yet be we not euery where, as God is. Albeit, that man is an other way in God, for God is an other way in that man after a certayne proper and peculier manner. For god and man is one perſon, and both be one Chriſt, one euery where according to his godhead, in Heauen according to his Manhood. And in the ende of ye Epiſtle, aſſure your ſelfe that Chriſt is euery where as god, and in ſome place of Heauen for theAug. in Ioh. tract. 56. truth of his body. And vppon S. Iohn, according to the preſence of maieſty we haue Chriſt euer, according to the preſence of his fleſh it was well ſayd to his Diſciples: Yée ſhall not haue me euer with you.
               In his booke intituled of the ſubſtanceAug. liber de eſſente diuinite. of Godheade, which is alſo aſcribed to S. Auguſtine, we ought to beléeue and confeſſe that the ſonne of God according to the ſubſtance of his godhead is inuiſible

without body, without circumſeription, but according to his manhoode, we ought to beleeue and confeſſe that he is viſible hauing body, hauing place, and all the parte of man truely. LikewiſeCirill. tract. 59. 
                  Cirillus wryting vpon ſaint John, doth diſtinguiſh the ſame two natures in the ſame ſorte, ſaying: Chriſt is not here by the preſence of the fleſh, which notwithſtanding is euerywhere by the preſenceGregorius. of maieſtie. And Beda in a certaine Homely at Eaſter. The ſame God & man was taken vp in body, which he toke frō
                  Beda. the earth, but remaineth with the ſaints vpon earth by his godhead, by the which he fylleth both the heauen & earth. And Fulgentius to Thraſimundus. Chriſt oneFulgenti. ad trac. in. and the ſame man locall of man, which is God infynite of the father, one and the ſame, according to his humayne nature, abſent in heauen when he was in earth, and leauing the earth when he went vp into heauen, but according to his deuine and immeaſurable nature neither leauing heauen when he came downe from heauen, nor leauing earth when he went vp into heauen. And Vigilius
                  Vigilius.
                  
agaynſt Vtiches, it differeth very much to be circumſcribed wyth place, & to be euery where, & bicauſe the word is euery where, but the fleſhe is not euerye where, it is manifeſt that one, and the ſame. Chriſt is partaker of both Natures, and that he is euerywhere according to the nature of his godheade, and contayned in place according to the nature of hys manhod Saint Auſten doth name the maner of Chriſtes true body, and doth call Chriſt locall. Cirillus affirmeth that he toke away the preſence of hys body. Gregorie denyeth that he is in this worlde by the preſence of his fleſh. Beda doeth auouche that he was taken vp according to his manhood. Fulgentius doth affirme him to be a man locall, and to haue a humane nature local. Vigilius doth moſt euidently ſaye, that his fleſhe is not euery where.
               But you will ſay, all theſe thinges be vnderſtode viſibly, and of a viſyble preſence. Truely, that is more abſurde, then the other, which doth plainely appeare by viewing the Antitheſis, or ſetting of the ſentences one againſt another.

                  Vigilius doth ſay the worde is euery where, the fleſhe is not euery where. Put to viſible, & the ſence will be moſt abſurde, for you muſt ſay the worde is euerye where, the fleſhe is not euery where viſybly, neyther yet the worde is euerye where viſibly, and ſo Vigillius hath ſet downe no difference of the two natures: For his ſence muſte be, the word is euery where inuiſybly, the fleſh is euery where inuiſybly: Waigh that of ſaint Gregorie, Chriſt is not here by the preſence of his humayne nature, you expound it by the viſyble preſence, for you make this the Antitheſis, Chriſt is not here in viſible preſence of his fleſhe, which is euery where by the inuiſyble preſence of his godheade: For the not viſyble preſence, and the inuyſible preſence be al one: So there ſhould be no Antitheſis, no fyght nor repugnauncie of theſe ſentences, but that the ancient fathers ment a manifeſt Antitheſis, & a great repugnancie, who is ſo dull, that he doth not vnderſtande, or ſo blinde that he doeth not ſée, ſythence by the ſame they auouch and eſtabliſh two

diuers natures in Chriſt. The one of perfyte God, the other of perfyte man. Whereby it is euident, that the iudgement of the auncient fathers is, that Chriſt his body is not at al in earth, but ſittteth on the right hande of God the father in heauen, not in an Ju
                     •
                  ri
                     •
                   or golden throne, or in kingly or coſtly apparel, as the ſymple fanſie: but in great glorie and power, as the faythfull beléeue. This is proued by that of Chriſt, in the twenteth of ſaint Mathewe, I leaue the worlde, and I go to my Father,John. 16. and agayne, ye ſhall haue the poore euer with you, but ye ſhall not haue me euer. Alſo I go to my father, and your father, to my GOD, and your God. Likewiſe ſaint Marke wryteth, that the Lorde Jeſus is taken vp into heauen, and ſytteth at the right hande of the Father. And S. PauleColoſſ. 3. exhorteth all men to ſeeke Heauen, where Chriſte ſitteth at the righte hand of GOD the Father. Euen ſo the authour to the Hebrewes. 10. doeth ſaye. we haue ſuch a high prieſt, which ſitteth in Heauen at the right hand of ye throne

of maieſty: And a little after he had offred one Sacrifyce for ſinne, he ſitteth for euer at the right hand of God, from henceforth looking, that his enemies beActs. 2. made his footeſcoole, whome the heauens muſt hold, vntill the time of reſtoring of all thinges, as it is in the ſeconde of the Actes of the Apoſtles.
               All this is ſpoken to ſet down the diuers properties of the two natures in Chriſt, his deuine nature and his humaine nature, and to ſhew that a man may well expreſſe the ſeuerall properties of eche nature, and yet in no caſe part the one from the other. But I pray you, is there no ſupernaturall property in the body of Chriſt, hath it no prerogatiues? Did the wonderfull vnion of the moſt holy godhead, poure no vertue: no force into it? Verie many, but yet not ſuche, as cannot agree with the humaine nature, as ſaint Auſten doth excellently ſay, he gaue to it immortalitie, but toke not awaye the nature of it. And againe, we muſte take great héede, that we do not affirme the deitée of the man ſo, that we take awaye the

truth of the body. Therfore the naturall body of Chriſt is made immortall, gloryfied, ſanctified, quickned, but it is not made eternall, vnmeaſurable, increat, or infynite, for theſe ouerthrowe the humaine nature.
               And that certaine things be ſo peculiar to the godheade, that at all they doe not agrée to the manhood, but be applyed only in phraſe or ſpeech, and contrary, that certayne thinges be peculiar to the manhood, and doe not at all agree to the godhead, but be applied to it onely by phraſe or ſpeech, is manifeſt: In ye firſte of John. He it is which comming after me, was before me. Neyther to be before John, doeth agrée to the manhood of Chriſt in déede, neither to be after John to the godhead.
               This is alſo manifeſt by theſe ſayings, before Abraham was, I am, and the father is greater then I, neyther doeth it agrée to the manhood in déede to be before Abraham, nor to the godhead to be leſſe then the Father.
               Of this point be the Fathers, Irencus, Ambroſius, Ierononius, Vigilius, Auguſtinus,
                  Irenens.
                  
and almoſt all the reſt, moſt ſufficient witneſſes. As ſayth Irenens, the ſoule is preſent to the fleſh dying, and ſuffreth nothing, ſo ye godhead of Chriſt is preſent with the manhood ſuffring, and ſuffering nothing, onely reſted.Ambr
                        •
                     s. 
                  Ambroſe of that vpon S. Iohn. Hereafter you ſhall ſee the ſonne of man ſitting on the right hande of the vertue: This ſitting doth ſo appertayne to the man, ſayeth he, that in no caſe it is applyed to the Godhead which is infinite, for God that is euer euery where, cannot goe from place to place: Ier
                        •
                     me,
                  I
                        ••
                     eron. Vigilius. Chriſt did die according to that he could die: Vigilius agaynſt Vtiches, he one, and the ſame ſonne of God the Lord Jeſus Chriſte both died according to the fourme of a ſeruaunt, and died not according to the fourme of God. Auſten
                  Aug. vpon that of S. John. None went vp into heauen, but he that came down from heauen, the ſonne of man, which is in heauen▪ he was here, ſayeth S. Auſten, by fleſh, in heauen, by Godhead, yea euery where by Godhead, and a little after, ſhall not man (Chriſt) be called the

ſonne of God, which his fieſhe alone deſerued to be called in the graue: For what elſe doe we confeſſe when we ſay that we beléeue in the only begotten ſon of God, which was crucifyed, and ſuffered vnder Pontius Pilate, died, and was buryed, what was buryed of him, but his fleſh without his ſoule. And more playnly afterwardes, who is he, by whome the world was made? Chriſte Jeſus, but in the fourme of God, who was nayled to the croſſe, vnder Pontius Pilate, Chriſt Jeſus: but in the fourme of a ſeruaunt. Who was net lefte in Hell? Chriſt Jeſus: but in ſoule alone. Who lay thrée dayes dead in the graue, and roſe agayne? the ſame Chriſte Jeſus, but in fleſh alone. Chriſt is ſayd in ech one of theſe, but all theſe be not two or thrée, but one Chriſt. Whereby it is playne, ye certayne properties, or peculier graces of the one nature, may be aſcribed to the other, in word thorough the vnion of the perſon, but cannot agree in déede thorow the difference of the two natures.
               The which Vigilius doth moſt playnly

expreſſe agaynſt Vtiches: Then accordingVigillus lib. 2. contra E
                        •
                     ty. to the property of nature, onely the fleſh died, only the fleſh was buried, but according to the vnion of the perſon God dyed, and was buryed: For the perſon of the word is in the fleſh, which died. Alſo, according to the propertie of the nature, the word came downe from heauen, not the fleſh: And according to the property of the nature, the fleſh died and not the word, but according to the vnion of the perſon, both the fleſh came downe from heauen, and the word dyed and was buried. Then when we ſaye, that God died and ſuffred: Let not Neſtoreus be afrayde: For we ſpeake according to the vnion of the perſon.
               Againe, when we ſay, that God neyther died, nor ſuffered. Let not Vtiches dreade, for we ſpeake according to the proprietie of the nature. To this purpoſe writeth Theodorete: you are to vnderſtande,Theodoretus. that the vnion of the two natures doth make the names and proprieties common: you will not ſay (I ſuppoſe) that the fleſhe of God came downe from heauen: For it was made in the

Virgins wombe. Howe then, doeth the Lorde ſaye, if you ſhall ſee the ſonne of manne go vp the ther, where he was before? And againe, none goeth vp into heauen, but he that came downe from heauen, the ſonne of manne which is in heauen, this he meaneth not of the fleſh, but of the godhead. And the godhead is of God the father, how then doth he call him the ſon of man? They be reckned common to the perſon, thorowe the vnion, which be peculier to the ſeuerall natures. So we are to expounde the reſt in this ſorte as the Fathers do. The wordIohan. pr
                        ••
                     . became fleſhe. What is the mind? what is the meaning of this ſpéeche: was the deuine nature made the humayne nature? God forbidde. Naye, it did take & vnite to the ſelfe the humaine nature. God did purge his church by his bloude. What meaneth this? hath the deuine nature bloud? God forbidde, that anye body ſhould ſo think, but God did purge his church by the bloude of that nature, which he did appropriate by in
                     •
                  arnation, or taking our fleſh vpon him. They nayled to the croſſe the GOD of glory,

what is the the ſence of theſe wordes? was the godheade pierced, or nayled to the woode? God forbidde. Nay, that nature was ſo affected, which the godhead did take to the ſelf of ye virgins wombe.
               Wherefore thorowe the vnion of the perſon, ſuch things maye be ſpoken in worde, but they cannot agrée in déede. Neyther doth that of ſaint Baſill of the birth of Chriſt diſagrée with theſe. How is the godheade in the fleſhe, as the fyre is in the yron, not tranſitiuely, but diſtributiuely. For the fyre doth not runne into the yron, but abyding in the place, doth imparte and beſtowe the peculier facultie vppon it. Howe then was not God the word fylled with bodily weakneſſe? as the fyre doth not get to it ſelfe the proprieties of the yron. Irō is black and colde, and yet fyred, it becommeth bright and hotte. So the humayne nature of the Lorde, was made partaker of the denine nature, but did not poure into the de
                     ••
                  e nature the owne weakneſſe. And ſo I ſee certaine proprieties diſperſed, but I doe not vnderſtand all, for after the vniting of the godhead, the

body of Chriſte was hungrie, coulde, thirſtie, wearie, and gréeued, and this isMath 26. true of Chriſt the voyce. My Soule is heauier, euen vnto death. And nayled vpon the croſſe he ſayeth: I am dry. He ſuffred truely, he dyed truely, hée was compaſſed about with place truly. I would therefore gladly learne, why the two natures ſhould be ſayd to be deuided, becauſe the ſeuerall proprieties of ech nature be ſet downe after his ryſing agayne, rather then they were, whē the ſeuerall proprieties of eache nature were ſet downe before his death. For I reaſō thus, the body of Chriſt liuing vpon earth was in one certayne and peculier place, but the Godhead was in euery place. And yet none will ſay that the perſon of Chriſt was then deuided, why then may we not likewiſe ſay, that the body of chriſt being in heauen, is in one certayn and peculier place, and yet not deuide the perſon of Chriſte: For in Chriſtes perſon being vpon earth, perfecte God, and perfect man, were coupled together: As S. Paule doth excelētly ſay to the Coloſſians. In him doeth

dwel all the fulneſſe of the Gohhead bodily.Coloſſ. 1. The true, full, and abſolute Godhead did dwell in the true, full, and abſoluteColoſſ. 2. body compriſed in one certayne and peculier place, and yet was there no renting of the perſon of Chriſt.
               What ground then haue theſe lamē
                  table and bitter outeryes that the perſō of Chriſt is denided, that his godhead and manhood be plucked aſunder? becauſe we auouch that the naturall body of Chriſt is in heauen, at the right hand of God the Father and yet his godhead to be euery where, did not his godhead then fill heauen and earth? when his naturall body was in a corner of the earth, whē it lay in the graue. And may not nowe the Godhead fill the whole world? and his naturall body be onely in heauen, and the two natures not ſeuered. Away then, away with quarrels and let truth preuayle and tryumphe, by the which the two natures of chriſt tyed togeather with the merueylous bonde of the vnion be diſtinguiſhed, but not ſeperated.
               And truely to continue in the ſame

reſemblance of ſaint Baſill, the fyre doth not chaunge all the properties of the Iron, for the Iron fyred and hotte is heauy, falleth downward, is a ſolidde and thicke body.
               This is S. Baſils meaning, that theſeSimile Baſill. forces of the fyre be tranſferred into the Iron, of the which the nature of the yrō is capable, not thoſe, which ouer throwe the nature of the yron. And in like manner that thoſe forces and proprieties of the godhead be tranſferred into the body of Chriſt, of the which the nature of the body is capable, not thoſe, which ouerthrow the nature of the body: For we muſt 
                     •
                  uer haue recourſe to that worthy ſhying of S. Auſten, he gaue immortallity to his body, but he tooke not awaye the nature of the body, neyther is the godhead of the man ſo to be mainteined, that the truth of the body be deſtroyed.
               But why do I ſtand vpon this poynt, why doth my ſpéech ſo long wāder? why doe I not open the ſpring of this controuerſy? For al this contētion floweth frō the queſtion aboute the preſence of the naturall body of Chriſt, being in the ſacrament

of the body and blood of Chriſt. For if that matter be once ordered and adiudged, the other will ſoone be ended.
               But that is a matter of great importaunce, of the greateſt in the worlde, it oughte not to be handled but warely, and reuerently, moſt warely, and moſt reuerently. Your good name ſhalbe rent with the bad ſpéeches not only of the enemies, but of the enuious. I refer that to God. The matter is very hard: The queſtyon to too darke, diſcourſed in Sermons: Joſſed in diſputations, varyed of through all Chriſtendome, and as it ſhould ſéeme of paſſing great difficulty. God will helpe out with that, whoſe both helpe we moſt humbly pray, and buſines moſt faythfully do, out of whoſe moſt bleſſed, and moſt certayne, & moſt true wordes, all the reſte of our ſpéeche ſhall grow.
               It is written in the .26. Chapter ofMath. 26. the Goſpell after S. Mathewe, in this wiſe, when Jeſus had taken bread, and bleſt, he did breake and gaue to the Diſciples, and ſayd, take ye, eate ye, this is my body: And taking the Cup, after he

had geuen thanks, he gaue to them ſaying, drink all ye of this: For this is my blood of the new Teſtament, which is ſhed for many, for the forgeueneſſe of ſinnes.
               And in the .14. after S. Marke, whenMarck. 14. Jeſus had taken the bread, and geuen thanks, he did breake and gaue to them and ſayd. Take yée, eate yée, this is my body, and when he had taken the Cuppe and geuen thanks, he gaue to them and ſayd. Drinke ye all of this, and he ſayde to them, this is my blood of the newe teſtament which is ſhead for many.
               And in the .22. after S. Luke, when heLuke. 22. had taken bread, and geuen thankes, he brake, and gaue to them ſaying: This is my body, which is geuen for you, doe you this in remembraunce of me. Likewiſe alſo the cuppe, after he had ſupped, ſaying. This cuppe is the new teſtamēt in my blood, which is ſhed for many.
               Laſtly ſaint Paule to the Corinthians1. Cor. 11. the .xj. Chapter, and the fyrſt Epiſtle. The Lorde tooke breade, and when he had giuen thankes, he brake, and ſaid. Take ye, eate ye, this is my body, which

is broken for you, do ye this in remembrance of me. Likewiſe alſo the cup after he had ſupped, ſaying: this cup is the newe teſtament in my bloude: Doe ye thys, as often as you ſhall drinke in remembraunce of me. For as oft as you ſhall eate this bread, and drinke of this cup, you ſhall ſhewe the Lordes death vntill his comming.
               I haue ſet downe the whole words of the holye ghoſt, done out of greeke into Engliſhe, worde by worde: That ſo good a foundation being layde, the reſt that foloweth, myght be the more fyrmly builded thervpon. Let vs nowe view and waigh all theſe things. Chriſt toke the ſame bread in his hande, which was vpon the table: Chriſt gaue to his Diſciples the ſame breade, and whiles he was giuing the breade to his diſciples, he ſpeaketh as before: whiles his Diſciples eate this breade, whiles they did brooſe it with their téeth, and ſwallowed it into their ſtomaks, where was chriſt? was be not at the table? did he not ſpeak to thē? did he not both eate & drink with them? was he not ſéene, hearde, and

touched. In which place was the bodye of Chriſt: In the mouth and ſtomack of his diſciples, or at the table, where they both ſawe Chriſt, and heard Chriſt? if you ſay in both places: Then this followeth: That eyther Chriſt had two bodies, or elſe that there was two chriſts, both which aunſweres be very vngodly and abſurde.
               But you wil ſay the words be plaine, for Chriſt ſaide plainely and diſtinctly. This is my body: This is my bloude. Neyther is it lyke, that Chriſt woulde ſpeake doubtfully, in the laſt talke, that he had with his diſciples. I graunt the words be plaine after the maner of miſteries, in the which things ſubiect to the ſenſe, doe repreſent and ſhewe things, which be taken onely of a godly minde, and by a religious fayth. I graunt that Chriſt gaue his bodye and that his Diſciples toke it, and eate it, not after a naturall and groſſe maner, but after a ſupernaturall, that is he heauenly and ſpirituall. What then doe you denie, that the breade is the bodye of Chriſt: That the wine is the bloud of Chriſt? not I truely.

But I ſaye, that they be ſo in truth of religion, ſacrament, and miſtery, and not by chaunging of nature, element, or ſubſtaunce. For Chriſt doth call the breade his body, but he doth not ſay that it is chaunged into his bodye.
               Then you call it breade, and the holye writer of this holy Storie doth himſelfe call it breade, the wordes be theſe. He toke breade: he gaue thankes: he brake: he gaue: doth he not meane by this circumſtance of wordes, to make the matter plaine: I praye you, what toke he? bread. What brake he? the ſame bread. What gaue he the ſame bread? For that that he toke, that he brake: and that that he brake, that he gaue to hys Diſciples: and that that he gaue to his diſciples, that did his diſciples eate. But bicauſe it is a miſtery, which is in hand. Therfore it repreſenteth the great and heauenly things, which the holy words of the high prieſt of our Lorde and Sauiour Chriſt Jeſus doe declare. This is my body ſayth he: which is broken for you, doe this in rememberance of me. Againe, of the Cup of wine: This Cup

is the newe Teſtament in my bloude, which is ſhedde for you. What meane theſe wordes? what ſence haue they? what ſignifye they? ſome prodigious thing, or newe thing, or light thing, or thing of ſmale value? No. But the moſt certaine teſtifycation and aſſurance of the forgiueneſſe of our ſinnes, ſaluation, & life euerlaſting, which we obtaine by the death of Chriſt, and which is exhibited by the outwarde elementes of bread and wine, but receiued only by y• inward hand of fayth, and ſéene onely by the inwarde eye of Fayth.
               Chriſt gaue to his diſciples bread and wine, ye, he gaue alſo vnto thē his body and blood, that they by fayth being fed, with this heaēnly bread & this heauenly drinke, might haue life euerlaſting, which to printe more ſurely in their harts, he playnly telleth thē, of his bleſſed body y• was to be rent for them, and his precious blood that was to be ſhedde for them, and for many other, that God the Father being pacified with this rich ſacrifice, might forgeue thē there ſinnes. Therfore he called this a new league, &

a new teſtament often promiſed by the holy Prophets, which was to be confirmed not by the blood of beaſtes, but by the ſheadding of his holy and precious blood: wherefore his will and pleaſure was that this miſtery of ſo great things ſhould be celebrated euer in publique aſſemblies, both that the remembrance of hym might euer be freſhe with hys, and that often thankes might be geuen to God the father, & that his louers and profeſſo
                     ••
                   might be ſtirred to mutuall loue, by ſo godly a preſidēt, & alſo ſigned wyth the holy ſeale of eternall bliſſe.
               But thus much at large, the reſt more briefly, that truth may be ſooner picked out and more plainely appere: For as Marcus Tullius ſaieth of Philoſophers. So I thinke Deuines bounde to briefe arguments. That which chriſt toke, he brake: that which he brake, he gaue to his Diſciples: that which he gaue to his diſciples, he called his body: Therefore he called breade his bodye. For he toke breade, brake breade, and gaue it to his Diſciples.
               But that which is breade by nature,

is not the ſubſtance of Chriſtes bodye. Except we will prodigiouſly confounde the ſubſtance of things, and ſo by conſequente the naturall bodye of Chriſt, is not really, and bodily, in the ſacrament of the body and blood of Chriſt. But here is made a ſtoppe: that Chriſt bleſſed the bread after he had takē it, as S. Mathew and S. Marck ſayeth, by vertue whereof there followed ſuch a chaunge, that although he tooke bread, yet he neyther brake bread, nor gaue bread: This ſophiſtication is called of the Logitians: Petitio Principij: For fyrſt S. Marcke doth not ſay, that Chriſt bleſſed ye bread but that when he had taken, he bleſſed.
               Secondly, the gréeke word 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , doth as well ſygnify to geue thanks, as to bleſſe, and that it ſygnifyeth there to geue thankes, becauſe the holy ghoſt is the beſt expounder of it ſelfe: Both S. Luke & S. Paule, declare, which both for that worde 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , vſe this word 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , which ſignifyeth ſo geue thanks, and not to bleſſe. Thirdly, as it was mēt touching ye bread. So was it

mente touching the Cuppe and Wyne: But both Mathew and Marcke themſelues, ſpeaking of the Cuppe or wyne, vſe not thys worde 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , but the ſaide worde 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                   Therfore it is manifeſt, that both they ment, hée gaue thankes, after that he had takē the bread, and he gaue thanckes after he had taken the Cuppe. Briefely thus: that that is true about the bread, is true alſo about the Cuppe of wyne, but the cuppe or the wyne haue ioyned vnto them, no wordes of conſecration, or tranſubſtantiation, or chaunging of one ſubſtaunce into another, as it appereth by S. Luke and S. Paule. Therefore the firſt principle is God, that breade was taken, ye bread was broken, and that bread was geuen to the Diſciples.
               Adde to theſe that S. Paule in the xx. Chapter, and fyrſt Epiſtle to the Corinthians, aduiſedly & purpoſely ſpeaking of the Lords ſupper, ſayeth, is not the bread which we breake the partaking of body of Chriſt. And Luke in the ſecōd of the Actes. They did continue together

in the doctrine of the Apoſtles, & in pertaking and breaking of bread, & a little after he ſayeth, that the Diſciples came together to breake bread, by the which it is neceſſarily concluded, that the ſame was broken which was taken and that that was broken was geuen 
                     〈…〉
                   and of that that was geuen did Chriſt ſay this is my body. Therefore chriſt did ſay of bread, this is my body. For as Chriſte ment of the bread, ſo he ment of ye wine, but he ment of wyne to be drawen and drunke, as it appeareth by Marcke and Mathew, where he ſayd, I will drincke no more of the fruite of this wyne, &c. Therefore he ment alſo that bread, that was eaten.
               Agayne if the ſubſtaunce of the bread be chaunged into the ſubſtaunce of the body. Then the ſubſtaunce of the wine ſhould be chaunged to the ſubſtaunce of the blood, but in the ſecond place, not the ſubſtaunce of wyne, but the ſubſtaunce of the cuppe ſhould be chaunged into the new Teſtamente, by the wordes of cō
                  ſecration, as their terme is: For wheras Mathew and Marck briefely ſaye:

This is my blood, Luke and Paule doe ſet downe at large, this cuppe is the new teſtamēt in my blood. But you will ſay that the cuppe doth ſignify the wine in the cuppe, by a fygure called Metonomia: Then you graunt that the holy Ghoſt doth ſpeake fyguratiuely in the matter of the Sacrament, but let that goe, and let it be, this wyne is the new teſtament in my blood, if the wyne ſhould be chaunged, it muſt be changed into the newe Teſtamente of Chriſtes blood, but that ſpéech cānot ſtand, except it be vnderſtood fyguratiuely and ſpiritually thus.
               This Wine is a viſible ſigne of mine new inuiſible league, couenaunt, will, grace, and mercy, which ſhall be confirmed and ſealed with the ſheadding of my blood.
               Then neyther the fyrſte wordes touching the bread, implye any chaunge of ſubſtaunce, but haue a ſpirituall and figuratiue meaning: For whether you ſay the cuppe or the wyne, the ſpéech muſt needes be fyguratiue. For neither the cuppe or the wyne eyther is or can

be properly called a teſtamente. Nowe if the ſecond ſpéech of the wyne do neceſſarily imply two figures at the leaſte, why ſhould it ſeeme ſo ſtrange to ſaye, yt the firſt ſpéech of the bread deth alſo imply a figure.
               Doe you then, ſaye you thinke, that Chriſt ſpake doubtfully? and woulde in his laſt departure leaue hys Churche doubtfully? Not I truely. Why then do you talke of figures and troupes? and figuratiue ſpeeches, and ſpirituall ſenſes▪ Not euerye figuratiue ſpeeche is doubtfull, and it is as great a faulte to refuſe a figure, when the place geueth it, as to force a figure when there is none. And it is moſt manifeſt by Saint Luke and ſaint Paule, that the ſecond ſpeech of the Cup or wine is figuratiue, and hath a ſpirituall ſence. For bothe they expounding the briefe wordes ſet downe by ſaint Mathew, and S. Marke expreſſely ſaye, that Chriſt ſaide, this Cup is the newe Teſtamente in my blood. And what ſence or meaning can theſe wordes haue? but this, that in

this ſacrament there is deliuered vnto Chriſtians a viſible and moſt certayne ſigne or ſeale, of that new inuiſible, truſe, will, grace, and mercie, which God hath made and aſſured hys church of, in theſe more mylde and gracyous dayes, and would ſeale and ratify with the bloude of his ſonne. For the words in S. Luke doe proue this ſence, which he addeth of Chriſt, ſaying: Doe this in rememberance of me, and alſo of ſaint Paule. Ye ſhall thewe the Lordes death vntill he come. Neyther here do I doubt that the true, godly & learned wil thinke that I haue not ſpokē reuerently of this moſt holye and bleſſed miſterie. For I geue more honor and reuerence to it by a great deale, then any that doth fanſye a groſſe and carnall preſence. But ſome will ſaye that I ouerthrowe all, & bring all to naught, and make the holy ſacrament nothing elſe but a péece of bread, and a little wine: that is a moſt falſe and malicious ſlaunder. For I moſt certainely beléeue it to be one of the moſt precious Jewels that Chriſt left to hys church, and that both the body and blood

of Chriſt is truely and effectually exhibited by the power and grace of God, and truely and effectually receaued by the fayth of the chriſtian receyuer. But ſuch men deale with me, as they & ſuch other deale with good preachers, which to pull downe the pryde of mans harte, telleth him, that he is nothing but duſt, earth, aſhes, and ſmoke and graſſe, and then a worldling wyll ſaye, that, that preacher maketh a man no better then a beaſt. Whereas the preacher mente this onely of the one parte of man, that is, his body, wiſedome, beautie glorye, pompe, and porte, which in déede be nothing elſe but duſt, and graſſe & ſmoke, that fade and periſhe away, and not of the ſeconde parte of manne, that is hys ſoule, which is immortall and eternall, and certainly as man hath two partes, the firſt the bodys which is viſible & fading, the ſeconde his ſoule which is inuiſible and eternall, euen ſo this holye and bleſſed ſacrament hath two partes. The fyrſt of the element of breade and wyne, which is viſible and fading, the ſecond, the grace, and fruites, and benefites,

of the bod of Chriſt rent, and his blood ſhed for the raunſome of man. And as he, that ſayeth the body of man is meere fleſh, and fading fleſh, and nothing but fleſh, deeth not deny the immortality of 
                     ••
                  e ſo de therby, nor make whole man nothing the but body and fleſh, for he meaneth onely of the fyrſte and fading parte of man, which is ſenſible, and not of the ſecond part of man, which is inſenſible, euen ſo he, that ſayeth that the elemente of breade and wyne, be n
                     〈…〉
                  re bread and wyne, fading bread and wyne, and nothing but bread and wyne, doth not therby deny or take away the grace and benefyte of the body and blood of Chriſt, nor make that bleſſed ſacramēt nothing elſe but bread and wyne. For he meaneth onely the fyrſt and fading part of that ſacrament, which is ſenſible, and not of the ſeconde which is inſenſible. And let any indifferent man iudge, whether he ſpeaketh more honourably, or doth more ſet forth the maieſty of that ſacrament, which ſayth that free forgeueneſſe of all our ſinnes and a ſure poſſeſſion of eternall

life, ſpringing frō the free mercy of God is deriued and poured into chriſtian heartes by that ſacrament, and as a Conduite thorough the force of a true & liuely fayth, in the death and merittes of our only Sauyoure Chriſt Jeſus, or he which by fancying of a real, carnal, or corporall preſence, doth binde and tye al the grace and power to creatures.
               I confeſſe with all my harte, 
                     •
                   Chriſt hath left vnto his church nothing, eyther if a man conſider profite more fruitfull, or if ſwéeteneſſe more pleaſant, or if honour more glorious, then the moſt holy and bleſſed ſacramente of the body and blood of Chriſte, by the which the moſte aboundaunt grace and mercy of God, is dropped into holy and faythfull ſoules, but to ſpeake otherwiſe of creatures, then can be iuſtified by the word of god, is wicked and damnable.
               And ſuch as would haue al things litterally vnderſtood, let them view the wordes well, and neyther this worde Cuppe, nor Is, can be litterally vnderſtood,Thomas Aquinas. which alſo Thomas Aquinas there Archſcholeman doth confeſſe, ſaying. By

that that is contayned in this Cuppe, is remembred the new Teſtamente confyrmed by the bleed of Chriſt: For this worde cuppe he ſayeth, that, that is contayned in the Cuppe: For this worde Is, he ſayeth, is remembred, is repreſented or is ſygnifyed. And although in others they condemne neceſſary & plaine figures, yet they themſelues be forced to immagine vnneceſſary & to to ſtraunge fygures, fyrſt where the Tert ſayeth: Hoc, meaning this bread, they will not haue it ſo, but theyexpound it to be indiuidium vagū, which is not any certayne determined thing, but onely one certayn thing at large in generality: where y• text doth ſay, Eſt is, they ſaye tranſubſtantiatur, tranſelementatur, is chaunged into the ſubſtaunce, the nature of the element is changed.
               Theſe wordes take ye, eate ye, this is my body, they turne thus, this is my body, take ye, eate ye, by a fygure called Huſteron Proteron, which ſetteth that behind that ſhould goe before. He bleſſed ſayeth the text, he tranſubſtantiated, he chaunged the ſubſtaunce ſaye they, he

brake ſayeth the text, the accidentes, the formes or ſheaues of bread ſay they. Do ye, ſayth the text, ſacrifyce ye, ſay they. This word (bread) hath a Quatermon of fygures. Fyrſt, becauſe it was bread. Secondly, becauſe the Infydell taketh it onely to be bread. Thirdly, becauſe the fourme and ſhewe of bread remayneth ſtil. Fourthly, becauſe the forme or ſhew of bread, doth nortiſh as perfectly, as though it were bread: Frangitur is broken ſayth the Texte, frangebatur it was broken, or videtur frangi, ſéemeth to bée broken ſay they. Now ſeemeth to be broken, is as much as is not broken. Then the word of the Text, Is, is broken, their word or expoſitiō, Is, is not broken, and this is a to too ſtraunge kinde of fygure. For, Is broken, and is not broken imply a playne and full contradiction. Much like as the gloſe expoundeth the Texte, ſtatuimus, &c. we do decree, enact, or determine. Whē the gloſe hath made many expoſitions of this law, & none of thē to the meaning of the law, well ſayth it, Statuimus. We doe decrée or determine, is as much to ſay, as ab
                        ••
                     gamu
                        •
                     ,
                  
we doe abrogate or diſa
                     ••
                  ll, which appoſition unplyeth a playne and ful contrariety. So they obſcure & deuine the playne words of this bleſſed ſacrament, the heauenly foode of our ſoules, & daſill our eyes with Indiuidium vagum, tranſubſtantiacon, tranſelementacon,▪ Concomitontia, pendula in aere, accidents without ſubiectes. Quantum ſine modo quā
                     ti, and ſuch other chaffe of their own.
               Stories doe tel, that Liſander picked out a great ſumme of Golde out of the bottome of a bagge, and ſowed it vp agayne cunningly. But Liſander his doinges were ſpyed by a Billet, that was lefte in the Bagge. And the Billet that Chriſt hath lefte vnto his church, that is his holy word, doeth ſhewe the ſubtill ſeames of theſe crafty ſophiſters, which ſo ſubtilly haue picked chriſt his bagge, that is the inſtitution of his moſt bleſſed ſacrament. And as the ſacrament of the old law, had a ſpiritual & heauenly meaning, and not a litterall, euen ſo haue ours: For they differ only in reſpectes and not in ſubſtaunce.
               And to this purpoſe ſayeth S. Auguſtine
                  
right wel: Tune Chriſtus venturus,Auguſtinus. modo Chriſtus venit, venturus et venit diuerſa verba ſunt. Sed idem Chriſtus. Then was Chriſt to come, now Chriſt is come. To be to come, and to be come, be Verbes of diuers times, but the ſame Chriſt. The Jewiſh ſacrifices or ſacramentes, did repreſent and ſignifye to them the blood of Chriſt that ſhould be ſhed for the forgiueneſſe of our ſinnes. And our ſacrifices or ſacramentes doe repreſent and ſignify vnto vs the blood of Chriſt that hath bene ſhed for the forgeueneſſe of our ſinnes. And euē as we be ſaued, and the gates of heauen opened vnto vs for that we certainly do beléeue that Chriſt dyed for vs, euen ſo were they ſaued, and the gates of Heauen opened vnto them, for that they certaynly beléeued that Chriſte ſhoulde dye for them. So that the ſame fayth carryed them vp into heauen, which now carryeth vs, as the ſame Aucthour doth playnly declare writing vpon S. John. Videte ſide mauente ſigna variata. Marke how the ſame fayth continuing the ſignes or ſacramentes be varied or

become diuers.
               In diuers ſignes or Sacraments the ſame fayth is, but moſt playnly in the 2, Tractat vpō S. John, S. Auguſtine ſetteth forth this differēce, ſhowing that our 
                     •
                  acramentes be fewer, eaſyer, more ſignifying, and of more maieſty, then the Iſraeletica
                     •
                  , ſed quod ſignificata paria, but equall as touching thinges ſignifyed. Chriſoſtome doth ſet out the matter by this ſimillitude. A Paynter ſayeth he, that is to paynt the ſtory of ſome famous victory doth fyrſt draw the Line amentes of men, Horſe, Citties, and Caſtles in obſeure lines, and then he that would diſcerne them muſt both know them perfectly, and view them earneſtly. Secondly, he addeth to the colloures and due proportion to eache, and then any that knew them, ſhall diſcearne them at the fyrſt ſyght. GOD is this Paynter that paynteth the Story of the famous victorye of his deare ſonne, which he had ouer the Deuill, Death, Hell, and ſinne. The Sacrament of the Iſraelites be like vnto the fyrſt draught. The Sacramente of the

Chriſtians, be like vnto the ſeconde draught. The ſame Aucthour compareth their ſacraments to the lighte of a Candle, and ours to the brightneſſe of the ſunne. Saynt Paule compareth them to a childe, and vs to a ful perfect man. So that Chriſt that is ſeene, or ſignified is al one, the ſéers or the thing ſignifying be diuers. For the Jewes ſawe Chriſt in the law, we in the ghoſpell. The law is a darke ſhadowe: the ghoſpell is a perfect Image. The Jewes ſaw Chriſt in the ſea, in the clowde, in the rocke, in Manna, in the bloude of Eoates and Calfes. We ſée Chriſt in the ſacrament of baptiſme, in the ſacrament of hys bodye and bloud by himſelfe ordayned. The difference is this, they ſawe hym ſomwhat darkly, we ſée him very plainly. They ſaw the ſame light that we do, but not in like quantitie, they ſawe the ſame Image that we doe, but not with lyke colours and furniture. And if he would alſo then inferre, that the ſacramentall breade by this reaſon were no better then common breade, I vtterlye deny that too. For they differ as much

as heauen and earth, as the ſpirite and the bodie. For the common breade is earthly foode: the ſacramentall bread heauenly foode: the common breade hath force onely to foode the body: the ſacramentall breade hath force to féede bothe bodye and ſoule: and to vnite and make them partes of Chriſtes miſticall body. For by the faithfull recepte of it, our bodies and ſoules be made cleane by hys bodye and ſoule, and there to ſpiritually ioyned. But yet euen as old bread when it is ſet vpon the table, is in ſubſtaunce the ſelfe ſame that it was, when it was taken hotte oute of the Ouen, but in qualitie muche differing, as the one time colde, ſtale, and drye, at the other tyme, hotte, newe, and moyſ
                     •
                  e. Euen ſo the ſacramentall breade in ſubſtance is the ſelfe ſame, when it is eaten of the faythfull, that it was when the miniſter tooke it fyrſt into his handes, but yet in qualitie excéeding much differing, as at the one time earthly, and bodely, at the other time heauenly and ſpirituall.
               So yt this matter doeth conſiſt chiefly

in faith as our maſter doth tel in the 
                     ••
                  xt of S. John the Euangeliſt, to whō when the people had ſayd, what ſhall we doe, that we may worke the workes of God, Jeſus aunſwered, and ſayd vnto them, this is the worke of god, that ye beléeue in him whom he hath ſent, and it is thus ſubſtantially cōcluded out of the words of our ſayd mayſter, out of the ſayd ſixte chapter, whoſoeuer hath life euerlaſting, eateth the fleſh of the ſonne of mā, and drinketh his blood, but he that beleeueth in Chriſt hath life euerlaſting, therefore he that beleeueth in Chriſt eateth the fleſh of the ſonne of man, and drinketh his blood, but then you wil ſay, to what purpoſe is the ſacrament? to very great.
               For man néeds not only to be taught by the eare, but alſo by the eye, and the teaching by the eye is more effectuall thē by the eare, as the Poet wel ſayeth.Horatio. 
                  Signius irritant animos dimoſſa per aures, quam que ſunt oculis ſubiecta fidelibus.
               
               Such thinges doe moue the minde leſſe which doe enter in at the eare, then

thoſe which be layde downe before the eye, as for example when Marcus Anthonius moued the people of Roome to reuenge the murther of Caius 
                        •
                     u
                        •
                     ius Caeſar: He did ſet forth the valiantneſſe, wiſedome, learning, liberallity, and other good giftes of 
                     
                        •
                     u
                        •
                     ius Caeſar to the vttermoſt that he could, both in words and ieſture, he ſtirred the people ſomewhat, but had not his purpoſe, then he plucked forth the ſhirt of Iu
                        •
                     ius Caeſar all to bée ſprinckled with blood, and ſayd ye forth before the eyes of the people, which as ſoone as the people behealde with their eyes, they were inflamed by and by as it were with the ſēſible old loue of their good Soueraigne, and ran fourthwith & fyred the houſes of the traytors, and killed them.
               Euen ſo when the Preacher ſetteth forth the graces and mercies of God obtained to man, by renting of ye bleſſed body, and ſhedding of the precious blood of the vnſpotted Lambe Chriſt Jeſus, it moueth man much, but when the ſaid Preacher doth pluck forth the ſhirte of Chriſt be ſprinckled with blood, that is

by breaking of bread ſheweth to ye eye, how his body was broken, and by drinking of the Wyne, how his blood was ſhed, it inflameth man as it were with the ſenſible old loue of his grand Soueraigne Chriſt Jeſus. The like example is drawen out of the holy writ, whē the Leuites wife was killed by the wickedneſſe of the Sabionittes, he the ſaid Leuite cut his wife into twelue péeces, & ſent one péece to eche Tribe of Iſraell with this meſſage, that one might vpon neceſſity be lodged in the Citty of Gabia, where his wife was not only moſt vngodly abuſed, but alſo cruelly murthered, which moued thē ſomewhat, but when the meſſenger plucked forth the parts of the woman, and ſhewed the head to one, the arme to an other, and ſo forth, all the people by & by were moued, as one to reuenge that fact, euen ſo, when the preacher telleth the people of the whipping & ſcourging of Chriſte, of the nailing to the Croſſe, of the pearſing of his heart, of the ſweating & dropping of water & blood, it moueth man much, but when he ſheweth vnto the eye in the

wine as it were the droppes of Chriſtes blood, it moueth man a thouſande times more to the remembraunce of his death and thanckfulneſſe: So that the Sacramentes be both moſt neceſſary for inſtruction and alſo for vſe. For he that contemneth to be renued by water and the holy ghoſt, contemneth eternall ſaluation, & he that contemneth to eate of the ſacramental bread, and drinke of the ſacramentall wyne, contemneth to bée pertaker of the death & paſſion of Chriſt. For albeit ye grace of God is not tyed to theſe ordinances, yet becauſe they were ordayned of our ſauyour for the comfort and inſtructiō of his people, and to moue them to be thankfull for the great benefites, which they haue receiued frō God in chriſt, to deſpiſe the ſame, is to deſpiſe God, and to run and to get eternal damnation, and yet to bind God to the outward elementes and rytes, is méere ſuperſtition.
               And that this is not my doctrine, but the ancient fathers. I ſhall ſhow briefelye and plainely, by the moſt famous of them.
               
                  
                  Origin which liued aboue xij. hundred yeares agoe, writing vpon the .xv. chapter of ſaint Mathew, ſaieth thus: it is not the materiall ſubſtaunce of bread, but the worde which is ſpoken ouer it, that is profitable to the man that eateth it worthely. And this I meane of the Tupical and ſimb
                     ••
                  icall body of Chriſt. Origin aſcribeth all grace to the force of the word, the worthineſſe of the Receauer, nameth the materiall ſubſtaunce of bread, and calleth it the Tupical, that is figuratiue, and ſimbolical, that is ſacramentall body.
               Before the bread ſayeth Chriſoſtome
                  Chriſoſt. to Ceſarius the Monke, be hallowed, we call it bread, but after the grace of God hath ſanctifyed it by the meanes of the Miniſter, it is deliuered new from the name of bread, and eſtéemed worth to be called the body of Chriſt, although the nature of bread remayneth ſtill.
               
                  Theodoreto in his firſt dyalogue writingTheodoretus. againſt Vtiches ſaieth thus, he that calleth his naturall body Corne & bread and nameth himſelfe a vine trée, euen he the ſame hath honored the ſacramentall

ſignes, with the names of his body & bloud, not chaunging in déede the nature it ſelf, but adding grace vnto the nature.
               
                  Theodorete doth ſaye, that Chriſt didTheodoretus. not in déede chaunge the nature of bread and wine, but added grace vnto the nature, by vertue whereof they receyued force to féede the ſoules of the faithfull receyuers, which naturall breade and wine cannot doe.
               
                  Auguſtine vpon the 89. Pſalme, ſpeakingAuguſt. in the name of our Lorde and Sauiour to his Diſciples, and recyting and expounding the wordes of the inſtitution of this bleſſed ſacrament, ſayth thus. It is not this body that you doe ſée, that ye ſhall eate, nor the bloud that the ſouldiours ſhall ſhed, that ſhall crucify me, that ye ſhall drinke, but I doe commend vnto you a miſterie, which ſpirituallye vnderſtoode, ſhall giue you life. Saint Auguſtine doth ſay that they did not eate of his naturall body, for that was ſéeneAuguſt. of them, nor drinke his naturall bloode, for that was ſhed of the ſouldiors. And he addeth further, to refute the bald gloſes of the Scholemen, that that is a miſterie,

and is to be vnderſtood ſpirituallye, not really or corporally. And although he take away the litterall ſence, and corporall pertaking, yet doth he not take awaye the heauenly bleſſing and grace. For he addeth, which ſpiritually vnderſtoode geueth life.
               So that, that is 
                     •
                  plaine ſlaunder, that manye doe vrge againſt thoſe, that deny the reall and corporall preſence, & make an heauenlye ſpirituall foode, that they make nothing of this bleſſed ſacrament. For ſaint Auguſtine teacheth to vnderſtande the wordes ſpiritually, and yet affirmeth that ſpirituallye vnderſtode, they geue life. The fyre ſimplie and naturally is aduſtine, that is, hath force to burne, to the ſtone called Amanthos, to the Vermine called Salamandra, it is not aduſtie, nor doth burne them. Euen ſo the ſacramentall breade and drinke be ſimply and properly ſpirituall, but after a ſort, and by accident, that is vnto the vnworthy receyuer, it is not ſpiritual, nor the body and bloud of Chriſt. And ye S. Auguſtine doth teach vs, ſaying:Auguſt. That Iudas did eate ſpiritual bread,

and he did eate the Lorde his bread, but it was not to him ſpirituall, it was not to him the Lorde. Some alſo ſay, we do make nothing of this moſt bleſſed ſacrament. Let any indifferent perſon conſider who doeth more. They aſcribe and binde al the graces of the ſacrifice, to the intencion of the ſacrificer. For Gabriell Biell doeth ſaye, that it belongeth to theIabriel Biel. prieſt to determine and limit the force, vertue and grace of this ſacrifice, that it may be beſtowed vpon ſuch, and ſuche néeding it, as a rewarde to be geuen. And Summa Angelica in the Maſſe. The Maſſe, ſayeth he, is auaileable vnto them vnto whom it pleaſeth ye Prieſt in his intencion to apply it. We know, teach, beléeue and confeſſe in and by the faithfull recept of this bleſſed ſacramēt, that Chriſt his body is rent for our ſins, and that by his woundes we were all made whole, that Chriſt in his bodye caryed our ſinnes vpon the trée, and by the oblation thereof once made vpō the Croſſe, hath ſanctifyed vs for euer, and hath purchaſed for vs euerlaſting redemption, and that there is none other

name or ſacrifice vnder heauen, wherby we can be ſaued, but only by the name of Jeſus chriſt. That theſe things ought to make the heart to tremble. For that therin is laid forth the miſtery that was hidde from worlds and generations, the horrour of ſinne, the death of the ſonne of God, that he tooke our heauineſſe, and bare our ſorrowes, and was wounded for our offences, and was rent and tormēted for our wickedneſſe, that he was carryed like an innocente Lambe vnto the flaughter, that he cried vnto his Father: O God, my God, why haſte thou for ſaken me? There we call to remembraunce the ſhame of the Croſſe, the darckning of the ayre, the ſhaking of the earth, the renting of the vale, the cleaning of the rockes, the opening of the graues, how Chriſt came to his paſſion, how he was wounded in the ſyde, howe blood and water iſſued and ſtreamed frō his wounde. They thinke it ynough to bow the knées of the body, to ſtretche forth the handes of the body, to lifte vp the eyes of the body, and to looke vppon the ſacramentall bread, and the ſacramentall

Cuppe, and that they thinke might ſerue once a yeare. We teach quarterly, monthly, weekely, dayly, to bow the knées of the body, and the knées of the ſeule, to ſtretch forth the handes of the body, and the handes of the ſoule, to lift vp the eyes of the body, and the eyes of the ſoule, and by farth the mouth of the ſoule to feede of the bleſſed & glorious body of our Lord & ſauiour chriſt Jeſus.
               They teach that in it, they doe eate the naturall body of Chriſt, and drinke the naturall blood of Chriſte naturally and ſēſibly. But by this ſpiritual, faithfull and heauenly receipt of the bleſſed ſacramēt we ſay, teach and beleeue, that we receaue though not naturally and corporally, yet ſpiritually, truely and effectually our Lord and ſauyour Chriſt Jeſus the true and naturall ſonne of God, conſubſtantiall and coequall with the Father in all poyntes, and that hée is made vnto vs the fulneſſe of all grace and truth. The Lambe of God that taketh away our ſinnes, the ladder & gate of heauen, the aduaunced Serpent that healeth our poyſoned ſoules, the ſonne

of God that reconſileth vs to the father, the bread of life, the light of the worlde, the dore, the way, the truth, the life, & to be briefe a full and perfect helth, wiſdome, rightcouſneſſe, redemption, ſatiſfaction, and ſaluation.
               They thinke they doe much aduance ſhe omnipotent power of God, & greatly exerciſe their faith, for that they teach and beleue that the ſubſtaunce of the breade is changed into the ſubſtance of the body of Chriſt, and the ſubſtaunce of wine into the ſubſtance of the bloude of Chriſt naturally, corporally, and really. We knowe that we doe a great deale more aduaunce the omnipotent power of God, and more mightily exerciſe our faith, and further carrie our ſelues from ſence and reaſon in beleeuing the inuiſtble, but moſt marueylous graces & bleſſings that God hath graunted and appointed to this moſt bleſſed ſacrament: For we beleue, that we ſpiritually, heauenly, truely and effectually eate the fleſhe of Chriſt, and drinke his bloude: Dwell in Chriſt, and Chriſt in vs, be one with Chriſt, and Chriſt with vs,

that our ſinneful bodies be made cleane by his body, and our ſoules waſhed thorowe his moſt precious bloude, that we be aſſured of the forgiueneſſe of oure ſins, and all other benefits of the death and paſſion of Jeſus Chriſt, that we be filled with heauenly grace, and benediction, that we be aſſured of God his fauor, and goodneſſe towarde vs, that we be liuely members incorporated in the miſticall bodye of Chriſt Jeſus, and be beyres thorowe hope of his euerlaſting kingdome.
               The Lorde Jeſus for his mercie ſake graunte vnto vs his heauenlye grace, that we may abandon ſence, reaſon, and our owne fanſies, and ſo by fayth builde vpon the rock of his worde and inſtitution, that we maye be partakers of the fruits and ioyes purchaſed by his death, and geuen, graunted, ſealed, deliuered, and poſſeſſed of the Chriſtian heart, by the true and faithfull recept of that moſt holye and bleſſed Sacrament.
            
            FINIS.
         
      
   