
      
         
            
            A TREATISE OF THE VNVVRITTEN WORD OF GOD, commonly called TRADITIONS. Written in Latin by the R. Father Iames Gordon Huntley of Scotland, Doctour of Diuinity, of the Society of Iesus. And translated into English by I. L. of the same Society.
            
               The second Part of the first Controuersy.
            
            Permissu Superiorum, M. DC. XIV.
         
      
      
         
            
            
            
               THE FIRST CHAPTER. Of the true state of the Question.
            
               HAVING already in the precedent Treatise spoken of the written Word of God, and of all other things therunto belonging, now it remayneth we speake a litle of the vnwritten word cō
               monly called Traditiōs. But to the end that the state of this controuersy may more easily be vnderstood, I will heere set downe foure things diligently to be considered in this matter we treate of. The first is, that by the vnwritten Word we only vnderstand that which is not written in the old or new Testament, for of the vnwritten word of God in this sense is our whole Controuersy in this place. Wherefore that obiection

of our Aduersaries is both friuolous and nothing worth, to wit, that the word of God which we call the vnwriten word, may be found extant eyther amonge the holy Fathers, or in the books of the Councells, or other Canons of the Church. But this nothing belongeth vnto this purpose: for it is sufficient for vs that this word of God is not written in any booke, eyther of the old or new Testament.
            2. The second is that a thing may be cō
               teined in the holy Scripture 2. wayes. The one way is implicite, that is to say, in some generall principle from whence this other may be certaynly deduced, and in this sense we acknowledge that the whole word of God is conteined in holy writ, and not only in Scripture, but also in the Apostles Creed, yea euen in that one article, I belieue the Catholike Church, so that it be diligently examined and well vnderstood, as S. Augustine
               S. Aug. in the 140. quest. vpon Exodus. Tom: 4. Matt. 22. v. 40. very well noteth. For so, sayth Christ▪ the whole Law and Prophets doe depend vpon two precepts of charity, as in the same place S. Augustine noteth. For seing that the holy Scripture teacheth that we are bound to belieue the Church in all things, & that it can neyther deceiue vs nor be deceiued, as we will euidently proue in the next Controuersy in the 
                  〈◊〉
               . Chapter,

it consequently also teacheth the whole and entire word of God, seing that all that which is not expressed in the holy Scripture, is conteined expresly in the doctrine of the Church, the which the Scripture commendeth vnto vs as infallible, as S. Augustine very well sayth, and declarethS. August: Tom. 7. contra Crescon. Grammat. c. 33. & de vnie. Eccles. c. 22. in fine. Matt. 17. v. 5. Matt. 18. v. 17. Luc. 10. v. 16. in many places. For euen as God the Father comprehended in these few words (This is my wellbeloued Sonne, heare him) the whole word of God, so Christ proposed vnto vs the whole word of God, when he commaunded vs to heare the Church.
            3. And in this sense do the holy Fathers oftentymes say, that all the points of fayth are conteined in the holy Scriptures, to wit, in that generall principle in the which they admonish vs to belieue the Church: but many of the holy Fathers sayings are falsifyed & corrupted by Martinꝰ Kē
                  nitius. and some Caluinists, as may be seene in Iudocus Ruesten in his first tome defending the Councell of Trent against Kemnitius.
            
            4. Secondly a thing may be conteined in expresse words in the holy Scriptures, as that Christ is borne, suffered, and risen againe &c. And in this sense we deny that the whole word of God is conteined in the Scriptures. That obiection of our Aduersaries by this may easily be answered, when

they say that we affirme, that Traditions are the vnwriten word of God, and yet we goe about to proue thē by Scriptures. For we do not proue euery particuler Tradition by expresse words of Scripture, but we only deduce and gather them out of it, and conuince in generall, that there are Traditions.
            5. The third thing which is to be considered, is, that our Aduersaries being conuinced by truth, doe acknowledge that many things were deliuered vnto vs by the Apostles, besids those which are written. But, say they, those were only externall rites and ceremonies, seruing only for the ornament or discipline of the Church, but nothing concerning doctrine of fayth was deliuered by the Apostles, which they haue not set downe in writing. So Caluin andCaluin cōt. 4. sess. Con. Tridēt. in suo 
                     •…
                  ntid. Be
                  
                     •…
                  a de notis Eccles. tom. 3. Tract. Theol. p. 137. edit. An. 158
                     •…
                  . some others which follow his opinion. Wherfore it remayneth for vs to proue that not only external ceremonies, but also those which belong vnto the doctrine of fayth were deliuered vnto vs by the Apostles, and that they were neuer expressely set downe in writing.
            6. The fourth thing is, that seing our Aduersaries cannot deny that which was obiected vnto them by Catholikes, to wit, that the Scripture in many places maketh

expresse mentiō of the word of God preached, deliuered, and diuulged ouer the whole world (as we haue already declared euen out of the holy Scriptures) they are wont to answere, that long since in the Apostles tyme this word of God was deliuered, preached, and not written, but the Apostles afterwards set downe in writing all the preached word of God, or at the least as much therof as was necessary vnto saluation. The which solutiō albeit it be very weake and friuolous, seing that it relyeth vpō no sure ground, yet notwithstanding that it may more fully be confuted we will declare hereafter, that many of the chiefest points of faith were not expressely set downe in writing by the Apostles. And thus much of the state of this Question.
         
         
            
            
               CHAP. II. Out of the first and chiefest principles of faith, it is clearly conuinced, that there are Traditions.
            
            THE first argument wherby we proue Traditions, is taken out of some of the chiefest principles of faith. For there are three chiefe and most necessary points of faith, yea the thiefe grounds of our whole faith which are not to he found expressely in Scriptures.
            2. The first, that there must needes be some Catalogue or Canon of the sacred Bookes aswell of the old as of the new Testament, the which all Christians with an assured faith should imbrace as a most certaine and an vndoubted truth, and this is a very necessary point of faith, yea of it dependeth the authority of all the bookes of holy Scripture, because by this Canon the sacred and true books of Scriptures are discerned and made knowne from all those which be Apochriphall; especially because aswell in times past as in these our daies

there hath byn so many, and so great Controuersyes about the Canonicall and Apochriphall bookes of Scripture; and such a Canon was altogeather necessary aswell in the auncient Church before Christ, as in our present Church after Christes tyme; the which also our Aduersaries themselues haue learned by experience. For they haue also placed their new Canon of the bookes of holy Scripture in their Confession made atConfess. Rupellana. Act. 3. 
               Rochell, and in the later end of some of their Bibles, and yet neyther in the tyme of the old Testament, nor in the tyme of the new Law, was this Canō euer written downe in the Bibles themselues.
            2. I know our Aduersaries, that they may escape this argument, do runne to the inward instinct of the holy Ghost, wherby say they, we know what booke is Canonicall, and what is not. But this answere is refuted & reiected before, where we haue shewed that the holy Ghost doth not moue vs to belieue any thing with the Catholike faith, which is not the word of God. IfSupra c. 5. therfore the holy Ghost moue vs to belieue that some bookes are Canonicall, and some are not, it is necessary that this be the word of God. We aske therefore of them, whether this is the written word of God or the vnwrittē, if it be the written word,

in what Booke or Chapter is it to be foūd? if it be no where to be found, our Aduersaries must needes cōfesse, that by the instinct of the holy Ghost they also belieue the vnwritten word of God, or Traditions.
            
            3. The second principle of faith is, that we must necessarily, with an assured and firme faith belieue, that all those Bookes eyther of the old or of the new Testament which we now retaine, are safely deliuered vnto vs entyre and vncorrupted through so many handes, so many ages, so many vexations and persecutions of the Christians, for otherwyse the whol credit and authority of those bookes will decay and perish. But this is no where extant or written, for neyther the Prophets or Apostles haue euer written, that their bookes should neuer be falsified or corrupted by any, yea it appeareth sufficientlySupra c. 9. 10. 12. & 13 by that which hath byn already said that they were falsified and corrupted in many bookes by the Iewes and Heretikes. Let our Aduersaries therfore tell vs where it is written, that this holy Scripture which we haue now, is not corrupted or falsifyed.
            4. The third principle of fayth is the true sense of the letter. For the true word of God consisteth rather in the true sense or

meaning of the words then in the words themselues as we haue declared before.Suprae. 3. But the true sense of the words, that is to say, in what sense or meaning the words are to be vnderstood, eyther properly or figuratiuely, cannot be had from the holy Scripture alone, but also from the doctrine and Traditions of the Church, as we haue sayd before in the fourth Chapter: wherby it also followeth, that the writtē word of God conteyneth in it the least part of the word of God, to wit, the bare letter only: but the word of God preached and deliuered keepeth and professeth vnto vs the cheife part of the word of God, that is to say, the true & natiue sense of the same.
            5. And this is that which S. Basil
               S. Basil. l. de Spiritū sanct. c. 27. Brent. contra Petrū à Soto in suis prol
                     •…
                  
                  gomenis. Kemnitius contra 4. sess. Concil. Trid. cùm agit de 2. genere Tradi
                     •…
                  . sayth, that those who reiect the vnwriten points of fayth, as vndiscreet persons, do wrong and damnify the chiefe parts of the Gospell, yea they euen as it were cō
               tract or bring the whole preaching of the Gospell, to the bare name therof.
            6. Many of our Aduersaries who deale more sincerely with vs, conuinced by these arguments, do acknowledge, that these grounds or principles of our faith are only to be had by Traditions, without any written word of God, as Ioannes Brentius, and Martin Kemnitius, who adde also, that

those Traditions which doe not repugne to the written word of God are to be admitted and receiued of all, and those only are to be reiected which are opposit vnto the holy Scriptures.
            7. But whatsoeuer our Aduersaries do answere, it is altogeather necessary that they confesse these three principles of our fayth do belong indeed to the very word of God it selfe. They must also needs confesse these are not extant in playne and expresse tearmes in any booke either of the old or new Testament; out of which necessarily followeth that the whole & intire word of God is not conteyned expresly in the holy Scripture.
         
         
            
               CHAP. III. Wherein it is proued out of other particuler poynts of fayth, that there are Traditions.
            
            THE second argument whereby we proue Apostolicall Traditions, is taken out of other particuler poynts of fayth, the which almost all our Aduersaryes belieue with vs, albeit they be no where expressely

conteyned in the Scriptures. There are many poyntes of fayth of this sort, wherof for example sake we will alledge some few. But to the end, we may vse our accustomed breuity, we will rehearse only those which do also manifestly shew out of this opinion of our Aduersaries (that nothing appertayneth to the doctrine of fayth, which is not expresly conteyned in holy Scripture) there are many greeuous errours and heresies in this our age arisen.
            2. The first point is, that in God there are three persons really distinct among themselues, and one only substance, for this is no where extant in holy Scripture, yea in it nothing is to be found expresly writen eyther of the substance or of the person in that signifycation wherein these words are vsed, when we speake of the Blessed Trinity.
            3. This indeed the Caluinists to their great losse and domage haue sufficiently learned by experience fourty yeares agoe in Transiluania. For when one Iohn Huniades whom they called Iohn the secōd King of Hūgary was then Gouernour in Trāsiluania, a Coutry or Prouince of Hungary, had ordained a publike dispuratiō betwixt the Cal
                  
                     •…
                  inists and the Antitrinitarians, that is to say

those who oppugned the mystery of the Blessed Trinity, and that according to the cōmon doctrine on both syds, they should dispute only out of the holy Scriptures, the Caluinists could neuer proue out of the Scriptures alone, that there is eyther a substance or person in God, neyther could they by the Scriptures only declare what is a person, or what is a substance.
            4. Wherefore at the last this was the end of the disputatiō, that almost all those which were present iudged, that the Antitrinitarians got the victory, and that the Caluinists were shamefully ouercome: wherupon it came to passe that the sayd Prince of Transiluania, of a Caluinist became an Antitrinitarian, yea one of their cheife friends; in so much that he tooke some publike Churches from the Caluinists, and gaue them to the Antitrinitarians, and he continued miserably in that wicked heresy euen till death, which happened in the yeare 1571. the 14. of March.
            5. All which things are aboundātly declared by one Ioannes Sommerus Pirnensis in the funerall Oration which he made at his death, wherein among other things he affirmeth, that the cheife cause why this Prince left the Caluinists, and became an Antitrinitarian, was this, because for sooth in the

Scriptures he could fynd nothing of the Blessed Trinity, and for that the Caluinists were forced to confesse, that the words wherby the mystery of the Blessed Trinity is explicated are not extāt in the holy Scripture: but because this funeral. Oration is scarse any where to be found & least some should thinke that I falsely coyned these things my selfe, I will heare set downe his owne words. For after he had most blasphemously spoken, as the Antitrinitarians are wont to doe, against the Blessed Trinity, the which he calleth heere and there the Roman Idolatry, these things he addeth of his Prince.
            6. But this our Prince (saith he)This funeral Orat▪ of Iohn Sommer was printed at Claudiopoli an. Domini 1571. being instructed by God, easily vnderstood what was the truth, and with earnest desire imbraced it, and with no lesse pleasure of mind defended it: for being accustomed euen from his childhood to reade the holy Scriptures, he made them very familiar vnto him, & presently he found that such things which were contrary to the phrase of Christ and his Apostles, were in the ensuing ages by a wicked curiosity brought into the Church; and that they are not at all to be numbred amongst those things which add any firmity or strength to the Author of our saluation, especially seing

that the Aduersaries themselues acknowledge, that the words wherby these subtilties of this new opinion are explicated if not rather (as I may well say) more obscured, are not to be found in the writings of the Apostles.
            
            7. And a little after. Wherfore little regarding eyther the multitude of wranglers, or the torments and paints which othersHe meaneth Seruetus who was burnt at Geneua. an. 1553. as Beza writ
                     •…
                  th in vi
                     •…
                  a Caluini. had endured, who first endeauored to breake this ice, he manifestly condemned the falsity of the Trinity, freely professing his owne opinon therein. And after a few words. For what hath he not done? what assemblies and disputations hath he not ordayned and caused to be had about this matter, both in Hangary, and in Transiluania, 
               that the sense or meaning of the Scripture might the better be explicated by conferring those thinges togeather which were then said or spoken of, where he would not only be present himselfe, but also taking the place or office of the Iudge and vmpyre in the said disputations, he very wisely and grauely confuted the great absurdities of that superstition, warning often the Aduersaries, that reiecting the fancies or fond expositions of men, they should lesse impudenily and more sincerly carry themselues in the explication of the

heauenly doctrine. Thus farre Sommerus of the great care & diligence of the Prince of Transiluania in defending the heresy of the Antitrinitarians.
            
            8. Moreouer it is also manifest that out of this opinion of our Aduersaries, to wit, that we must not belieue any thingSeruetus l. 1. de erroribus Trinitatis fol. 32. pag. 1. Edit. an. 1531. which is not expressed in Scriptures, this wicked heresy of the Antitrinitariās in these our dayes had her beginning. For that Michael Seruetus who in our age was the first of them that by printed bookes presumed to oppugne the mystery of the Blessed Trinity, doth plainely testify, writing in this manner: For the solution, saith he, of all things which may heere be alledgedL. Item apud. §. Ai
                        •…
                      Praetor. f
                        •…
                     . de iniurijs. by the Philosophers (for thus he calleth the Catholikes) thou must obserue this rule, which is an axiome among lawiers, that those thinges which do not deserue any speciall note or marke, are vnderstood and esteemed as things neglected, vnlesse they be specially noted. But I pray thee iudge, whether this article of the Trinity deserue any speciall note or no, seing that it is the chiefest and first ground of all our faith, wherof the whole knowledge of God and Christ dependeth. And whether it be expressely noted or no, may be seene by reading ouer the Scriptures,

seing that there is not one word to be foūd of the Trinity in the whole Bible, nor of the persons therof, nor of the essence or vnity of the supposition, nor of the vnity of nature in many distinct thinges, and such like.  Thus farre Seruetus. By these it euidently appeareth that all these monstrous & strange opinions of latter Arrians, who are also called Antitrinitarians do proceed from this one principle of our Aduersaries, to wit, that we must only belieue Scriptures, and by this they are encreased. But let vs now see other matters.
            9. The second point of faith is, that Infants are to be baptized. For our Aduersaries will neuer shew this in the holy Scriptures. For that one place which dothIoan. 3. v. 1. clearly conuince this, to wit, vnlesse he be borne againe of water and the spirit, he cannot enter into the Kingdome of God, they wrest and expound it in another sense. For they willCalu. in c. 
                     •…
                  . Ioan. v. 5. not haue this word (water) to signify the element of water, but the holy Ghost: so Caluin: hence arose that wicked sect of the Anabaptistes, who affirme now adayes that it is an vnlawfull and prophane thing, to baptize Infants, seing that there is no solide reason heereof extant in the Scriptures.
            10. For that wherunto Caluin, and his

followers do fly for refuge, to wit, that in the old Law Infantes were circūcised,Genes. 17. v. 10. the Anabaptistes do easily confute both, because cōcerning that, there was an expresse precept of God, but there was none of the baptisme of Infants; and the similitude also betwixt circumcision and baptismeS. Aug. Tom. 
                     •…
                  . de haeres. cap. 84. S. Hieron. cōtra Heluidium Author de Eccles. dogmatib. cap. 69. S. Ambr. in Epist. 7. ad Siriciū Papam. Epiphan. haeres. 78. 
                     •…
                  nnius cō
                  tra Bellar. Controu. 1. lib. 4. cap. 9. not
                     •…
                   5. doth not hold in all thinges, for otherwise women should not be baptized but only men.
            11. The third point of faith is, that the Blessed Virgin Mary the mother of God remayned alwayes a Virgin euen after her childbyrth. For this is extant no where in Scripture, and yet Heluidius was condemned as an Heretike by the whole auncient Church, because he presumed to deny this.
            12. When Bellarmine had alleadged this vnwrittē poynt of faith, to proue that all such pointes of faith were not expresly set downe in holy writ, Franciscus Innius to answere vnto this difficulty was forced to take and approue the condemned heresy of Heluidius. For he denyeth that we ought to belieue as a point of faith the perpetuall Virginity of our B. Lady. But the ancient Fathers had neuer condemned Heluidius as an Heretike vnlesse he had denyed a point of faith. But

in this manner are our Aduersaries forced to renew the old heresies of tymes past, to the end they may defend this their paradoxe, that we must only belieue Scriptures.
         
         
            
               CHAP. IIII. Whether there are any pointes of faith to be alleadged, which are no where extant in the Bible.
            THE fourth point that our Aduersaries also belieue, but without expresse Scripture for it, is that Christians cannot lawfully haue more wyues at once: for the Councell
               Concil. Trident. sess. 24. c. 2. 
               of Trent hath very well defined this to be a point of faith against the heresy of these tymes, wherof we will speake more presently. But yet our Aduersaries can neuer proue this out of Scriptures only, abstracting from the authority of the Church, albeit they also agree with vs in the beliefe heerof. Yea the examples of holy Scripture do rather perswade the cōtrary. For those most holy men Abraham, Iacob, Dauid, and many others had more wyues

at once, yet neuer did God reprehend this in them, albeit he often spake vnto them.
            2. When Bernardine Ochine one of Caluins schollers did consider this, he was not afrayd to perswade both by word and writing, that Polygamy was yet lawfull, of whome and of his most wicked lyfe Beza
               Beza Epist. 1. ad Andream Duditium. writeth at large.
            But Ochinus grounded only this his heresy in that principle of our Aduersaries before alledged, to wit, that we must belieue nothing which is not expresly in Scriptures. And whereupon Beza himself in his booke which he wrote against the same Ochinus doth testify, that Ochinus vsed this argument: where Beza also manifestly acknowledgeth that Polygamy is not forbidden in holy Scriptures by any expresse Law. The other argument (saith Beza) of Ochinus,
               Beza in lib. de Poligamia. extat. in initio voluminis 
                     •…
                  . suarum Tract. Theol. 
               is that Polygamy is not forbidden by any expresse law to the contrary: but I answere, that there are not lawes written of all thinges. Thus Beza.
            
            3. But afterward indeed Beza goeth about to proue that Poligamy is contrary to the Law of Nature, but the same difficulty still remayneth. For according to our Aduersaries doctrine all thinges necessary to saluation are expressed in holy Scriptures: but the obseruatiō of all things

belonging to the Law of Nature, is altogeather necessary to saluation, therefore the obseruation of these thinges is expressed in Scriptures, or els truly many thinges necessary to saluation must be sought for out of the Scriptures. Moreouer that Polygamy is vnlawfull, is a point of faith, but this as Beza confesseth is not expressely contayned in Scriptures, therfore all the pointes of faith are not expressely contained in Scriptures.
            4. The first point of faith is, that the Sacrament of Baptisme may only be giuen in water. For this point is also very necessary for the Church, least so great and worthy a Sacrament be prophaned, contrary to the institution of Christ: and yet our Aduersaries will neuer be able to proue this out of the Scriptures only, who deny that the forsaid place of S. Iohn is to be vnderstood of true water, as we haue said before in the second point. For the examples of holy Scripture do proue indeed that water is the fit matter of Baptisme,
               §. 
                     •…
                  . cap. praeced. Beza Epist. 
                     •…
                  . ad Tom. Tilium Fratrem & Symmistam suam. but they do not proue that there can be no other matter.
            5. When Beza did consider this well, least that his foresayd principle that we must belieue nothing but Scripture might seeme to be called in question, he was not

ashamed to write that Baptisme might be giuen in any liquour, and by this meanes it wilbe true and lawfull Baptisme, though it be giuen in milke, wyne, yea in Inke or any other filthy liquour. Thus are our Aduersaryes forced to admit these absurdityes, least they might be forced to depart from that their principle of belieuing only Scripture.
            6. Furthermore to the end that Beza might more easily perswade the ignorant common people to admit this his strange paradoxe, addeth presently a very grieuous slaunder against the Catholike Doctors. Let water be wanting, saith, Beza, and yet the Baptisme of any cannot be deserred with edification, nor must not be, I
               Beza 
                     •…
                  adē Epist. 2. 
               truly would as well and as lawfully baptize in any other liquour as in water: neyther are the most superstitious Deuines of any other opinion in these matters. Thus far Beza. But these thinges which he writeth are most false. For there is no Catholike nor Scholasticall DoctorConcil. Trid. sess. 7. can. 2. de baptism. who hath euer eyther thought or written so, yea the playne contrary is defined by the Catholike Church as a poynt of Fayth.
            7. The sixt poynt of fayth, is that bread and wyne is only the necessary matter of the Blessed Sacrament of the Eucharist.

This poynt of faith is also very necessary for the Church, least so great and so excellent a Sacrament should be prophaned; yet our Aduersaries will neuer be able to proue it effectually out of Scripture only. For by this word (Bread) any kind of meate is oftentymes signifyed in Scripture; of wine it is farre more doubtfull. For the Scripture maketh only mention of the Chalice, and not of the liquor which was in the Chalice; and Caluin himselfe acknowledgeth thatLuc. 22. v. 18. Calu. ibid. insua harmonia. Beza Epist. 2. citata. those words (of the fruite of the vyne) were spoken before the institution of this Sacrament.
            8. The which when Beza easily preceaued, heere also he went about to bring in another error, least indeed he should be forced to forsake his former principle of belieuing only Scriptures. For he was not afraid to write that he erred nothing from the institution of Christ, who in the consecration of the Eucharist should vse insteed of the bread appointed for that purpose, any other vsuall meate; and insteed of the wyne any other ordinary kind of drinke, and by this meanes one may consecrate the Eucharist eyther in cheese, flesh, fish, or egges, as also in milke, water, beare, or vineger, or any other liquor

which hitherto was neuer heard of in Gods Church. And yet for all this Beza is not ashamed to attribute this most absurd error of his to all the Scholasticall Doctors. For of both these errors he treateth in the words before alledged, because when he sayth the Scholasticall Doctors were of no other opinion, he speaketh as well cōcerning the matter of the Eucharist, as of the matter of Baptisme. After this manner our Aduersaries do force so many and so great errors out of that their principle of belieuing only Scriptures, wherof more might be alledged, which for breuities sake we omit.
            9. But there is one thing I cannot let passe, because therby we clearly conuince that the Traditions of the Church do not only contayne vnwritten points of fayth, but (that which is more) euen in our Aduersaries iudgment they change and abolish such things as are expresly commaunded in Scriptures: for euen in the Table of the Law of God, which is sayd to be written by Gods owne hand, inExod. 34. v. 1. Exod. 20. v. 8, 9, 10, 11. many and manyfest words the keeping of the Sabboth day is comaunded, the which notwithstanding, now all, except a few Anabaptists, do confesse to be abrogated by Ecclesiasticall Tradition only, without any expresse

testimony of Scripture. The Anabaptists I say being also deceiued by that Common principle of our Aduersaries of blieuing only Scriptures, they go about to bring the obseruation of the Sabboth day into vse and custome agayne, and for this cause they are called Sabatharians, but notVide Prateolum V. Sabatharij: so much the heresy as the madnesse of these men is condemned of all, and namely of Luther in his booke against the Sabbatarians, in the seauenth Tome.
         
         
            
               CHAP. V. Wherin it is proued, that there are Traditions by the testimonies of the holy Fathers.
            THE third argument wherby we proue, that all the poynts of our fayth are not set downe in writing by the Apostles, is the authorityCoccius Tom. 1. l. 
                     •…
                  . Antic. vltimo. Bellarm. Tom. 1. l. 41. de verbo Dei c. 7. of the aunciēt Fathers, who affirme and teach this in many places. The which places of the holy Fathers, as well the Greeks as the Latins Iodocus Coccius hath very diligently gathered togeather in his booke, intitled Thesaurus Catholicus, and before him Bellarmine did the same. But least

we be longer then the order of Epitomes doth permit, especially in a thing so manyfest, it shall suffice vs to alledg one chiefe Doctor of the Greeke, and another of the Latine Church.
            2. Among the Grecians S. Chrysostome is the most famous, who doth not only affirme it but also manifestly proueth it out of holy Scripture. For when he expoundeth those words of the later Epistle2. ad Thes. c. 1. v. 14. to the Thessalonians: Therefore brethren stand and hold the Traditions which you haue learned, whether it be by word or by our Epistle, he writeth thus: Hence it appeareth, sayth S. Chrysostome, that he did not deliuer all things vnto them by his Epistle but many things also without his letters, but as well these, as those other, worthily deserue
               S. Chrisost. Hom. 4. in. 2. ad Thessal. 
               to be belieued; therfore we esteeme the Tradition also of the Church to be worthy of credit. It is a Tradition, seeke no further. Thus S. Chrysostome. But it is most certayne that the Apostle and consequently S. Chrysostome also,Caluin l. 4. Instit c. 14. sect. vlt. S. August. Tom. 7. de baptismo. contra Donatist. l. 2. cap. 7. who expoūdeth him, doth not only speake of ceremonies and customes, but also of poynts of Fayth.
            3. S. Augustine whom Caluin acknowledgeth to be the best and most faythfull witnesse of antiquity, writeth in this manner. Many things are not to be found in the Apostles writings, nor in the ensewing Councells, and yet notwithstanding,
               
               because they are generally kept through out the whole Catholike Church, they are iuged to haue byn deliuered and commended by none, but by them. Thus S. Augustine. Neyther can it be sayd, that S. Augustine speaketh of ceremonies and not of poynts of fayah. For in that place he proueth against the Donatists that those which were baptized in the accustomed forme and matter by heretikes were not to be baptized againe, but none vnlesse he be an Anabaptist, will deny that this is a point of fayth.
         
         
            
               CHAP. VI. Wherin euen by the doctrine of our Aduersaries it is proued, that there are Traditions.
            THE fourth argument wherby we proue Traditions, is taken out of the doctrine of our Aduersaries. For all those things which our Aduersaries do affirme to be poyntes of fayth against the Catholike doctrine, they teach and belieue them without any expresse Scripture. For it cannot be found expressely in Scripture, that fayth only iustifyeh, that there are only two Sacraments of

the new law, that none should pray for the dead &c. for all these things and many others which they teach against vs, they gather only out of Scriptures, and that by some false and very weake consequence; but it is no where expresly written, that fayth only iustifieth, that there are only two Sacraments, that we must not pray to Saynts or for the dead &c.
            2. Moreouer there can no Catholike be found who doth not receaue and assuredly belieue the whole authenticall text of the holy Scripture, why do they therfore condemne vs, when they affirme that nothing is to be belieued besids the text of Scripture, wheras the whole Controuersy betwixt them and vs, is of the vnwritten points of fayth which, we affirme, & they deny?
            3. Our Aduersaries being conuinced by this argument, do now at the last confesse, that not only that is to be admitted and belieued as the pure word of GodBeza de notis Eccl. pag. 137. volum. 2. Theol. Tract. edit. an
                     •…
                  . 1581. which is expresly written in holy Scripture, but all that also which by a necessary consequence may be gathered out of it.
            4. But when they answere thus, they are forced to depart and forsake that their first principle, wherby they affirmed that

all the poynts of fayth are expresly conteyned in Scriptures, and that they were set downe in writing by the Apostles.
            5. Furhermore not perceauing so much, they ioyne in opinion with vs, so that they must needes indeed confesse that the Traditions of the Church are altogeather necessary. For such things as are gathered out of Scriptures do rather belong to Traditions then to expresse Scripture. For that which only, consequently, & by reasoning & discoursing is gathered out of Scripture albeit it very well and necessarily may be deduced from thence, is not expressely in Scripture, but only obscurly, secretly, or virtually is conteined therin. For no man can truly say, that the conclusion which is only inferred out of the premisses is expresly conteyned in the same premisses, for otherwise our discourse and arguing were vayne and to no purpose. But therfore do we reason and discourse to the end, that, that which lyeth hidden virtually in the premisses may be expresly manyfested in the conclusion.
            6. And that we may alleadge an example out of the Scriptures themselues, when God the Father sayd, This is my welbeloued
               Matt. 17. v. 5. 
               Sonne, heare him. Out of these wordes

we may very well gather, and by a necessary consequence, that the whole doctrine of Christ our Lord is to be heard and receiued of all: yet none will say, that all the doctrine of Christ is conteyned expresly in those few wordes. And truely the holy Scripture is so fertill & plentifull that many pointes of faith do as yet lye hidden and vnknowne therin, which hitherto hath neuer byn gathered togeather by any, but these thinges are conteyned virtually and not expressely in it.
            7. Moreouer after so many debates and contentions, after so many bookes set forth against vs, after so many slaunders wherby our Aduersaries charge vs, as though we taught that the Scriptures are imperfect, they at the last returne to our opinion. For we do not deny, yea we willingly acknowledge, that all those things which rightly and without errour are deduced or gathered out of the expresse wordes of the holy Scriptures, do belong vnto the written word of God, and are contayned in holy writ obscurely, not expressely, virtually, and not plainly. For in that God doth reueale any thing in expresse wordes, consequently, and virtually he reuealeth all things which necessarily and without any errour may be deduced

from thence.
            8. We graunt also that the Scripture consequently, mediatly, & virtually, as in a generall principle conteyneth all things necessary to saluatiō, yea in that one only article of the Creed, I belieue the holy Catholike Church; in those few words also of Christ,Luc. 10. v. 16. 
               he who heareth you, heareth me, if the collection be rightly framed, as we haue also said before in the 25. Chapter. But when these thinges are gathered togeather which are not expressely in Scripture, there is scarse any of them which is not vncertayne & doubtful without the authority and Traditions of the Church. Wherefore these collections do manifestly conuince the necessity and authority of Traditions.
            
            9. But that these collections may be vncertayne and deceytfull, both experiēce & reasō teacheth vs: experiēce, because almost all Heresies haue had their beginning not from the Scripture alone in it selfe, but from these collections badly framed and made. For there is not almost any one heresy which is only grounded on the expresse wordes of Scripture without some other collection, seing that almost all Heretikes both in tymes past as now also go about to proue and gather their heresies from the Scripture by certayne

deceytfull & sophisticall argumēts. Arius for example, out of those wordes of Christ, the Father is greater then I, did gatherIoan. 14. v. 
                     •…
                  . 28. but badly, that Christ euen according to his diuine Nature was interiour to his Father. The new Arians out of those words of the ten cōmaūdemēts, thou shalt not haue strāge
               Exod. 20. v. 3. 
               Gods before me, do gather but foolishly that the Sōne is not God, the holy Ghost is not God. So the Diuell himself against ChristMatth. 4. v. 6. vsed this reason, It is written, God hath giuen his Angells charge of thee, therfore cast thy selfe downe headlong. Lastly all the arguments indeed which our Aduersaries at this tyme alleadge against vs out of Scriptures, and all the errours which they haue inuē
               ted, do take their beginning and strength from their new illations and reasons, and not out of the bare and playne words of Scripture, as will manifestly appeare in euery one of the Controuersies.
            10. The reason also is manifest why these their collections and reasons are vncertaine and doubtfull. For in nothing can one more easily or more often erre, then in these illations. The which may proceed of many causes; eyther because the illation it selfe is bad and Sophisticall, or because the place of Scripture from whence it is gathered is

falsified by some false exposition therof, or because the proposition which is assumed and adioyned to the wordes of Scripture is false and ambiguous, or because one or more wordes in that collection are vsed doubtfully, that is to say, in one sense in the premises, and in another in the conclusion; or lastly because there hapneth some errour to be in the collection which maketh it weake, Sophisticall, and erroneous.
            11. Besides that, there are so many and so contrary illations of diuers men, that the authority of the Church is altogeather necessary in matters of faith, that there may arise a certaine and an vndoubted faith of these matters, of which sort Traditions are, that is to say, the doctrine of the whole Church.
            12. But when one belieueth such an illation with a diuine or Catholike faith, he must needes know two thinges, the one is, that the expresse place of Scripture from whence this conclusion is deduced must certainly be well vnderstood by him which disputeth: the other is, that he who maketh such a deduction and collection can neyther deceiue others not be deceyued himselfe. But none can know eyther of these without the Traditions of

the Church, seeing that otherwise there is none which may not be deceiued sometymes: All collections therefore which produce or breed fayth in vs, do most clearly conuince and shew the authority and necessity of Traditions.
         
         
            
               CHAP. VII. Wherein it is proued, that there are Traditions, by the absurdities which otherwise would follow.
            THE fift argument wherby we proue, that many things are to be belieued which are not expressed in holy Scriptures, is taken out of the absurdities which do ensue of the contrary doctrine. For hauing once admitted, that nothing is to be belieued which is not expressed in Scripture, all old heresies are renewed, and a great vncertaynty and confusion of all things is brought into the Church of God, yea euen the way to Atheisme is layd open, because hauing once reiected & despised the Tradition of the Church, all the poynts of fayth from the Apostles tyme till now explicated and proued by the auncient

Fathers against heretiks, all those things also which were decreed and determined by all the generall Councells in times past against the said heretiks, leese their chiefest strength and authority; the which notwithstanding our Aduersaries do acknowledge themselues to receiue and belieue.
            2. Neyther do we know by an assured Catholike fayth, whether there were euer any Fathers or Councells but by the Traditions of the Church But neyther do we know any other way but by fayth, whether since the Apostles tyme till now there were any Catholikes or not? because of those things which were done since the tyme and death of the Apostles, there is nothing extant in holy Scripture, seeing that all the bookes therof were written before the death of the Apostles. But such things as haue byn donne since till now, cannot otherwyse be knowne but by the Tradition of the Church.
            3. Neyther is it sufficient to say, that we know these things by the Ecclesiasticall histories. For that fayth which proceedeth of histories without the authority or Traditions of the Catholike Church, is but an humaine fayth which oftentymes deceaueth others, and may be deceiued it selfe, and therfore these kind of histories

cannot produce a diuine fayth in vs: this experience it selfe doth clearly teach vs. For our Aduersaries do somtymes doubt whether S. Peter was euer at Rome, or no, because forsooth this is not to be found expresly in holy Scriptures, wheras notwithstanding it is most assuredly proued and testified in many bookes both of the auncient Historiographers and holy Fathers: Why may they not as lawfully call other matters in question which are notwithstanding expressely set downe in other auncient writers. Our Aduersaries therfore do make all things very doubtfull and vncertayne, whyles they will only belieue and admit the Scripture: but now let vs answere their arguments.
         
         
            
            
               CHAP. VIII. Wherein the arguments of our Aduersaries, taken out of the old Testament, are confuted.
            THE first argument wherby our Aduersaries oppugne Traditions, and which they vse very often, the which also as inuincible they haue added to the confession of theirRupellana confessio Artic. 5. Deut. 4. v. 2. Deut. 12. v. vltimo. fayth, they take out of those words of Deuteronomy, Thou shalt not add any thing to the word which I speake vnto you; nor shall you take any thing from it. And againe, that which I commaund thee do that only; neyther add or diminish any thing from it. By these places of Scriptures our Aduersaries do inferre, that nothing is to be receiued as a poynt of fayth, which is not expressely set downe in Scriptures.
            2. But this argument is erroneous and the weaknes thereof is very great for many causes. First because in those words there is no mention made of the Scripture nor of the written word of God, but only of the word preached and deliuered viua voce. Thou shalt not add (sayth the Scripture) to the word that I speake vnto you, he doth not

say, that I write vnto you. Againe, Do only sayth he, that which I commaund thee, he doth not say, that which I write vnto thee.
            3. Moreouer in these words the holy Scripture doth not only speake of matters of sayth to be belieued, but also of ceremonies and customes to be done and obserued: but our Aduersaries themselues confesse, that these customes may be added by the authority of the Church, yea they haue ordeined themselues very many, the which they chang euen yet when theyCaluin cō
                  tra 4. sess. Concil. 
                     •…
                  rident. please. Caluin also acknowledgeth that many vnwritten customes were deliuered vnto vs by the Apostles.
            4. That also according to the phrase of Scripture is said to be added to the word of God which is contrary & opposite vnit. For Iosue did not transgresse this commaundement of Deuteronomy, when he added his booke to the bookes of Moyses. Nor did others transgresse it who added the bookes of the Iudges, Ruth, and of the Kinges, which were not written by Moyses, & which are also to be belieued as contayning pointes of faith. But in these bookes there is nothing contrary to that which Moyses wrote. And the Hebrew text agreeth very well to this answere, for in both

places of Deuteronomy this word (Ghal) is vsed, which signifieth oftentines contrary, or against, so that the sense is, do not add any thing contrary to the word which I commaund: and againe, yee shall not add any thing contrary to the word which I say vnto you. For so is that particle (Ghal) taken in the 40. Psalme (or according to the Hebrewes 41. in the 2. Psalme also, the second verse. And in the 14. of Numbers the 2. verse, & els where very often. Euen as also in the new Testament 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               , which answereth to the Hebrew Ghal, signifieth also contrary, or against; when the Apostle writeth to the Corinthians, that in vs you may learne one not
               
                  
                     •…
                  . ad Cor. 4. v. 6. 
               to be puffed vp against another aboue that is writiē. that is to say, against the Scripture, the which saith, we must not be puffed vp in pryde as S. Chrysostome, and after him Theophilactus & others do note vpon that place. The which place some bodliy alledge against Traditions, wheras the Apostle in that place doth not speake of the wholeCaluin. in illa verba 1. ad Corin. 4. v. 6. word of God, but of this one point, that we must not be puffed vp in pryde, as euen Caluin himselfe acknowledgeth.
            5. But to omit all such thinges as other Catholike Doctors haue very well, and learnedly written of the proper and

literall sense of these wordes, yea that we may also graunt to our Aduersaries that this which they alledge is the true sense, they erre very much in that they thinke that these wordes of Moyses belong vnto vs, and that we are no lesse now bound and obliged by them, then the Iewes were in tymes past. For these wordes do no more appertaine vnto vs then those of theDeuteron. 27. v. vlt. same booke of Deuteronomy. Cursed be he that abideth not in the wordes of this Law, and fulfilleth them not in worke. From which wordes S.
               Ad Galat. 3. v. 10. & 13. 
               Paul manifestly teacheth that we are deliuered and freed, by the grace of Christ Iesus. But seing that in these wordes which they do heere alledge Moyses commaundeth that the Childrē of Israel should obserue & fulfill euery word which he had commaunded them, for so it is expresly set downe Deuteronomy 
               
                  •…
               2. the last verse, in the Hebrew text, and in all the Bibles of our Aduersaries, and he presently addeth that nothing is to be added or detracted from all these, he manifestly commaundeth the keeping of the whole Moysaicall Law, and of all the Sacraments, Sacrifices, and Ceremonies of the old Testament. For he doth not only commaund, that nothing should be added but also that nothing is to be detracted of all those thinges by him commaū
               ded.

Wherefore if our Aduersaries obiect against vs that we adde any thing against this precept, we may more iustly obiect vnto them, that they detract farre more then we add, seing that they neyther obserue the Circumcision, nor the legall Sacrifices, nor other Ceremonies which are so often and so straitely commaunded in Deuteronomy. It cannot truly be denyed, but that this is to detract somewhat from those thinges which Moyses commaunded; and therfore our Aduersaries must needes confesse that these are the wordes of the old Law, and consequently to appertaine nothing vnto vs. Out of this which hath byn said, it followeth, that our Aduersaries do very indiscretly & foolishly boast and bragge of those wordes of Moyses. For in the exposition, thereof they erre farre from the truth, and a great deale more in the application, when they go about to proue that we are also bound and obliged by them.
            6. Our Aduersaries take their second argument out of these wordes of Salomons prouerbs: Euery word of God is fiery, it is a shyeld
               Prouerb. 30. v. 5. & 
                     •…
                  . 
               of defence to those which hope in it: do not add any thing to the wordes thereof, and thou shalt be found and reprehended as a lyar. I answere that this place maketh nothing against vs: for in

that place there is no mention made of Scripture only, but of al the word of God. And it is most true that nothing should be added to all the whole word of God, the which is to be belieued with a Catholike faith as the true word of God. For as we haue said before, our faith relyeth only of the word of God, but the Scripture only is not all the word of God, because all Traditions also which contayne poynts of faith belong therunto, as we haue sufficientlySupra. c. 2. proued already. But they add to the word of God, & are lyars who affirme that God sayd this, or that, which indeed he neuer spake. And of this sort are those false Prophets, of whome God by the Prophet Ieremy conplayneth, saying, They speake the vision of their hartes, not from the mouth
               Hier. 23. v. 16. & 21. 
               of our Lord: & againe, I did not speake vnto them, and they did prophesy. This place also may very well be vnderstood, of those who add any thing contrary to the word of God. For in the Hebrew text, there is set downe that particle (Ghal) which oftentymes signifieth contrary, or against, as we haue already declared in our answere to the first argument.
         
         
            
            
               CHAP. IX. Wherin is examined that place of S. Pauls Epistle to the Galathians, the which our Aduersaries do obiect against Traditions.
            THE third argument our Aduersaries take out of the firstConfess. Rupell. Art. 3. Chapter to the Galathians, the which they haue also added to their confession of fayth as inuincible. For they haue omitted their second argument as not strong inough for their purpose. But thus they frame their argument: The Apostle sayth twice an Anathema to thoseGal. 1. v. 8. & 9. who teach any thing besids that which he hath taught: therefore nothing is to be receiued or belieued but Scripture. Our Aduersaries haue this place of the Apostle often in their mouthes, wherefore it shalbe examined more exactly. We answere therfore that our Aduersaries do erre heere for two reasons, first because our whole controuersy is of the written word of God, but in these words there is no mention made of the writtē word, or of Scripture, but only of the word preached and deliuered

               viua voce to the Galathians by S. Paul. And hence it is that S. Augustine farre otherwiseS. August. Tom. 7. de vnit. Eccles. c. 24. then our Aduersaries, disputing against the Donatists proueth by these words of the Apostle, that we are bound to admit and belieue the Traditions of the Church: as for exāple, that those who are once orderly and lawfully christened by Heretiks, are not to be baptized againe. And well truly; for that which is viua voce deliuered, is a Tradition, and not Scripture. Moreouer if the Scripture only conteyned expressely all the poynts of fayth, the Apostle would rather haue proposed the Scripture as the rule of faith then his owne preaching, seing that the Scripture is manifestly well knowne to all Nations, but his owne preaching to the Galathians only. But our Aduersaries vrge againe and say, that all that which the Apostle preached to the Galathians was written eyther before that tyme or afterward by S. Paul and the other Apostles: they say this, but they proue it not. For this is no where written in holy Scripture, and so whyles they goe about to perswade vs, that all points of fayth are writtē, they coyne & inuent a new point, which is no where extant in Scripture, that is to say, that all such things as S. Paul viua voce taught the Galathians, are written.

But we following herein S. Augustine, doS. Aug. Tom. 9. Tract. 96. in loan & Tom. 7. de v
                     •…
                  itat, Eccles. c. 21. in fine. gather much better by these words, and infer thus against them. If there must be nothing belieued, but that which S. Paul preached to the Galathians, and that none knoweth certainly what are those things which he preached, but by the Traditions and doctrine of the Church, it followeth manifestly that besids the Scripture we must also belieue the Traditions and doctrine of the Church; seing that without them we cannot certainly and without errour know what were those things which the Apostle taught the Galathians.
            
            2. Secondly our Aduersaries do erre in that they doe not rightly expound that particle in the wordes of S. Paul (praeter) (besides) but rather contrary to the Apostles meaning. For the Latine word praeter, as also the Greeke word 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               , and the Hebrew (Ghal) haue two significations. In the former it signifyeth all that which is not the selfe same thing whereof we doe speake: in the later sense it signifieth that only which is contrary to that we speake of. In which sense praeter signifieth the same that contra doth, to wit (against:) the former sense is manifest inough, the later is proued by these places of Scripture, Act. 18. v. 13.

where all do translate these Greeke words,Calu, super acta A post. ann. 1560. Beza edit. an▪ 1560. & 1565. & 1598. Henric. Steph. in thesauro linguae Graecae Tom. 
                     〈◊〉
                   in dictione 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  . 
               
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               , to be against the Law: so hath not only the vulgar edition, but also Caluin and Beza, and all the French Bibles of Geneua. Likewise in the first to the Romans the 26. vers. 
               
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                signifieth against Nature: so hath the vu
                  •…
               gar edition and all the french Bibles of Genena, yea Cicero, as witnesseth Henricus Stephanus doth thus translate this phrase out of Greeke. Againe in the 4. to the Romanes the 18. verse, 
               
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                signifieth against, as the vulgar edition, and Beza hath in all editions. Moreouer in the 11. to the Romans the 24. vers, 
               
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                signifieth against, as the vulgar edition and all the Bibles of Geneua haue: finally in the last to the Romans the 17. vers▪
                aswell the Greeke word 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               , as the Latin word (praeter) in our interpretor signifieth the same thing that contra doth, as manifestly appeareth by the precedent wordes, for dissensions and scandals are contrary or against the doctrine of Christ, and not only besides his doctrine.
                  
                     〈…〉
                  
                Wherfore Caluin in his Commentaries set forth in the yeare 1557. vpon the Epistle to the Romanes, and Sebasti
                     •…
                  n Castalio, and all the French Bibles of Geneua haue cōtrary or against the doctrine: and albeit Beza translateth it besids the doctrine, yet in

his last edition set forth in the yeare 159
                  •…
               . he translateth it contrary to the doctrine and in his Annotations he warneth that it is rather so to be translated. It is not therfore strange or absurd that the Greeke word 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               , or the Latyne praeter should signify the same that contra doth.
            3. But now that this word may not only be thus vsed, but that also it must necessarily be so vnderstood and taken in this place, we haue shewed by the absurdities which would otherwise follow▪ The first is that S. Paul would haue sayd Anathema to S. Iohn Euangelist, who many yeares after the preaching of S. Paul to the Galathians, yea after his death, wrote his Apocalyps, wherein there are many new reuelations which S. Paul had not preached to the Galathiās, because they were not thē reuealed by God.
            4. The second absurdity, that S. Paul had pronoūced an Anathema vpon all those who in his tyme by a propheticall spirit did dayly prophesy new things. For in1. ad Cor. 14. v. 2. 4. 26. & 30. the Apostles tyme there were many such as appeareth by the first epistle to the Corinthians. And S. Paul could not preach to the Galathians, which God had not yet reuealed.
            5. The third absurdity, the Apostle

for the same reason had pronounced Anathema against S. Luke who in the Actes of the Apostles relateth many thinges which happened long after S. Paul left Galatia.
            
            6. The fourth absurdity, the Apostle for the same cause also had condemned himselfe with the said Anathema. For he wrote many Epistles after he had left Galatia, wherein he relateth many thinges which hapned afterward vnto him eyther at Rome, or in other places.
            7. Lastly it is an absurd thing to think either God after those wordes of S. Paul to the Galathians could reueale to men nothing more by an Angell sent from heauen, or that the said Angell who by the commaundement of God should reueale any new thing, but not contrary to faith, should incurre that▪ 
               Anathema by S. Paul, seing that this were to wrest the Anathema vpon God himselfe, who commaunded the Angell to do so. This place therfore cannot be vnderstood of diuers and distinct thinges from those which S. Paul taught the Galathians, but only of contrary and opposite thinges vnto them. But according to this sense of the word (praeter) all the foresayd Absurdities doe cease. For neyther S. Iohn in his Apocalyps, nor

               S. Luke in the Actes of the Apostles, nor any other which did prophecy, nor S. Paul himself, euer wrote or taught any thing contrary to that which S. Paul taught the Galathians. But euen God himself cannotAd Hebr. 16. v. 18. reueale the contrary by an Angell, because according to the Apostle, It is impossible for God to lye.
            8. Neyther is it sufficient for me to say that those thinges which were afterward reuealed and written, were not necessary pointes of faith to saluation. For S. Paul did not say, if any shall Euangelize vnto you any point necessary to saluation: but absolutely, if any shall Euangelize any thing contrary to that which you haue recevued. Moreouer all these thinges which were afterward set downe in holy Scripture were true pointes of faith, the which euery Christiā is necessarily boūd to belieue, if not expressely, yet at the least virtually and generally euery one is boūd to belieue with an assured faith all those things which are in holy Writ to be most certaine and true.
            9. Finally euen our Aduersaries confession doth conuince this to be most true▪ for now they acknowledge that all those thinges which by a necessary consequēce are deduced out of the Scriptures do belong

vnto the word of God and are points of fayth, and therfore they may be lawfullySuprac. 3
                     •…
                  
                preached vnto the people as we haue said before. But al these are distinct things from those which are expresly written in holy Scriptures. For the antecedent wherby some other thing may be inferred, is distinct from that which is inferred. For it were a ridiculous illation if one and the same thing should be inferred from it selfe. But that which is inferred in a good collection is neuer contrary to the antecedent. The Apostle therefore speaketh of doctrine contrary to his, and not absolutly of any other distinct doctrine.
            10. And in this sense the Fathers doe often say that S. Paul affirmed in this placeS. August. Tom. 7▪ ō
                  tra literas Petil Donatist. lib 3▪ cap. 6. S August. Tom▪ 9. Tract. 98. in Euang. Ioan. sub. finem. that nothing was to be taught besids that which is in the holy Scripture. For so S. Augustine speaketh in one place. But in another he clearly explicateth himselfe by this word (praeter) to vnderstand (contra) because we must preach nothing contrary to the holy Scripture. That this is the true sense and meaning of S. Augustine, it is manifest by the words themselues, wherby also he proueth that the word (praeter) in those words of the Apostle, doth signify diuers, but not contrary thinges. For in

this manner he writeth when he warneth his schollers to take heed of the opinions of the Manichaeans & other heretikes, because these are not only distinct but alsoAd Gal. 1. v. 9. contrary to those which the Apostles taught. Let the admonition, sayth he, of the holy Apostle neuer depart from your hart. If any shall Euangelize vnto you besids that which you haue receiued, let him be an Anathema. He doth not say
               1. ad Thess. 3. v. 10. 
               more then you haue receaued, but besides that which you haue receaued. For if he should say that, he should be preiudiciall to himselfe who coueteth to come to the Thessalonians, that he might supply that which was wanting to their fayth. Now he which supplieth addeth that which is lacking, taketh not away that which was. But he which ouerpasseth
               Ioan. 1
                     •…
                  . v. 
                     •…
                  . 
               the rule of fayth doth not goe on in the way, but departeth frō the way. That therfore which our Lord sayth, I haue yet many things to say vnto you, but you cannot beare them now, were to be added to those things which they knew, and not to be ouerthrowen by those they had already learned. Hitherto S. Augustine.
            
         
         
            
            
               CHAP. X. Wherein other obiections of our Aduersaries against Traditions are resuted.
            THE fourth argument is deducedApoc. vlt v. 18. confess. Rupell. Artic. 5. out of those words of the Apocalyps which they also cite and alledge in their confessiō at Rochell. If any man shall adde to these things, God shall adde vpon him the plagues written in this booke. But who doth not see that S. Iohn speaketh expresly of the booke of the Apocalyps only, and not of the whole Scripture, for he sayth, I testify to euery one hearing the words of the Prophesy of this booke, if any man sall adde to these things &c. and in the 19. verse following. If any man shall diminish of the words of the booke of this prophecy &c. he speaketh therfore only of the propheticall words of the Apocalyps. For it is manyfest otherwise out of Ecclesiasticall histories, that S. Iohn wrote his Ghospell after the Apocalyps, and consequently that he added many thingsS. Hier. de script. Eccles. in Ioā. Apost. besids the Apocalyps. But let our Aduersaries take heed least they incurre those paynes which S. Iohn threatneth to those which

adde or detract any thing from the Apocalyps; seing that they so often and so bouldly wrest the prophesies of the Apocalyps to many strange senses against the Pope and the Catholike Church.
            2. Our Aduersaries alledge many other things, but their arguments which be of lesse moment are taken out of those places of Scripture which commend vnto vs the great excellency of holy Scripture. But all these are very easily confuted by thatSupra c. 25. one ground, which as we haue declared before euen our Aduersaries do admit, to wit, that to the end the holy Scripture be perfect in it selfe and sufficient to euerlasting saluation, it is not necessary that it should expresly cōteyne al points of fayth, but it is sufficiēt, that all such poynts may be deduced by a good consequence out of it. But all the Traditions of the Church which belong vnto fayth may be gatheredSupra c. 25. as we haue sayd out of Scripture, the which also we declare more at large in euery one of these controuersies. Our Aduersaries therfore haue not reason to say that we teach the Scripture to be imperfect or insufficient. For as concerning this sufficiency and perfectiō of Scripture they are forced at least to yield and subscribe vnto our opinion herein: but these

their arguments, whereof they make great account, we haue therfore alledged, to the end all may know how badly they interpret the holy Scriptures, and by how friuolous reason they are perswaded to forsake the Catholike fayth.
            3. But euen this sufficiency of Scripture which they pretēd, they proue very foolishly by those wordes of the Apostle, wherein he teacheth, that the ScriptureAd Tim. 3. v. penul
                     •…
                  . is very profitable; as though forsooth euery thing which is profitable for obtayning some particuler end or purpose, were also absolutely sufficient then the which nothing can be spoken more absurdly. The head truely is not only profitable, but also necessary, that a man may liue, but who I pray you will say that the head only without the rest of the body is sufficient for the lyfe of man. But to our late Aduersaries to the end they may make this their discourse or reason the stronger, say, that in humane thinges not euery thing which is profitable is also sufficient, but in diuine matters whatsoeuer is profitable, is also sufficient, whervntoIunius cō
                  tra Bell. controu. 1. lib. 4. c. 10. nota 44. 
               Iunius like a fine young stripling addeth, that this can be ouerthrowne by no sophistry. But who doth not see that the Eucharist by the diuine vertue thereof is

profitable to the obtayning of eternall saluation, and yet notwithstanding without Baptisme it is not sufficiēt, as also without faith and pennance: the same may be sayd of Baptisme and of euery booke of Scripture. Yea euen the Apostle doth not speake of the whole Scripture, as our Aduersaries thinke he doth, when he saith, that euery Scripture is profitable, but of euery particuler part thereof. For howS. Hier. de Script. Eccles. in Ioan Apost. 2. ad Tim. 
                     •…
                  . v. penult. could he speake of a thing which was not then extant. But as then the Ghospell of S. Iohn was not yet written nor the Apocalyps. For these were after S. Pauls death written by S. Iohn: hence it is that the Apostle S. Paul doth not say the whole Scripture▪ but euen Scripture inspired by God is profitable. For there is not one parte of Scripture which is not profitable vnto vs if it be well vnderstood. Yea for all that notwithstanding euery one part precisely in it selfe abstracting from the rest of the Scripture (as all do very well know) is not sufficient.
            4▪ Finally it is also to be considered that all those places wherin the integrity, perfection and vtility of the Scripture is commended vnto vs, must needes be vnderstood not of the bare wordes only, butSupra c. 3. of the same well and rightly vnderstood.

But this true vnderstanding of the words cannot otherwise be had then by TraditionSupra c. 4 and the vnwritten doctrine of the Church it selfe, as we haue already declared. Wherefore all those places which do commend vnto vs the holy Scriptures, do also consequently cōmend vnto vs Traditions and the vnwritten Word of God, seing that therein consisteth the principal part of holy Scripture, to wit, the true sense of the wordes.
         
         
            
               CHAP. XI. Wherein is declared how we may know the Apostolicall Traditions.
            AMONG the other arguments of our Aduersaries this is one that we cannot know certainly which are the Traditions of the Apostles, seing that many Heretikes in times past pretented also that their heresyes were agreing to Apostolicall Traditions. Moreouer they obiect that Traditions may easily be corrupted and changed, and for this cause, Scripture was ordayned that the doctrine deliuered by word of

mouth might continue the longer without any falsification▪ or corruption. But we answere to this their reason: that the auncient Heretikes also by supposed and false Scriptures which they attributed falsely to the Apostles, did confirme and proue their heresies. Many thinges, saith S. Augustine,
               8 Aug. de Ciuit. Dei l. c. & 
                     〈◊〉
                  . sub finem. 
               were alleadged by heretikes as though they were the sayings of the Prophets and Apostles. But yet for all that they were not iudged to be the most certaine and Canonicall Scriptures.
            
            2. But the Traditions of the Apostles may so certainly and easily be known from supposed and false Traditions, as the Canonical Scriptures may be knowne from the Apocriphall, for they are both knowne by the same meanes and authority, that is to say, by the authority, doctrine, and testimony of the Catholike Church, which neyther can deceiue any nor be deceyued her selfe.
            3. And albeit speaking of humane matters the Scripture is more certaine thē Tradition alone, yet it hapneth otherwise in matters concerning God, because in these there is the authority of God, and the continuall assistance of the holy Ghost hath place, which doth not suffer the Church to erre, and hence it is, that the Tradition only of the Church which

is not so much written in paper as is printed in the hartes of Christians, is a most certayne, and faithfull keeper of all the2. ad Cor. 3. V. 3. 4. pointes of our diuine 
                  •…
               aith.
            4. Moreouer, if euen Christ himself had with his owne hand writtē in brasse all the pointes of our faith, they should notwithstanding not haue had so great certainty, as now Ecclesiasticall Traditions haue, vnlesse the same keeper of the diuine doctrine had byn also present. For that which is imprinted in brasse, may be rased and blotted out, and the brasse it selfe may be consumed by fyre. But those thinges which are imprinted in the hartes of Christians by the holy Ghost, can neuer perish, or be any way changed.
            5. And what we haue said of knowing the Apostolicall Traditions, is to be vnderstood whether the Church assembled in a generall Councel declared it so, or it became knowne and manifest by the continuall and generall custome of the whole Church. Also, whether the question be of Tradition belonging to faith, or only belonging to rites and Ceremon
                  •…
               es▪ For of the Tradition belonging to faith (that is to say, of not baptizing againe those which are baptized once before by heretikes) are these wordes of St.

               Augustine. Albeit indeed of this thing, saith he,S. Aug. Tom. 7. contra Crescon. Grammat. l. 1. cap. penult. 
               there can no example be alleadged out of Canonicall Scriptures, yet notwithstanding we hold the truth of the same holy Scriptures in this matter, when we do that which generally the whole Catholike Church holdeth, the which euen the authority of the Scriptures themselues commend vnto vs: so as, because the holy Scripture cannot erre, whosoeuer feareth to be deceaued by the difficultie or obscurity of this question, let him go to the same Church for counsell, the
               S. Aug. Tom. 7. de baptismo contra Donatist. l. 4. cap. 24. 
               which the holy Scripture very clearely sheweth and demonstrateth vnto vs. Hitherto S. Augustine. And disputing in another place against the Donatists, concerning the baptisme of Infants. That, saith he, which the whole Catholike Church holdeth, nor was ordayned by generall Councells, but yet alwaies kept and obserued by all, is most truly to be belieued to haue byn deliuered vnto vs by Apostolicall authority.
            
            6. But of the Ecclesiasticall rites andS. Aug. Tom. 2. Epist. 118. ad Ianuar. c. 5. Calu. l. 4. Instit. c. 4. sect. vltima sub finem. & l. 3. c. 3. sect. 10. in medio. Ceremonies, the same S. Augustine speaketh in this manner. Is the Catholike Church through the whole world hold and practise any thing, it is a signe of great madnesse to dispute, whether it is to be done so or noe. By which wordes of S. Augustine it may easily be vnderstood what was the opinion and vniforme doctrine of the whole auncient Church concerning this point. For our Aduersaries themselues do say, that S. Augustine was a most
               
               faithfull witnesse of antiquity, vnto whome I referre the Readers, if they desire to know certainly any more of the sense of Antiquity,
         
         The end of the second Part of the first Controuersy.
         FINIS.
      
   