
      
         
            
            
            A VVORLD of vvonders▪
A MASSE of Murthers.
            A COVIE of Coſonages.
            Containing many of the moſte notableſt Wonders, horrible
Murthers and deteſtable Coſonages that haue béene within this
Land.
            Not imagined 
                  •
               alſo to delight vaine heads c
                     •
                  ieſe, nor
practiſed trans mare to breed trueth cum
ambiguitate, but commited euen
at home re vera, and may
be prooued cum
honeſtate.
            
            A matter moſte fit to be knowen, well wayed and
conſidered of all men.
            
               Who liſt of VVonders tell, and ſtraunge euents to knowe,
               Or heare of Murthers fell: this Booke a Maſſe dooth 
                     〈◊〉
                  .
               Who would the wily ſlights, of Couſnage gladly heare,
               Heerin for his delights: a Couie dooth appeare.
               Muſe at the firſt, feare at the next, the third doth cry beware
               So maiſt thou ſhun a world of woes which herein named ere.
            
            
               NON PLVS
               W.B
               printer's or publisher's device
            
            Imprinted at London for William Barley, and are to be
ſolde at his ſhop in Gratious ſtreat neere vnto
Leadenhallgate. 1595.
         
         
            
            
            To the chriſtian READER.
grace, mercie and peace.
            
               FOraſmuch (gentle and beneuolent Reader) as
wee are now abyding in that ſame iron worlde
wherof Ouid ſpeaketh in which is ſmall ſtore of
good frutes but ſuch as barren ſoyles doe buy:
Nature yeelds, to witthiſtles, brambles & ſuch
like, whereof ſmall gaine is to bee expected,
wherwith mens harts are hardned, charitie chaſed, loue lacking
trueth thruſted out of doores, liberalitie laide along, compaision
coupled in chaines and all good and vertuous exerciſes
either ſeldome vſed or vtterly extinct: as fire ſmothered
vp in aſhes, and in ſtede of theſe carnall and moſt vnnaturall
murthers, deteſtable periuries, cankerd coutouſnes inceſtious
adulterie, hardnes of hart, peeuiſh extortion, exactions
vſury and diuers ſuch moſt horrible and abhominable practiſes
yeerly, monthly, nay howrely are vſed and practiſed. All
which and other like to the learned are thought to bee moſte
euident and manifeſt ſignes, that that finall end that concluſion
and ſhutting vp of theſe tranſitories and vanities of this
mortall world are at hand and that Chriſt is euen readie to call
vs vnto iudgement: and foraſmuch as calling of Preachers,
execution of lawes and iuſtice and other like woorketh but
ſmall amendment in vs, yet neuertheleſſe becauſe that ſignes
threats, tokens of Gods wrath, ſignes in the ayre, murthers,
inceſt and ſuch like heard of and ſeene with our corporall eyes
although they be not in continuall remembrance to terrifye
by vs from committing ſuch abhominations, yet doe they
for the preſent time that they are ſeene, heard or done, ſtirre
and moue vs vp to prayer to God to amendment of our ſinful
liues, to the horror of ſuch wicked actions and ſuch like.
            
               
And for this cauſe I haue collected theſe exampſes not from
ſtraunge languages or from forrain nations which might breed
ſome ambiguitie or doubtas touching the trueth, but I haue taken
them out of our owne natiue Cuntry (not without ſorrow
that ſuch hainous ſins & enormities ſhould be ſo rife amongſt
vs) wherof can no doubt be made for trueth of action or exception
for proceſſe of time or antiquitie, being done all for
the moſt parr within theſe few yeares within our memory with
in our knowledge. All which I ſay are collected togither in a
redines as apretious glaſſe to ſee the frailitie of man, to vein
the wickedneſſe of this world, the end of miſchiefs, the puniſhment
of ſuch greeuous enormities & ſuch like
that therby, other ſeing the ſame may refrain the
like, and ſeeke to ſhunne ſuch paths as
lead to diſtruction which graunt
vs ſo to doe hee that for ſinners
ſhed his pretious
blood vpon the
tree. Amen.
(.)
            
               Thine in Chriſt.
T. I.
            
         
      
      
         
            
            AS there is no fructe vvhich hath not firſt his bud
then his flovver, thirdly his fruct and aftervvard
time for his rypenes. Euen ſo there is no villanie o
                  •
               
vvicked fact that hath not firſt his motion and intent,
next his opportunitie, thirdly his execution or committing
of that fact and laſtly his shame and punishment
as may appeare by theſe examples.
            
               A
COVIE of Coſonages.
               
                  
                     WIthin theſe thrée yeare dwelled in Brodſtreet
within the Cittie of London a Chaundler,
whoſe honeſt life, good conuerſation, vpright
dealing and chriſtian zeale is yet manifeſtly
to beknowen of ye inhabitants wher he dwelled.
Vnto this youngman in a winters euening
repaired a tall young man of a commendable
proportion of body, if inward guifts had accorded therunts:
                  This man entring this Chaundelers ſhoppe (where the goodman
was buſie in his vocation) & demaunded if he had any Nutmegges
to ſell, whereuppon after hee had ſéene the Nutmegges,

demaunded the price, he aſked the Chaundler if hée would buye a
good bargaine of Nutmegges and other wares? ſaying hée was
lately come out of the Carick and had certaine commodities to ſel
which he had kept till than, but now wanting money and comming
into arrorages, with his Ghoaſt where he ſoiurned, was
conſtrained to ſell all his merchandize or at leaſt ſome of them to
diſcharge his lodging: the Chaundler ready (as all worldlings
are) to get: After certaine ſpéeches of bargaining, they grewe to
a compoſition and abſolute bargaine, and therupon this halter
catcher deſired the Chamdler to take a bagge or two with him,
to put in the commodities for the eaſier carriage, and alſo to put
ſixtéene ſhillings in his purſſe to pay the hoaſt if he would not let
the wares to paſſe (for ſo much hée ſaid he was runne on the ſcore)
The ſimple and plaine meaning Chaundler ſuſpecting nothing
leſſe then coſenage tooke to his box and tooke out from other mony
twentie and fiue ſhillings, and put it into an other purſſe by it
ſelfe, and ſo takeing the bagges marched all along from Breadſtreet
to Queen-hiue where this tiborneſſe growing ſonne, entring
into a dore (fit as it ſéemeth his parpoſe) deſired the Chaundler
to ſtay at the dore, till he tooke the bagges and filled them.
                  After ſome ſhort ſpace or time this new gates birde came again
to the Chaundler ſitting at the dore and there certifying him that
his hoſt and he had beene at ſome ſpeeches and that he would not
let him haue the Nutmegs vill he had his ſixteene ſhillings, and
therfore deſired him to let him haue ſixtéene ſhillings to pay him,
and ther with deliuered him a thing wrapped vp in browne paper
after the beſt faſhon like to a peece of veluet which hee ſaide was

                        •
                     uft taffata this he left as gadge for the money till the Nutmegs
came, the Chaundler meaning plaine ſimplicitie deliuered him
his purſſe with the fiue and twentie ſhillings ſaying take ye purſſe
you know I put in ſo much money, pay him out ſixtéene ſhillings,
and keep the reſt till we reckon.
                  Now the viliaine is gonne, and the Chaundler waiteth
for his Gentleman at the doore ſome halfe bowre and more,
and pereceiuing no likelyhood of his comming beganne to ſuſpect
ſome vnacqainted bargaine and theruppon vntied paper to
ſee what merchandize was therein which being opened he found
nought but taylors ſhreds artificialy placed and bound after the

faſhion of yeeces of taffata. Imagine now that the Chaundler
is in his dumps, and there leaue him a while meditating vpon the
proffit of his bargaine.
                  The caterpiller in the meane ſpace making haſte you may
be aſſured out of a falce back doore (wherof there may be to many
in London more is the pittie) came home to the Chaundlers
houſe againe, & he that before had veiwed each thing for his purpoſe,
and had ſéene the bor out of which the chaundler had taken
out the fiue and twentie ſhillings before, came to the chaundlers
boy, and ſayd ſirra you muſt ſend your maiſter twelue ſhillings
wanting twopence out of the bore that hath the ragge of white
cloth in it: the marke of the cloth he ſaw in the box & at the quantitie
of the money hee geſſed.
                  The boy gaue ſmall truſt to his wordes, and replyed that hee
knew no ſuch box till he had him looke for the ragge and ſaide his
maſter had ſent a porter that was comming wt nutmegs, which
nutmegs his maſter charged ſhould be laid out of ſight in the back
roome. Notwithſtanding for all this the boy would not deliuer
him any money, but when he was importunate vpon him he deſired
an other boy of one of the neighbours to come in and take ſo
much money and to goe with the man to his maſter.
                  The matter concluded the neighbours boy had a xi .s. and x .d.
and going foorth, this notorious couſener leads the boy into Saint
Mary-axe to an other doore and bids the boy to ſtaye hee would
call the chaundler to him. Hée went in and ſtayed a while & came
againe to the boy ſaying that the chaundler was ſo buſie that hée
would not come to him but deſired that he would ſend it him in,
willing him to ſtay and carry a bagge of nutmegges home with
him: the boy ſimply deliuered the money and ſtayed an houre for
the bagge of autmegges but as yet can not they be heard of.
                  In the meane time the chaundler commeth home but how diſpoſed
(God knoweth) where he findeth himſelf two folde deceiued,
to his greit no doubt, and more in my iudgement for the wiccednes
of the man then for the loſſe of the money.
                  If this be not as notorious a knauerie as euer you heard off I
refer it to your owne conſiderations.
               
               
                  
                  How a woman conſained a miniſter
often groates.
                  A Miniſter who yet liueth godly diſpoſed repayred vpon a day
to Chriſts-Church in London to heare the Lecture and continued
there during the ſet men. Afterwad departing thence,
and comming into the open ſtreat, vppon the ſuddain came a woman
vnto him with open mouth and cōmaunded him to giue her
her ring. What ring ſaid the Miniſter? the ring ſaid ſhe you tooke
of my finger in the Church. Auaunt queane ſaid the miniſter I
haue nothing of thine and with that the woman made ſuch exclamations
in the ſtreat, that the paſſengers gazed vpon them in ſuch
ſorte that the Miniſter aſhamed of ſuch an hurly burly demaunded
what her ring was worth, who anſwered that it was worth fortie
pence, and therupon, hée drewe his purſie and gaue her tenne
gretes to be rid of the filth.
               
               
                  An other.
                  VVIthin theſe laſt twelue moneths euen at twy-light, an
honeſt man and of good behauiour, came to enter London
at Cripplegate, vnder which gate as hee paſſed, ſoddainly met
him a ſtudy fellow who iuſtled him with his ſhoulder, & at that
inſtant, vppon the other ſide of him, an other knaue confederate
with the other ſuppoſing that he would minde ſhe man that inſtled
him, as indéed any man ſhould doe, caught the fellowes cloke
by the lap, and therwith turned himſelf round, in ſuch ſorte that
the honeſt mans cloke was lapped the inſide outward vppon the
cony-catchers back, and hauing his pray, fled with ſwift héeles:
the honeſt man, notwithſtanding their iuſtling, remembred his
cloke and theruppon cryed ſtoppe théefe, the other knaue that iuſt
led him neuer ſtirred his feete but hearing the man cry ſhop théefe,
drewe out his dagger and aſked where, where, and by that time
people gathered as the vſuall order, the honeſt man ſaid that hee
that had the dagger in his hand was he that iuſtled him but whether
he was his aſſociate that ran away with his cloke hee would
not ſay. What a villaine is this queth the cony-catcher to make
ſuch an hurly burly, thou art a diſſembling roague ſaid he & take

this for thy labour and therwith ſtroke the poore man vppon the
head with his dagger, and by this meenes, left he his cloke and
was alſo cruelly heaten.
               
               
                  An other.
                  ANd ſéeing I haue begunne with Clocke-catching, beholde an
other knack of knauery, which was commited in Smithfeild
at noone dayes. A certaine man walking or going in Smithfeild
with a new cloke vpon his back, there came to him of Plutoes
hel-hountes, demaunding what he might pay for his cloake: mary
ſir ſaid ye other, it coſt me fiue nobles, truely ſaide the other it is
woorth that: I pray you where bought you it? at ſuch a place ſaid
the other, and there you may haue of the very ſelf ſame péece: at
laſt the frauder deſired the honeſt man that he might ſée it vppon
his back, if it were long enough, for him, who meaning nothing
but plaine dealing, put the cloke vpon the others back and incontinent
the théefe runneth away as faſt as he might with the cloke,
the true man cryed ſtoppe theefe ſtoppe théefe, and hee that was
the théefe and ranne away, he cryed alſo ſtoppe theefe, ſtop theef,
the men in the ſtreat hearing both of them cry both one noate ſuppoſed
that both they had runne after a third body, and could not
tell whome to ſtay, ſo that in concluſion, the théefe paſt away ſtily
with the cloke and ſo far as euer I could learne was euer heard
of to this day.
               
               
                  An other.
                  ANd will yée yet heare ſtraunger matters the trueth wherof is,
and may with ſmall labour be knowen.
                  At the Sun without Alderſ-gate not long ſince there ſupped
certaine Gentlemen and ſeruingmen: There Chamber prepared
and ſupper ready, they fat downe to meat, among whome came
in alſo an other man booted and ſpurred and fat downe with them
at the neither end of the Table, a méere Straunger to the reſt,
yet vnſuſpected, for that euery one thought hée had beene ſome
freind or acquaintance of ſome of the other, (as well it might bee
iudged) where many are togither one thinking him to bee ſuch a

mans acquaintance, the other thinking him to be his freind, &c.
                  They paſſed their ſupper time in mirth and paid the reconing,
among the which, this new found gue & orderly payde his ſhare
and hauing ſo done they ſat talking till it was néer to eleuen of the
clock at night and that all the companies were departed the Tauerne,
except this vncouth gueſt watching his time left the companie
& came to the bar where he found the boy that ſat therin nodding
a ſleepe with money to the value of eight or tenne ſhilings,
in his hand vnto whome came this prigger and with théeuiſh ſoftly
meanes aſſayes to take the money out of the boyes hand and
did faindeed, the boy not faſt in ſleepe awaked, miſt his money,
ſearch was made, the fellow not far was gonne from the barre:
and theruppon had in ſuſpition: hee denyeth the fact bothe with
wordes, othes and geſture: inquirie was made of whoſe acquaintance
he was, of them that ſupped togither and in concluſion hee
was found a meere ſtraunger to them all, and thereupon did ſerche
bothe his ſleeue, boſome and other places where might bee any
poſſibilitie to hide any mony but all in vaine, it could not be found
he ſtoode vppon his tearmes hee was a Gentleman, he was honeſt
as the beſt &c. This made the companie muze till at the length
one ſubtiller then the reſt commaunded his bootes to be plucked
of and in one of them they found the eight ſhilinges, manifeſted by
tokens and his other to the value of fiue pounds.
               
               
                  An other.
                  BVt if you deſire to heare a ſubtiller kinde of knauery and ſuch
a one as if it had not beene petie knauery for the ſmall valuation
of the thing defrauded, you might ſay it caried the vel away
and it was thus.
                  A pore woman there was, (yea ſhee yet liueth) that vſed to
to take kildeckins of beere of a brewer: this wam an beeing a widow
and hauing but few of meany could not well drink the kylderkin
whilſt it was good, and therfore a neighbour of hers came
to her and called her by her name, ſaying neighbour, you are but
few of houſhold and I like a good huſband fetch all my drinke at
the alehouſe if you think good I will fetch of you if I may haue ſo
much for a peny, as I can haue at the alehouſe, yes marry ſhall

you ſaid to the widow, why then quoth the other let my folkes hare
héere when they come for it, and when they haue fetcher ſo much
as commeth to twelue pence you ſhall haue money: content ſaith
the widdow, and héerupon they departed, and the man ſent day by
day for béere till it came to eleuenpence, & then he lift fetching any
more, and ſo it continued: In the end, the poore woman ſent to him
for money for her drink: money ſaide her good neighbour, why I
awe you none, no quoth the widoowe I haue deliueret ſo much
as commeth to eleuenpence: I confeſſe all that ſaid he, but when
is my day to pay? marry ſaith ſhee, when I demaunded it, nay
quoth he, my bargaine was to pay when it comes to tweluepence
and not before. Thus the poore witow was beguiled.
               
               
                  An other.
                  IT may ſée me néedleſſe to write that which as yet is not buryed
in the boſoms of obliuien that is how a cripple within theſe few
yéeres within foure or fiue miles of London deſired a paſſenger to
help him vpon his horſſe, who ſupoſing it a deed of charitie to help
him, & taking him in his armes the cripple woūded him to death,
and robbed him and according to law was therfore executed.
               
               
                  An other.
                  AN Vſurer ſometime there was who lent out much money and
neuer twentie or thirtie yeares made any deſperat debt. This
vſurer had a man a young whely of this tigers kinde: apt to learn
of his olde churle his maſter what might turne to his proffit: Yet
notwithſtanding, his maſter kept all his dealings cloſe from his
ſeruant, in ſo much, that the ſeruant ſéeing his maſter made no
ſuch debts as ſometimes he did, demaunded of his maſter how hée
could kéepe himſelfe from banckroutes?
                  The maſter kept him ſelfe a looſe and would not be knowen of
that ſecret to his ſeruant, till acencluſion was made that the ſeruant
ſhould beſtowe a ſupper of his maſter at the tauerne to learn
the ſecret. The ſupper was prepared, the maſter, ſeruant and other
fréends ſupped and were merry: the maſter tolde the ſeruant
that if he delt as he vſed to doe, he could make no euill debts, and

that was that he ſhould not take any mans bill, bond or woord
but euer be ſure of a good pawne woorth double or treble his mony
in vſancce with a good bill of ſale in open market. The ſupper ended,
the olde ſeignior hauing well liquored himſelf & olde veſſelles
muſt needes leake, would néedes be gon to make water, nay ſaide
the ſeruant then you will leaue vs: not ſo ſaid the vſurer, if you
think ſo keep my cloke, wheruppon he tooke his cloke & laid it to
pawne at the barre for the ſhot & went his way. thus fraude was
deceiued with deceit.
               
               
                  An other.
                  NOt thrée yéeres paſſed, it chaunced that a certaine man traueling
towards North-hawton meet with an other man in a ſolitarie
place wheras was none other but them twaine, the one of
them commaunded the other to ſtay and to deliuer him his purſſe
for he wanted money, the other partie ſeemed willing, & ſaid truly
I haue but two ſhillinges, but ſeing it is ſo that thou wilt néedes
haue it heere it is, and ſo gaue it him & departed. This party who
had they purſſe went forward, and he that loſt the purſſe ſéemed to
goe forward an other way, but ſeeing opportunitie croſſed ouer
two or thrée cloſes or feildes till he came and met the other theefe
againe, and then commaunding him to ſtay charged him to deliuer
his purſſe for he was a goodfellow wanted mony, and lately
robbed and now muſt and would haue money: the other anſwered
that he ſhould haue none, and then after ſome ſpéeches they fell to
grapling togither ſo long till the firſt théefe was contented to redeliuer
the man his owne purſſe and his two ſhillings, but the other
was not ſo contented tooke from him his purſſe wherein was
ſeuen ſhillings and odde pence.
               
               
                  An other.
                  IT was credibly-reported that not far from the croſſe in Cheapſide
in London vſed a Coſtermongers wife to ſit with apples,
who vſed for her better intiſing of cuſtomers to haue fortie or fiſtie
ſhillinges in the pocket other white Apron, which becauſe it
was ſo directly before her a outpurſe tooke great care how to coſin

her of her mony (which to an honeſt mans minde might ſéeme impoſſible
to be brought to paſſe.) The cut-purſſes man had made
made many aſſayes but could not preuaile & therefore the maſtercut-purſe
being moned, tooke the matter vpon him, and takeing a
cloake commonly called a ſpaniſh-cape (ſuch as Italians daylye
vſe) it hath a hoode hanging downe the back, he put it about him
and came to her where acter many ſpeeches he bought a groates
worth of pippins of her but not hauing canuenient carriage requeſted
that ſhée would let ſome body carry them home with him.
The woman making anſwere that ſhe had no body but her ſelfe
he then prayed her to put them into the hoore or cape of his cleake
wher vppon he ſtooped downe with his hed and ſhe putting in the
apples he put his hand into her packet and by that meanes picked
out her money a thing thought vnpoſſible.
               
               
                  An other.
                  IN a winters night (ſome few yéeres paſt) a boy about thirteen
or foureteene yeares of age was ſent with three or foure ſhirtebands,
caffes and handkerchers therto according valued at foure
pounds or there about, vnto a Gentleman lying about olde Fiſhſtreat,
who paſſing through ſome part of Waeling-ſtreat vppon
a ſuddain met him a woman demaunding his name his mothers
name his dwelling and place wherto he was going, the boy folde
her truely all theſe things and ſo ſhe departed goin vnto another
companion not far ſeated from her and tolde her mate all what ſo
euer the boy had before declared: which done, this other coſoninge
queane croſſing ouer the ſtreat came and met the boy calling him
by his name, aſking him whether he went and ſo foorth: the boy
wondred how ſhe knew him and ſaid that he knew not her, no ſaid
ſhe, I a well heard by thy mother at Biſhopf-gate and I haue
beene heerby of an err and and as I came along this ſtreat at I ſpied
a good ſhoulder of mutton in a Cookes ſhop but I cannot haue it
vnder xiiii .d. becauſe he and I fell out, I pray thée take this xii .
pence, and goe and aſue for one Hariſon a Cooke heer in: Watling
ſtreat and ſe if thou canſt buy it, and thou and I will be mery togither
with it & then goe home togither. The boy ſimply tooke
the mony & left his bands & other things with the huſwife & in the
meane while, ſhe went away with the clothes.
               
               
                  
                  An other.
                  SEeing I haue ſpoke of Watling-ſtreat, I meane to put you in
minde of an odde ieſt (if ſo I may tearme it) cōmitted in Fryday-ſtrēat
néere the ſaid place, and thus it was.
                  Salters there as other traders vſe to ſet out there wares vppon
ſhe ſtalles and ſuch like places that men may ſee what they haue
to ſell. Amongſt the reſt one W. C. now liuing, ſet out halfe a
firkin of ſope vnder his ſtale vppon a barrel of pitch as the reporte
goes, and ſo it long continued. One day aboue the reſt, there
paſſed by a man (ſeruingman like) who ſeeing the ſaid half firkin
(without ſaying by your leaue) tooke the half firkinne vnder his
at me, and away he went. The owner knew nothing thereof, till
one of the neighbours ſervants ſéeing the fact tolde him of it and
he intentinent ſent his ſeruant after him, who brought him to his
maſter, and being aſked why he ſtole it, defied them ſaying, hée
came not into his houſe for any ware, but he found that half firkin
in the Quéenes high way, and therfore hée tooke it vp.
               
               
                  An other:
                  AMong petie coſonage this may alſo be numbred. A Cuntrey
man came into Fry day-ſtreat before named and demaunded
which was his way into Fryday-ſtreat a naughtie minded fellow
bad him turue at the next corner and he ſhould be out of it by
and by. The fillie ſuſpecting no deceit did as he bad him & ſo was
led amiſſs. And this petie coſonage is to common now a dayes
more is the pittie.
               
               
                  An other.
                  AS notorious a coſonage as euer was heard dooth follow.
                  In Leceſter towne dwelled ſometimes a weauer who beeing
a perfect workeman wanted not cuſtomers to ſet him on worke
and among others one in the towne brought him ſome. thirtie or,
fortie poundes of flaxen yarne to weaue, his woorke ended, hée
brought home the cloth as the vſage is, and the goodwiſe partlie
knowing how much might be be made of ſo much yarne and ſuſpecting

that he had ſtolne ſame of heer yarne, aſked if he had brought
home all her yarne, yea dame quoth he that I haue, but 
                        〈◊〉
                      
                     
                        ••
                     king
as though ſhe did not beléeue him, hee ſ
                        •
                     ore as G
                        ••
                      ſh
                        •••••
                     
iudge him he had brought home euerie ha
                        •••
                      to 
                        〈…〉
                     
and ſo he did in very déed, he brought home all and yet 
                        〈◊〉
                     
ſtanding he beguyled her of two or thrée pounds in his 
                        〈◊〉
                     
                     
                        •
                     réeches, but going away hee caryed it a way with him backe againe.
                  A wounder it is to ſée what ſleightes the diuell vſeth to drawe
men vnto him aſwelmay be noted in this, for hée thought by this
meanes to ſaue his oath though he neuer imagined that it was aſault
to deceiue ſuch as put moſt confidence in him.
               
               
                  An other.
                  IN Melton Mobray dwelled a Caryer named K. who when
firſt he vſed carrying, as he trauailed in the hiyh way, heard a
woman ouer the hedge crying and making great mone for helpe,
the man ſuppoſing if a good déed to help a woman diſtreſſed would
haue left his companion and haue gone to the reſeue of the woman:
but his fellow traualler would not ſuffer him, ſhewing him
what trecherie might he inſuch diſſembling cryes, ſo he ſtayed a
ſpace, but yet hearing the importunate moane he ſaide that hée
would ayde her what he might, and therupon leapt ouer ye hedge,
where preſently one caught him by the throat, and had not reſcue
béene hée had both beene robbed and murthered.
               
               
                  An other.
                  IN Colm inſtreat in London oueragainſt a Perſumers ſtall,
met thrée men or as may be ſuſpected came thether of a ſet purpoſe
and ſtoode in the open ſtreat, within two or thrée yardes
(or there abouts) of the ſtall and talked ſecretlie betwéene themſelues,
the Perfunter, his wife and ſeruaut buſie in the ſhoppe, euen
at noone dayes: yet one of the thrée hauing a ſmall long wand
in his hand as it ſhould ſeeme hauing a crooked pinne in the end,
filched away thrée or foure payre of glooues and went there way
vntaken, yea not ſuſpected of ſuch filthy actions. This was

doone within theſe twelue menethes.
               
               
                  An other.
                  ABout the ſame time alſo, a boy aged ſixteene or there about, in
ſtructed by ſome miſcreant, (for ſuch young yeares coulde not
produce ſo miſcheiuous a faction of themſelues) got a ſtick faſhioned
much like vnto thoſe ſtickes which the boyes calles bandyes,
and hauing the ſamel eſmeered with lyme, came by a Goldſmiths
ſop in Foſter-lane and vnder a pretence of knocking the ſticke
vpon ſtalles as be paſſed along at the laſt ſtrooke his ſtick vpon a
Gold-ſmiths bourde where a gilt ſpoone and other money, they
knew not how much he got vpon his lymed ſtick. The ſpoone being
waightie fell into the currant, and they had it againe, but
what money was loſt it is not knowen.
               
               
                  An other.
                  NOw for becauſe our Countrey-men are ſlaundered not to be
ſo vpright in conuerſation nor ſo true dealers as ſtraungers,
and therfore we run thick and thrée folde to buy what ſoeuer commodities
we want (of them leauing our owne natiue Cuntreymen
as an oprobris to the world aſwell for cunning in actes and
trades as alſo in vpright dealing, which ſure is lamentable that
wee ſhould deecleane contrarie tonature and reaſon, euen all one
to begger our ſelues and inrich others. I will by your patience
ſhowe you a moſt cunning peece of knauerie this one to ſerue inſted
of many examples. Neither is it inuented as falſe, but euen
now by ſufficient proofe to be verified at this preſent & thus it was.
                  A Gentlewoman of ye cuntrey occaſioned to buy her a gowne of
taffata came into Cheap-ſide in London and ſought the mercers
ſhops vp and downe and could not finde a peece of taffata ſo good
as ſhe would haue had (for women w
                        ••
                      haue ye beſt, if it be for their
owne backs eſpecially( notwithſtanding marking where the beſt
was, came back againe and offered money for it, but not ſo much
as the mercer would haue, wheruppon there was going and ſending
to and frs but the bargaine could not be made.
                  Thus they parted, Now in the meane while a Straunger a

                     Dutchwoman as I wéene, comming to the mercers, vpon ſome
buſines noted there buſines, noted there ſpéeches marked the goodnes
of ye taffata & conſidered the humor of the Gentle woman and
theruppon bought the pecce of taffata of the mercer and ſent it
home to her owne houſe, and afterward wandring in Cheapſide
till ſhe eſpied the Gentlewoman, went vnto her and ſaid Gentlewoman,
I vnderſtand that you want a peece of very good riche
taffata, if it pleaſe you to goe with me I will ſhewe you ſuch an
one as you neuer ſaw a better and all London can not match it:
the Gentlewoman wonderfull glad went with her, ſaw it and
liked it excéeding well, bought it and paide ſome two or thrée ſhillings
in a yard déerer then ſhe might haue had it before of an engliſhman.
Well this is our ſhuttle nature, the parties are yet
bothe pleaſed. The Gentlewoman paſſing along Cheap-ſide
tolde the mercer of her good hap and therwithall ſhewed him the
taffata with his owne mark and ſeale at the end thereof, and incontinent
he tolde the Gentlewoman where ſhée bought it and in
what place ſhe dwelt, & how it was the ſame péece that ſhe ſhould
haue bought of him: wherat the gentlewoman thus deceiued was
out of meaſure aſtonied.
                  Many other like coſonages might be héere ſet downe as how
the Trpe-wire was of late deceiued-which now in memorie: yea
many others, but theſe may ſuffice only, I will note two or thrée
adde ſleightes or ieſts andſ sprocéed to a further matter.
               
               
                  An other.
                  SOmetime a companie of prentices had apponted to méete at a
Tauerne to breake their faſt togither, an houre was ſet, who
ſo came not at that houre was fined at a gallon of wine beſides
the loſſe of his breakfaſt. One aboue the reſt, wanting excuſe to
to come abroade to méet his companions, the houre drew on, his
maſter and miſtreſſe bothe in the ſhop that he could not ſtart, you
would wounder what excuſe he made: ſtanding at the doore looking
to his appointed place where his hart was, ſuddainly he ran
out of the doores to his mates, ſtayed there ſome houre or more,
and comming home to his maſter, enquired where he had beene?

and what was the cauſe of his ſuddaine running out of the ſhop?
ſir ſaid he, as I ſtoode at the dore I ſaw H, K. your olde debtor
that hath ought you money this long time, and I haue followed
him till now to ſée him houſed, and he is in ſuch a place, & hée hath
promiſed to come and agree with you before hée wil goe out of the
Towke.
               
               
                  An other.
                  A Like to this is reported, that one Maſter H. in the Pultrie,
hauing ſundry Chapmen, one of them did owe him money a
long ſeaſon, and at laſt vnderſtanding that his Debtour was in
the Towne be commaunded his man to goe and demaund the
debt, and if he make delay for the payment (ſaid the Maſter) tell
him from me that I ſuppoſe, he taketh no care to pay in my mony.
                  The ſeruant went and accompliſhed in each reſpect what his
maſter gaue him in charge. When the Debtour heard him talk
of care to pay his money, hée replyed, ſaying, dooth thy maſter
thinke that I take care to pay his money? no, no, hee is deceiued,
tell him I tooke care & great care how to get the wareof thy maſter,
now let thy maſter take care how to get his money, for I
will take none to pay him.
               
               
                  An other.
                  AN honeſt man flitting or remoouing from the houſe where héeearſt
dwelled, wanting roume was conſtrained to ſell a certaine
bedſtead. Now a young man readie to take a wife, vnderſtanding
thereof. deſired a Ioyner a friend of his, to goe with
him to ſée the bedſtead and to haue his counſaile in it for ſo much
as hée him ſelfe knew not what ſuch thinges were worth.
                  The Ioyner went with him, and after the ſight, they grew to
barganing, but the Ioyner would not ſuffer the other man to
giue the price by fiue ſhillings and ſo departed.
                  Afterward the Ioyner reſorteth againe to the houſe alone and
buyeth the bed-ſlead for his owne proper vſe, defrauding his
freiud that put him in truſt.
                  O moſt vnnaturall, diueliſh and deteſtable action, whome ſhall

a man repoſe his confidence in theſe our moſte daungerous and
troubleſome dayes and tymes? wherin eniquitie ſo deceitfully
and arrogantly ſtriueth to ſubiect and deceiue the ſimple and wel
meaning: yea in ſo much, that the brother ſéeketh to greiue the
brother, and freinds deale ſo vniuſt that it is hard to repoſe confidence
in any. A thing to the good odious, but abhorred in the
ſight of God.
                  I haue thought good, becauſe I haue publiſhed ſome actions
which are alreadie imprinted to manifeſt (according to the offenders
confeſſion at the Seſſions houſe) the reporte, (in this my collection
of falſe dealings and coſonages (the notorious coſenage vſed
to M. Maſcall, which becauſe it is already extant in print. I
was the bolder to note it in this collection, to admoniſh others to
beware of the like.
               
               
                  The moſt notorious coſenage that euer was
heard of, how M. Maſcall the Trypewife
was deceiued.
                  Written as it was ſpoken by the Offendour
before the Honorable at the
Seſſions-houſe.
                  
                     MAſcales wife ſuppoſed to be left rich at her huſbands diſceaſe
as it ſéemeth ſhe was, had ſundry & many ſuters amongſt the
which there was one Pee
                        •
                     ers a gentleman at the leaſt (for all be
gentlemen now a dayes) who oft and many times reſorted to her
houſe 
                        •
                     oying at the laſt to obtaine her good will but the widdowe
carefull enough for her owne good could not by any waies be wun.
Whereupon Peters perceiuing that drift as touching mariage
to be in vaine determined to get ſome of her money by other meanes
and therfore frequenting her houſe as before he ſtudied to
know the faſhions of her houſe the diſpoſition of her minde the vmber
and names of her acquantance friends and ſo much and ſo many
of her ſecrets as poſſiblie he might and therwith one Vaughen

he went to a woman lying with out Biſhops gate fitly inſtructed
for ſuch purpoſes and there aſking for her they met with her huſband
and betwéene them thrée was great talke, & at the laſt they
went to the taueren where after further ſpéech ther was a pinte of
wine ſent vnto the woman that ſhould doe this feate: Not long
after they either ſent for her to the Tauerne orels they came home
to her (I know not whether) but trueth it is, they tolde her what
their meaning & determination was, & how that they had heard
that ſhee was the only woman for their purpoſe: but ſhee made
them anſwere that in ſo much as ſhe had béene diuers times before
my Lord A. for ſuch tricks as this was, ſhe durſt not be ſéene
in London: for if my Lord ſhould ſée me (ſaid ſhee) he will hang
me Then they encouraged her ſaying that ſhee ſhoulde goe in a
Cuntrey womans gowne wherby ſhe ſhould not be ſuſpected and
ſhe ſhould ſay ſhe came from a very freind of Miſtreſſe Maſcalls
dwelling in Eſſex and in that letter ſhould be commendations of
her and ſo foorth.
                  When this woman had graunted her conſent: Peeters began
to certefie her of all that he had learned that was, how Miſtreſſe
Maſcall had many ſutors and how ſhe loued a parchment ſeller in
Parer noſter row better then any of them, alſo hee tolde her that
ſhe had aring with fiue precious ſtones in it, which ring one dwelling
vpon London bridge did weare vppon. Chriſtmas day laſt
paſt.
                  Hee tolde her alſo that there vſed to beſéene ſtraunge light or
fire in the night in her houſe: as alſo how that the laſt time hée
kiſſed her, her hat fell into the ſouce-tubbe and many other.
                  Now ſhée hauing all theſe ad vnguem (like an olde beaten ſoldier)
would not goe till ſhée was alſo well inſtructed of the man
from whōe the letter ſhould be ſuppoſed to come and therfore made
the two Gentlemen to goe ſée what fauour, what haire, what ſtat
                        •
                     re
and condicion the man of Eſſex was of, leaſt ſhée ſhould be
intrapped.
                  All things like an apt ſchollers tale learned by hart. Vaughen
makes the letter in effect thus.
                  Miſtreſſe Maſcall after commendations &c. I pray you
ſhow the bearer heerof (my ſpeciall freind) what fauour, frendſhip
and curteſie you may for my ſake, and ſo much the rather

becauſe ſhe hath done me great pleaſure it many things touching
the art ſhe profeſſeth, and I doubt not but ſhe will pleaſure
you the like if you haue any occaſion: you may truſt her
as your ſelf, wherfore I praye you doe for her, as you would
doe for me if I were with you. I meane to be at London betweene
this and Eaſtervppon vrgent buſines that I haue, and
then I meane to ſee you &c.
                  This letter after the foreſaid forme being framed and ſealed vp,
the woman in her counerey like gowne taketh and goeth into S
Nicholas-ſhambles, knocketh for M. Maſcall and deliuereth
the letter: M. Maſcall calleth for a cup of béere for the meſſenger
and in the meane time opening the letters and hauing read the
contents taketh the woman by the hand and leadeth her vp into
her houſe, and according to the folly of all ſimple women ſhoweth
her one roume, after an other, with all the braueries therof,
and afterward to victualing and goſſiping they goe by the fire,
and there ſit merely ſome ſeaſon.
                  You may be well aſſured all this pleaſed the meſſenger right
well, and now hauing growne into ſome familiaritie or acquaintance
the effects of the letter were reherſed: as touching the fauor
ſhe had done to M. Freind in matters of her art, and ſo foorth:
Whervppon the truſtie Roger (this meſſenger I meane) began
now to woorke her fact and deſired M. Maſcall to ſhowe her her
hand, which ſhe forthwith did, and when ſhe had looked in euerie
place of her hand, ſhe tolde her ſoone matters touching her huſbād
deceaſed, and moreouer that ſhe had many ſutors, whereof ſome
were good, and other that were naught, from which ſhe diſwaded
her and gaue her counſaile to take héed of them.
                  You may haue many (ſaid ſhée) but yet you loue a parchment
ſeller in Pater noſter row aboue the reſt, and there is a Gentleman
that is a ſutor vnto you take héed of him ſaid ſhe for hee will
deceiue you: what is he ſaid M. Maſ. mary quoth the other it is
the Gentleman that the laſt time hée kiſſed you, he kiſſed you in
ſuch a place by the ſame token your hat fell into the ſouce-tubbe.
                  When M. Maſcall heard that ſhee (as moſt women light of
beleife) thought that ſhée then knew all things, and therevppon
falling into further talke this cunuing woman aſked if there was
not ſome vnacouſtomed or ſome ſtraunge ſights ſéene in ye right

time her houſe: Yes marry ſayd miſtris Maſ. but doe you knowe
the reaſō thereof ſayd the other, no ſayd miſtèris Maſ. except ther
be ſome money hid in my houſe. There is money hid in very truth
ſayd this cunning woman and that good ſtore: can you help me to
it ſayd miſtris Marſ. yea ſayd the other and if you will ſwere to me
that you will not make any chriſtian body acquainted with it, thē
miſtris Maſ, as the woman confeſſed went to a bible that lay vp
on the table and ſwore by the contents of it neuer to open it vnto
any. You muſt vnderſtand that the cunning Coſoner liked the
falling out of theſe matters wundrous well for her purpoſe, and
hauing now brought them euen to the very iſſue, procéeded in
or the like order.
                  
                     Miſtreſſe Maſcall if ſo be, you deſire to haue this money that
is hid in your houſe it behooueth you to haue bothe golde and ſiluer
and iewels to preſent vnto the King of the Feries: I haue ſayde
the other, and therwith led her vp to her Cheſis, and ſhowed her
bothe golde, ſiluer, golde-ringes and a chaine of golde.
                  Now when ſhée had ſéene theſe, among the reſt ſhée eſpyed one
ring which had fiue ſtones in it, this ring ſaide the Coſoner one
vpon London-bridge did weare vpon Chriſtmas day laſt, which
was true indéede, and therefore M. Maſcall hearing her ſay ſo,
gaue the more credit vnto her woordes, ſuppoſing that ſhée knew
all ſecrets.
                  Well theſe iewels, golde and ſiluer were brought downe and
M. Maſcall muſt put theſe into the Coſoners lap, with her right
hand and there they muſt reſt awhile.
                  Then ſhee muſt put them into M. Maſcalls lappe with the
like ceremonie, and then M. Maſcall taking the foreſaid things
muſt goe into euerie reume and euery corner therof muſt knéele
downe and ſay certaine prayers: which finiſhed, ſhée muſt come
and put the golde &c. into the cunning womans lap againe with
her left hand and ſhe receiuing the ſame muſt in like order as the
other had done, goe and ſay prayers in euerie place as before.
                  All this brought to ripenes there muſt be a capon and a turkie
bought to feaſt the king of Feries, but this muſt be doone ſome
two dayes after, in the meane time this cunning woman muſt
haue the cuſtodie and kéeping of the money and 
                        •
                     inges till two
dayes be ended and in the means time ſhe deliuered to M. Maſ.
                     
a cloth with two things in it, into which cloth m. Maſcall might
not dare to looke into during two dayes, and thus the cunning
woman departed with the ring, money & chaine leauing nought
els but two little ſtones lapt in a cloth for the ſame.
                  Now if conetouſnes had not ouermaſtered her ſhee had neuer
béene taken but vnderſtanding what plate that M. Maſcall had
ſhée hanged thereafter and therfore cauſed the forenamed Capon
and turkey to be cut and mangled, the hed, féet and hart &c. to be
cut off and euery corner of the table one to be laide. a candle burning,
to be ſet alſo vpon the table, and all the plate ſet ther vppon
as a preſent for the king of Feryes, then ſhould they goe to the
Tauerne with ſome of the cunning womans companions, and
m, Maſcall with them, and the coſoner ſhould get ſome ſure token
from m. Maſcall to come home for ſome thing and the Meſſeger
by that t
                        •
                     ken ſhould bring away the plate, but this effecting
not and ſuſpition of coſoning aryſing, this cunning woman was
apprehended and laid in Newgate and beeing examined before
the bench at Seſſions houſe confeſſed theſe wordes or the like in
effect.
               
               
                  How ſhe coſoned an other woman, confeſſed
by her ſelf at the Seſsions houſe
the fourteene of February.
1595.
                  AFter ſhée had made an end of her former diſcourſe as ſhe termed
it one of the Iudges aſked her if ſhe knew a woman that
ſtood therby, ſhée made anſwere yes my Lord and an other woman
to, wherſoeuer ſhee be, whereuppon it was aſked how ſhée
knew her, and ſhée made anſwere that about a twelue moneths
paſt, ſhe came to the place where this woman dwelled and enquired
of ſome of her neighbours what Cunterywoman ſhée was
as alſo what manner of man her huſband was, how many children,
how many boyes, how many Wenches and many ſuch
like fitting her determined purpoſe, which knowen, immediatly
ſhée went to the honeſt womans houſe, deſiring as it ſhould ſéem
ſome refreſhing for her and her Children.
                  
                     
The woman inquiſitiue of her ſtate inquired what countrey
woman ſhe was, (who knowing ye other to be of the ſame ſhire)
ſayd ſhe was a Lancaſhire woman and how that for coniuring
ſhe was caſt in priſon and had remained long there. The other
woman aſked what ſhée conſured for, who anſwered for money
hide, and how for thoſe matters ſhée was very expert, and there
telling her how many children ſhée had had, how many boyes
and how many wenches, how many of them aliue and how many
dead and many ſuch like before learned queſtions they grewe
to a compoſition that this cunning woman ſhould helpe her to a
pot of money no leſſe then thrée hundred pounds, which ſhée promiſed
with ſpeed to perſourme, and thereupon the poore woman
not hauing ſo much mony as ſhe deſired, went to one of her neighbours
and borrowed more, ſo that this coning woman coniured
fiue and fiftie ſhillings out of the poore womans 
                        〈◊〉
                     . So much
ſhée her ſelf confeſſed at the Seſſions houſe, but the partie dece
                        •
                     
                     affirmeth
that it was thrée pounds or more.
                  The foreſaid partie deceiued alſo a rich & gréedy Churle in ſuch
ſorte that ſhe ſadled him and road vpon him as vpon an horſe and
deceiued many others, but becauſe it is a thing extant in print,
I purpoſely omit them, ending with an odde ieſt done of late at
Iſlington.
                  
               
               
                  An other:
                  A Young man and a maide there was dwelling at Iſlington
neare London who in ſome continuance of time loued mutually
euen almoſt to the perfection of mariage ſo that nought remained
to ſtay their intent but the good will of Parents without
whoſe conſent the maid ſcrupuouſly would not be obtained.
                  Many ſutes and intreaties being made but to ſmall effect, the
young man abſented him ſelf from his loue ſome ſpace of time and
after the wooing manner courted an other mayde in the towne,
in ſuch ſorte that the common brute went he ſhould marry with
the latter. Wheruppon méeting his former looue in Iſlington
church yarde after ſome gréeting betwéene them the mayde had
God giue him ioy for ſhée heard ſay that hée ſhould be aſked in the
Church the next Sunday. True it is ſaid hée, and I feare nothing

but that you will forbid the banes, with that he tooke an
othe forthwith, raſhly you may be bolde to ſay, as commonly in
ſuch cauſes women are, to prooue that of her faith and troth ſhée
would not forbid the banes.
                  They departed each from other, the man ſtraight waies to the
Clark of the Church, to giue him notice of his owne name, and
and this mayde his former looue her name alſo, and cauſed them
two to be aſked banes togither, the mayde and her father & mother
that Sunday béeing at the Church not knowing of it, till other
neighbours & their ſeruaunts tolde that ſure it was ſhe that
was aſked. The matter examined, hee tolde the father of the
maide, what promiſe his daughter had made, that if he were aſked
in the Church, ſhée would not forbid the banes, therfore hée
thought good to be aſked to her whome ſo long he had wooed and
looued.
                  Now the Parents ſeing the matter had gon ſo far, gaue their
conſents and ſo at this preſent liue honeſtly together.
                  I might héer note downe many other coſonages & ſhiftes, more
then the aforeſaid, but for breuities ſake I will will heer ſucceaſe,
with this caueat, that people beware of many youths & others,
who hauing got copper rings, and other ſuch like when they méet
ſuch whome they think they may beguile, they will goe is them
and ſay they haue found a golde or ſiluer ring, and offer to ſell it
for a ſmall price.
                  The buyer thinking it to be golde, giues him for it thriſe
the worth and thinkes that he hath a great peny worth till trueth
try the contrarie. Therefore let euerie one beware let not faire
wordes make fooles faine, had I wiſt comes euer to late, ſhrede
ſurnes to ſoone, and repentance by leaſure.
                  Ignauiam necſsitas acuit, et ſepe deſperatio
ſpei cauſa eſt.
               
            
            
               
               A VVORLD OF
VVonders.
               IT is recorded in auntient monuments that what time Rinaldo
ruled this land it raiyned blood thrée dayes, and after that followed
a tempeſt of venemous beaſtes which ſlew many people.
               All this was a forewarning of great punishment to light vpon
the Inhabitants in this land that liued not penitently as enſued
the next yeare: when ſo great a mortalitie hapned that this land
was almoſt in deſolation. Whatſoeuer therefore (gentle Reader)
thou findeſt in this booke aſſure thy ſelf that it is written as a
memoriall or day-booke for all and euerie of vs dayly and hourely
to looke into for the better and ſpeedier amendment of our ſinfull
liues.
               
                  Bladud ſometime gouerned this land who cunning in Nigromancie
and truſting therto decked himſelf with feathers and preſuming
to flye ouer the towne of Bathe broke his neck by falling
vpon the Temple which he there had built. A fit rewarde for all
ſuch as as vſe Nigromancie or any ſuch vnlawfull acts.
               At what time Norindus ruled this land a wonderfull monſter
came out off the iriſh ſeas & deuoured much people againſt which
the King him ſelf Neides fought, and was of the ſame monſter
cleane deuoured. Beware of fooles hardnes.
               
                  Archigallo was twiſe king of this land and Elidurus his brother
twiſe diſpoſed, ſo that he was thriſe ruler heerof.
               
                  Catillus who ruled this land ten yeares, cauſed all Extortioners
and oppreſſors of the poore to be hanged, to giue examples to
other. I would to God they were ſo vſed now a dayes: I ſuppoſe
there would be a great number of vſurers, brokers & ſergiaunts.
               About thréeſcore yeares after the birth of Chriſt, it is ſuppoſed
that Chriſtianitie came into this land: but diuers write diuerſly,
for ſome as Necephorus and Dowthemus ſay that Simon Zelotes
firſt preached Chriſt heere. Some ſay Phillip the Apoſtle:

Some ſay Ioſeph of Armathia that buryed our Lord.
               King Arthur conquered thirtie kingtomes ſuch as were in
thoſe dayes wherin he liued.
               In the raigne of Careticus and Ethelfridus was ſuch ciuil and
deadly warres that the moſt part of this land was buryed & deſtroyed,
and the people that were left faine to flye into Wales, the
faithfull of Chriſt was then almoſt extinguiſhed, the Brittaines
indiſpaire and in ſubuerſion to the Saxons.
               
               But what is the cauſe or this prouoking of Gods anger? euen
couetouſnes, whordome and extortion: Looke vp England, looke
vp and repent: thoſe ſinnes were then but euen in the budde, now
behol
                     •
                  e and repent, for now are they in the fulnes of their flower,
and ſtay but for the frute. Woe are wée whoſe doyes are ſo dangerous:
But Lord awake in mercie and take pittie on vs.
               Then couerend Beda wrote 78. bookes and in his time renoumed
throughout the whole worlde.
               When Bytiricus ruled this land it rained blood yea that fel on
peoples clothes appeared like croſſes.
               When this land was ſtored with Wooules, the Princes of
VVales payed 300. Wooules euerie yeare to the King of England
for at that time might ſcarce two be found vntill the yeare
994. neither feuer nor flix nor murren of Cattle were knowen in
this land.
               In the time of king VVilliam the Conquerour was ſcarcitie
and dearth that men did eat horſſes, cats, dogges yea and mans
fleſh.
               
                  Anno 1093, was ſuch a famine that therof ſprang ſuch and ſo
great a mortalitie that the quick were ſcant able the dead.
               Alſo in the yeare 1099. we read that blood ſprang out of ye earth
at Finchamſtead in Barkſhire.
               
               Much about this time the water of the riuer of Trent at Nottingham
was dryed vp from one of the clock till thrée.
               The like defection of water did the Theames at Londen bridg
ſuffer about foure yeares after.
               The 24. of February at Tewxbury being then their Faire,
ſuch number of flyes and kyttles dammed Seuern that for the
length of a Buts ſhot were in mens iudgement eſtéemed abooue
a hundred quarters.
               
                  
A wunder of wunders befel in England throughout 1133. for
there was great darknes throughout all the land and the Sunne
appeared no otherwiſe then as the Moone when ſhe is in her laſt
quarter.
               
                  Giraldus Cambrencis in his booke of the diſcription of Wales
telleth that in the Cuntrey Kemanies, yea in his time a young
man named Se
                        ••
                     illus borne in thoſe parts, was ſo tormented wt
toades as though all the toades in the Cuntrey had beene gathered
together to vex him, and when as innumerable numbers of
them were killed by thoſe that kept him, & by others of his friends
and kinſmen, yet came they ſtill increaſing in greater numbers
then before, inſomuch that when his acquaintance perceiued no
help, after many aſſayes they loped all the boughes and leaues of
a very high trée and cloſed him in a coffin made for the purpoſe ſo
hoiſted vp into the ſaid high trée, but notwithſtanding poore S
                        •
                     iſillies
was ſtill moleſted with them. for they créeping vp wunderfull
heapes left him not til they had eaten him vy to bare bones
and ſo dyed.
               About Orford in Suffolk certaine fiſhers tooke in their nettes
a fiſh in all pointes ſhaped like a man, which fiſh was half a yeare
kept in Orford Caſtle for a wunder. Hée would eat all manner
meat but moſt gréedily raw fiſh, he was ſhewed in no kinde
of worſhip. Aftermen had wundred at him, hée was little eſtéemed
of and ſo not béeing looked vnto ſtole away and was
neuer heard of. 1188.
               In the yeare 1230. a ſuddain darkneſſe chaunced in Poules-Church
euen at ſeruice time ſo oue could ſcantly ſée an other: Alſo
bout thrée or foure yeare afterward, fiue ſunnes to be ſéene in the
ayre as alſo two great dragons flyingand fighting together during
a whole day, the one day chaſed the other to the déepe ſea.
               After all theſe followed great warres and troubles in England
Wales. &c.
               
               Beholde all Cornehourders a wunderfull example not fained
but by ſufficient teſtimonies to be approued done euen at home.
               In the yeare 1234 was a dearth in England as true hiſtories
recorde (euen as now alſo there is) ſo that many dyed for want of
victualls. The richmen as now a dayes were dwelled with couetouſnes,
ſo that they would not releiue them that were in neceſſite

Amongſt whome (a thing worthy noting) was one Walter
Gray Arch-biſhop of Yorke, whoſe corne béeing fiue yeares
olde, doubted that the vermine would deſtroy it, and therfore cōmaunded
to deliuer it to huſband men, that dwelt in his manours
vppon condicion as much new corne after the next harueſt, and
would diſtribute none of it to the poore for Gods ſake.
               Now it fortuned that when the men came to a great ſtacke of
corne that ſtoode néere to the towne of Rippon belonging to the
ſaid Archbiſhop and had opened the corne, there appeared in the
ſheaues the heds of wormes and of toades, and horrible ſerpents,
yea and a voice was heard out of the mowe ſaying lay no handes
one that corne for the Archbiſhop and all that he hath is the diuels.
               This being heard, the left it, and the bayliffes of the Towne
were faine to build an high wall round about the corne, and then
to ſet it one fire leaſt the venemous venime ſhould haue gonne out
to haue poyſned the corne in other places.
               Beholde this true example and repent thou couetous richman
and doe good while time is offered thée, and God will bleſſe thée
the better,
               A ſea-bull was taken paſſinge the thames as far as Mortlake
to the 25. yeare of the reigne of King Richard the 3.
               It is moſt aproued that in the ſayd Kings raigne ther dwelled
in the Dioces of Lincolne a woman of noble birth, both well fauored
and beautifull who being married to a rich man in that curtry
beare to her huſband many children and yet not with ſtāding
(wonderfull to tell) the ſayd woman got another gētle with child
and begate of her thrée ſonnes one after an other or euer the ma
                     •
                  er
came to light the woman were named Hauiſſia and Lucia.
               
               In King Edward the 2 raigne fleſh of beaſts was ſo corrupted
that men durſt not eate therof, ſuch murraine of beaſts and cattell
was then that men and women ſtole Cattes and did eate their
owne children, ſome fatte dogges, horſes & ſuch like. Priſoners,
plucked in peeces ſuch as came newly to them as priſoners & eate
them haule a liue ſo greeuous a mortalitie of people folloged that
vneth the quicke were able to bury the deade. Lord deliuer vs
from the like.
               About Chippyngnorton in Oxfordſhire in the yeare 1344,
was found a monſterous ſerpent, hauing two heads and two faces

like women one face attired of the new faſhion of attyres
then ſprung vp, and the other face atired after the olde ci
                     •
                  ll faſhion
and like a bat or 
                     •••
                  n
                     •
                  er mouſe.
               And ſhall wee not ſay thoſe were tokens of Gods wrath ſent
to mooue vs to repentance and leauing of our new deuiſed pride of
apparrell.
               But what then may be ſayd of the ſtraunge birds or fowles taken
by Richard Waller, and Richard Preſton, within the Pariſh
of Crowell in Lincolne ſhire, euen euen the other day in 
                     ••
                  r
memories in the yeare 1586 which birds w
                     ••
                  ed enter
                     •••
                  t 
                     ••
                  llors
hauing fethers vpon then heads or fronts growing & ſtanding
out very like the friſled and curled haire of moſt men and women
in theſe dayes, yea hauing alſo great feathers / about their
neckes growing and ſtanding very high, very euen and in the
very forme of our greateſt ſet of ruffes, being diuerſly coullored
held vp with 
                     〈◊〉
                   quilles reſembling the wyers commonly called
ſupporters, which woord (in my iudgment) right fitteth the
matter for that in very trueth they are the ſupporters of ſinne and
of many iniquities.
               If wee further conſider how theſe foules beeing taken would
walke thrée and thrée togeither in moſt ſtately forme, and afterwards
turning bill to bill ſtood as it were conſulting, it might be
imagined they did but reſemble the moſt 
                     •
                  proude, ſtately, and
ſcornefull footeſteps of women in theſe our dayes as alſo their goſſops
talks and inuentions of new
                     ••
                  nd tayles and behauiour.
               But gentlewomen conſider what you are and whereto you
muſt turne: A apainted wall is but a deceite to the buyer, and a
paynted body is but a deceiuing of the ſoule.
               Conſider that a ſimple ſoule ſurpaſſeth thouſands of the moſte
gorgious attired bodies of this world: Leaue off the pride of the
Pecock and take the humility of the Doeue, for when age draweth
vpon you you your ſelues will repent your former pride, and
acknowledge it méere vanitie.
               Vppon Chriſtmas day in the the 25. yeare of the raigne of L.
Richard the ſecond a Dolphin came out of the ſea euento London
bridge ſhowing himſelfe playing but after there followed great
tempeſts.
               The poſterne gate of London néere the Towre in King Henry

the ſixt dayes ſunck more then ſeuen foote into the earth at the
ſame ſeaſon.
               Wonderfull and ſtraunge it is to tell how in the 1594, the
bodie of one Alce Hackney which had béene buried in the Church
of Saint Mary-hill in London by the ſpace of one hundred thrée
ſcore and fiftéene yeares was taken out of the ground by a graue
maker, bothe whole of ſkinne and alſo her ioynts plyable, not deminiſhed.
               This body being alſo ſo taken vp, is reported that after ſo long
time lying in the earth to lye foure dayes abooue ground to the
vein of all commers, not ſmelling nor anoying of any, and then
buryed againe,
               This (as it ſéemeth to mée) veryfieth the ſaying of reueend
Bede our Cuntreyman, who affirmeth that there be thrée dayes
in a yeare wherein whoſoeuer is borne the bodies ſhall not conſume
vntill the day of Iudgement.
               In the yeare 1552 at Middleton eleuen myles from Oxford,
a woman brought foorth a Childe with two bodies from the nauill
in ſuch ſorte that when they lay at length the one body & hed
lay as it were eaſt-ward, and the other hed and body lay weſt
weſt-ward, the legs for ye bodies grew out at the midſt wheras
the bodies ioyned and they had but one iſſue for both the bodies.
               Theſe were women children and liued eightéene dayes,
               About that time when the Gray-f
                     •
                  yers was made an hoſpitall,
ten great Dolphins were taken and brought to London the leaſt
wherof, was bigger then a horſe.
               Straunge it is to conſider how God ſundry times in moſt miraculous
ſorte prouideth for the poore, as may be read in the
dayes of Quéene Mary.
               
               The twentie ſix of Nouember 1575. a Poulters wiſe in Chriſt
Church pariſh within Newgate was deliuered and brought to
bed of foure daugghters all aliue.
               A place by the ſeaſide all of hardſtone and pebles commonly
called a ſhelf, lying betwéene Oxford and Alborough in Suffolk,
wheras neuer was knowen to be either graſſe or earth, but alwaies
bare and barren, ſuddainly by Gods appointment ſprang
out of the fame without labour or till age ſuch great abundaunce
of peaſon that the poore Inhabitaunts there gathered (as it was

then iudged) aboue one hundred, quarters and yet notwithſtanding
there ſtill remained peaſe ſome rype ſome gréene and ſome in
the bloſſome, euen in as a great a quantitie as they were before
they were gathered.
               About the ſame time alſo a great fiſh was taken threeſcore féet
in length very ſwéet and pleaſant to be eaten.
               In the yeare 1557. before harueſt was ſuch a dearth, that
wheat was ſolde for foure marks the quarter, mault for fortie
foure ſhillings, peaſe at fortie ſix ſhillings the quarter, but it pleaſed
God to ſend ſuch a harueſt, to enſue preſently vpon that dearth
that wheat was ſolde for fiue ſhillings a quarter, mault for an noble,
Rye for ten grotes, and all this ſo ſolde at London, in the
cuntry it was better cheape.
               Let vs repent vs of our wickednes and begine to loue one an
other as we ought, and doubt we not but God will euen now doe
the like for vs in this our dearth although in mans iudgement it
preſumptio
                     •
                  s may be made to the contrary.
               More monſterous births befell in the yeare 1562 then in many
yeares before.
               A Mare brought foorth a foale with one body and two heads
and a thing like a tayle growing sut betweene the heads.
               Alſo a Sow farrowed a pigge with foure legs like to thearmes
of a man childe, with hands and figers.
               Alſo there was an other Sow which farrowed a pigge with
two bodyes, eight féete and but one head.
               Diuers children and beaſtes were brought into the world in
monſterous formes but moſt to be noted, is how many had reſemblances
of ruffs growing about their necks and this without fable.
               The xvij, of February 1570. at a place called Kinnaſton néer
Marclech hill in Herefordſhire, a ſtraunge thing was ſéene that
was the ground to open. and the ground with certaine rocks to
remooue, and went forward for the ſpace of foure or thrée dayes
to wit ſatterday, ſunday and munday, and in fiue and twentée
houre it remooued fortie paces euerie pace fiue foote carrying both
trees and ſhéepecoates yea ſhéepe and all in them, ſome trees falling
into the chinkes others remaning firme as before others that
to fore ſtood eaſt ſtand now weſt: et ſic econtra.
               
               
                  
                  Kinaſton Chapell was ouerthrowne with it, and two high
wayes laned with hedges and trées are remooued trées and all
an hundred yards from their acc
                     •
                  uſtomed places, where 
                     ••
                  llage
ground was, there it was paſture left in place therof, and wheras
paſ
                     •
                  ure ground lay there tillage ground hath gone vpon it, the
ground as it was mooued draue the earth before it, and at the
lower part euer whelmed the ground ſo that it is nowe great hil
highted abooue twelue fadome: it brake out at firſt in depth thirtie
foote, the breadth of the earth béeing eightſcore yardes, and the
ground in all being twentie ſix Acres.
               The like alſo hapned within theſe two yeares, beeing a wunderfull
example and worthy the marking.
               The 9 of Iuly 1274, in the Ile of T
                     •
                  net a monſterous whale
was taken, who wanting water dyed with ſuch roaring that he
was heard a mile off. His length was two and twentie yardes
one of his eyes beeing taken out was more then ſix horſſes could
draw in a cart▪ a man might ſtand vpright in the place, wherout
his eye was taken: between his eyes was twelue foote in length,
three men might ſtand vpright in his mouth: his ribbes being ſixtéene
foote long, his liuer was two cart load, and any man might
créep into his noſ
                     •
                  rels, which was wunderfull.
               A wounderfull and a notable Example for ſuch as vſe ſwearing
and forſwearing them ſelues.
               
                  Anne Auery comming into the houſe of one Williamſon in
Woodſtreat in London to buy ſix poundes of Towe or hardeſſe,
hauing had the towe and béeing demaunded money after many
vaine ſpéeches and filthy oathes deſired of God that ſhée might
ſinck where ſhée ſteed if ſhée did not pay for it. God who is iuſt,
ſent his iuſt iudgement vpon her so as forthwith ſhée ſunck down
vnto the ground, not able to ſtand, the vſe of that her blaſphemous
tongue being taken away, and ſhee remaining ſpeachleſſe
caſt vp at her mouth (that veſſell of ſinne) the filth and ordure of
her body in great quantitie and with horrible ſhucking, which
by natures courſe ſhould haue béen voided downeward, and in
it is ſorte continued which was not long till ſhe dyed.
               I might héere alſo put you in minde of the like periured called
father Lea, dwelling about Foſter lane, but to the wiſe this may
be a warning: as for ſuch as are commonly called knights of the

I c
                     •
                  n in conſcience think no otherwiſe but that they are euen reprobates
hated of God and beloued of the diuell. God for his
Chriſtes ſake giue them grace to repent and amend.
               Euen as before is ſaide as concerning periury, ſo in a manner
may bee ſayde of other enormities, as of whordome, hardnes of
hart to the poore, vnmercifulnes of bretheren and ſuch like, in
which extremitie, God neuer leaueth ſuch as truſt in him, as may
well be ſéene by the peaſon growing in the rock before mentioned
as alſo by one William Lumley a poore man dwelling in Elmeton
in the countie of Worceſter who being caſt into priſon & there
continuing. within thrée dayes after his impriſonmēt had a mare
which foalded vnto him a mare foale, which immediatly after
had ſuch an vdder of milk that ſhee gaue for a long time together
euerie day thrée pyntes of milke to the great comfort of his poore
wiſe and children. A wunderfull prouidence of God and worthy
to be noted eſpecially of ſuch as hauing ſuperfluitie yet euen
for the ſmalleſt debts care not to what trouble and hard impriſonment
they put their poore bretheren that God ſuffers to want for
their further indgement and condempnation I feare except they
repent and be mercifull as Chriſt him ſelfe is and hath commaunded
vs to be ſo likewiſe.
               Marke héer an notable example of ſuch as practice any vnlawfull
artes.
               The 17 of Ianuary, 1577, Simon Penbrooke dwelling in
Saint Georges Pariſh in Southwarck ſuſpected for a Coniurer,
and therefore ſummoned to appeare before the Ordinarie, at S,
Sauiours Church, ſtanding by his proctor, when euen as the
Iudge came in hée fell downe ratling in the throate, and neuer
ſpoke woord but dyed preſently: in whoſe clothes were found fiue
diueliſh bookes of coniuration and a picture of a man made of tyn,
hauing thrée dice in his hand with this writing: chance dice fortunately.
A fit rewarde for ſuch vile varlets as make lawfull
artes ill ſpoken of, and deteſted by their vngodly vſes and practiſe
of diueliſh deuiſes.
               But ſith I am now rehearſing of wounders and woundrous
ſhapes, I will héere declare as ſtraunge a matter as euer was
heard of.
               In the yeare 1588, was a widdow named Margaret Owen,
                  
aged thréeſcore yeares who had an horne foure inches long moſte
miraculouſly growing out of her forehed downe to her noſe, and
there crooked towardes her right eye, and was then growing ſo
faſt that ſhée was faine to cut it, leaſt it ſhould blemiſh her ſight.
               The woman was to be ſéene aſwell in London as in other places
of this Realme, neither can any naturall cauſe bee knowen
thereof, but a wounder that God hath ſent.
               Many are the reportes, but whether they be true or no I leaue
to your iudgments: for ſome affirme that in her youth ſhée was
not ſo loyall to her huſband as dutie ought, and that diuers times
there hath béene ſpéeches tending to that purpoſe betwéene her
huſband and her, wherupon hée ſuſpſcting flying fame to be true,
that ſhée was light of behauiour. & charging her with it in theſe
tearmes, that ſhe had giuen him the horne, it is ſaid, that ſhée not
only denyed it, but wiſhed of God that if ſhee had giuen her huſband
the horne, that ſhée might haue one horne growing out of
her owne forehead as a witneſſe againſt her to the wounder of the
world: (God only knoweth whether it were ſo or not) if it were, I
counſaile all other aſwell men as women to looke to them ſelues
and not to commit ſinne vpon ſinne: firſt, in committing ſuch an
horrible offence and adultrie: and ſecondly to cloake the ſame, to
call vengeance on their heds. Remember the woman that forſware
her ſelf for a ſmall ſumme of money: the olde ſaying is: It
may be ſpoke in ſuch an houre, as God may ſay Amen.
               
               This woman inhabited in Wales in the Tawneand pariſh
of Llhau Gaduaine in the Countie of Moungomrye and at the
roote of this horne beganne, an other hard knot euen as the other
beganne which ſhée vſed to cut of leaſt it ſhould prooue alſo an otherhorne.
               The mercifull and louing kindneſſe of god vnto ſinfull people
hath and is ſo greate that he longe time ſuffereth vs before he puniſheth
nay he ſeldom puniſheth except he vſe ſome maruelous
operation before hand to moue to repetance to forwarne vs of
the anger depending our heads, as fatherly admonitions, as
may well be perceiued, by this that followeth.
               About the yeare 1579 or there abouts, in Aberwick in the
parriſh of Agglingham in the county of Northumberland,
dwelled one Iohn Vrine a piper, vnto whome it pleaſed God to

ſend by his wife Elianor a daughter, and by reporte a goodly
childe.
               The wife being deliuered and each thing (as in ſuch cauſes requireth)
ordered the midwife glad of the womans ſaftie. called
the ſayd Iohn Vrine to his wife, and tolde him that it had pleaſed
God to ſend him a goodly daughter.
               A daughter quoth he with a ſterne and angery countenance,
if it be a daughter the diuell take my parte for me, for it is none
of myne: and ſo departed murmuring, withont any thankes-giuing
to God for her ſaffe deliuerance but rather tempting God,
as moſt of vs doe, God be mercifull vnto vs, but marke the ſequell.
               A yeare or two after about the yeare 1580 which is not long
ſince that it may be forgoten, or fained as a lie, it pleaſed God to
ſend his wife to be with childe againe, and to be deliuered of a
monſter, a male according to his deſier, hauing the ſhape of two
Children, from the ſhoulders vpward it had two heads, hauing
naturall proportions, ſauing that the one eare of each head
was ſhapened like an horſe eare, aud the other like a ſwine. The
body greater then vſuall, ha
                     •
                  ing two féete, and two armes,
proportionable, and was borne dead.
               Loe here God his iudgment ſent vpon him that murmured againſt
his creator, what would he haue ſayd if it had pleaſed God
to haue ſent him this, when he ſent him the daughter? But he
ſéeing this wonderfull worke, as it is reported, accknowledged
his offence, and cryed to god for mercy: which God graunt vnto
vs all, he that ſhed his bloud vpon the trée for vs. Anen
               
               
                  A memoriall of certaine moſt notorious
witches, and of their dealings
                  THere dwelled not ſo long ſince, but ſhat of ſome it may be remembred.
In Barking in Eſſex ſeuen miles diſtraunt from
London a Witch named mother white-coate alias mother Aruold
alias mother Glaſſenbury who committed many execrable
factes, as may appeare.
                  There was dwelling in Barking one Thomas Clark a fiſher
who hauing angred this witch, went foorth in mackerel

time to catch flounders, and he and two boyes ſayling downe almoſt
as farre as Lée where they caſt out his nets, in the ſame
place was ſuch an neddy that he could by no meanes woork, neither
his nets come in order, as they ſhould do, but vpon a ſodaine
this Clarke cryed out and ſayd that he ſawe mother Arnolde
the witch walking in the water, and withall cryed the ſpirit entred
into him and mooued him to kill him ſelfe ſo that hee tooke
a hatchet, a hooke and a knife and threw them ouerbourd and after
tyed he himſelfe about the middle with a rope and ſo fell mad,
ſo that the boyes cryed vnto other fiſhermen, who ſéeking to
help him, there was a whirlepoole that had almoſt caſt them away
ſo that none durſt come neer them, atlength a boat of Green
wich perceiuing the whirle poole threw a roape vnto them and ſo
plucked him into his boate and ſo brought him home to Barking
where he remained mad, and lying ſtill bound cryed out of mother
Arnold, and in the end dyed thus tormented.
                  The ſaid mother Arnold going in preceſſion with other her
neighbours in gangwéek and William Daulbie ſeeing her very
liuely came vnawares behinde her and ſtrooke vp her heeles giuing
her a fall, and after thruſt him ſelf into the preaſe of the people
to the intent ſhe might not know who did it, but ſhe aryſing
came immediatly to him taking him by the hand thanked him for
her fall, and ſayd ſhe would be euen with him.
                  They went to one Malles houſe a mile and a half from Barking
where ſhe complained of the young man and after ſome victualls
giuen her by the good wiſe went homeward againe.
                  
                     Malles wiſe and Daulbie going to Barking togither a good
pace but could ſet no eye of her, till they came by Barking, where
ſhe ſat a praying vnder a trée, and ſo paſſed by her, and ſo went
home, where béeing not a quarter of an houre, but Daulbie was
ſo miſerably vexed, that he ſought to kill himſelf, thruſt his hedde
into the ſwilling tub full of ſwines meat, where he had ſmothered
him ſelf if help had not preuented it.
                  Then would he haue runne into an hotte ouen to the burning
fire brands with his téeth that hée burned his mouth and lippes
very ſore: when night came his friends had him to bed, but his
vexation growing wurſie and wurſſe and he féeling his bowels
burne within him (as a pot ſéething on the fire) could not indure

the bed but lay for the moſt part all the night out of a windowe
which hée ſo byted with his téeth that it may be perceiued ſtill, ſo
long as the window endureth, and in theſe miſerable caſes continued.
At laſt helped by an other witch, was at the Aſſſſes bound
to appeare at Burnt wood where hée gaue evidence againſt mother
Arnold in the hearing ofher owne daughter, who after
came to him and ſaide you haue giuen ſhrode euidence againſt
my mother but you will be little better for it. And the next
night following, ryſing to make water was ſtroken in the neck
that hee fell ſick and was faine to be brought from Burnt wood
to Rainford in a Cart, and ſo from thence home, béeing pitiouſly
vexed till he gaue vp the ghoſt.
                  WHen Maſter Clement Siſley Eſquire had examined this
witch and tolde her ſhée ſhould goe to prſſon the wiech deſired
that ſhée might not goe to priſon, for the ſpirit would be reuenged
as it hapned when hée tooke paper in his hand to make his warrant
ſuddainly both his féete were taken from him by reaſon
wherof, he fell on a plaine pauement of frée ſtone in his owne
houſe at Taſtburyhall and ſtrook out the huckle bone of his thigh
out of the ioynt, ſo that for thrée wéekes ſpace he could not goe,
nor ſtand along time after her erecution but vſed ſtiles for neceſſities
ſake.
                  But before he committed her to the Iaiole, he cauſed her to be
ſearched by honeſt wiues who betwéene her kercheif and her hat
found wrapped in a linnen cloth ſwines dung, the herb cherwell
dill, red fenell and ſaint Iohns woort, the right hand or forefoote
of a Moulewarp, which vpon the opening ſo ſtanck that no perſon
could abyde it.
                  After the finding of this ſhee knéeled downe vppon her knées,
deſiring them if ſhe might not haue the whole, yet to let her haue
ſome part therof, but the ſame by the commaundement of the Iuſtice
was burned.
                  IF I ſhould write at full the manifold miſcheifes of this moſt
deteſtable practicioner, they would fill a great volume, as
how ſhe lamed Newman of Stratforde a tanner, how ſhée ſtole

an handchercher from his wife and after fiue dayes kéeping it
ſent it backe againe by one of her neighbours▪ who deliuering it,
faire, and white, to Newmans mayd, preſently there fell thrée
dropps of bloud vpon it one after another, and the mayd amazed
giuing it to her miſtris it became all ouer red as bloud moſt wonderfull.
                  Alſo how ſhee vexed one Hariſon béeing a Dutch man méeting
him at Mile-end and ſtroke him ſo lame that he was faine to
hire a horſe, to carry him home, and bewitched him dumbe, that
he could not ſpeake: and made his horſe to ſhake, aud dance, for
the ſpace of one whole yeare.
                  Alſo how ſhe threatned George Male at the Grayhound at
Barking that for ſo much as he thruſt her and her daughter out
of his doores and would giue them nothing, this witch threatned
that ſhée would ſet a Bée in his tayle the next time. Yea and that
a ſtinger ſayd the daughter. So not long after he determining
to ride, put on a new payre of hoſe with a double rugge in them
pryſed fortie ſhillings, the firſt day of his riding he was ſo tickled
in the buttocke, that he ſcratched through all, both hoſe and lynings
and ſuch a hole in his ſleſh, that it was not whole a m
                        •
                     
                     neth
after.
                  Many other miſcheifs might be héere numbred, but I meane
not to ſtand long vppon theſe deteſtable actions only this to be
noted, that béeing often examined, when ſhe was to anſwere ſuddainly
there roſe in her throate a ſwelling as bigge as a mans
fiſt, black as pitch, and then ſhe ſeemed to haue the hitchcough,
as though ſhe would ſpeake but could not, and in this caſe the examiners
would ſtrike her on the breſt but ſhe required them not
to doe ſo: And when ſhe was executed ſuch a ſtincking vapour
iſſued foorth of her mouth that the behoulders were ſcantlye able
to endure it. All which is moſte wounderfull.
                  I might héere noate the cruell deuiſes of mother Bumby the
witch of Rocheſter: the tirannie of the witches of VVarboys.
and many other, but for breuities ſake I omit thē, putting them
in memorie of one the moſte ſtraunge of all other, committed in
March 1592. néer Harrow on the bill.
                  One Maſter Edling hauing a barne at the townes end, his
ſeruant Richard Bucte going thether with a maſtiue dogge after

him, ſuddainly eſpied an haire to fiart before him and ſet his
dogge at her, but the maſtiue refuſing the chaſe ran round about
the fellow whyning pittiefully, but the fellow left not till he ſaw
the hare take in at one mother Atkins houſe, knowen to be a notorious
witch.
                  The fellow perceiuing this, bleſſed him ſelf and bad auaunt
witch, which turned to his woe for a moneth after or there about
he going to his maſters barne againe met this mother Atkins
and bad her good morrow, but the witch would not anſwere.
                  The next day hee went to the barne againe and carryed with
him his dinner and going to his victualls about noone hee ſawe a
monſterous black cat, among the ſtrawe ſhaking it, wherat Richard
riſing vp from whence he ſat, heard avoice commaunding
him to come away.
                  Come away thought he whether ſhall I come? the voice ſayde
againe come away and leaue thy victualls behinde thée and thy
knife alſo: the fellow amazed went with his victualls in his hand
to the barne doore and there was hoiſted vppe ſuddainly into the
ayre and carryed ouer many feilds by the way eſpying his maſters
plough plowing but not able to call to them from thence
he was hoiſtedouer to Harrow ouer that ſide of the hill, whereon
there is a great pond of water through which was drawne moſte
piteouſly that there he loſt his hat and then was violently rapt vp
the hill, and ouer the toppes of the trees by Harrow church but
béeing haled further, he was taken into a place which was al fire
wherin was ſuch lamentable crying and howling as all the damned

                        •
                     oules had béene there, ſuch ſtuicks, ſuch darknes, ſ
                        •
                     ch noiſe
and ſuch heat that it made him ſo thriſtie that he knew not what
to doe: where vpon he hauing but one peny in his purſſe remembred
it, and looked round about for an alehouſe where hee might
ſpend it. But perceiuing no ſuch matters but hearing varietie
of voices ſuppoſing ſome had ſpoken vnto him he replyed ſaying,
heere is no woorke for me to doe, it was reanſwered againe,
coaſt away with him with this pro
                           •
                        iſo, that thou bee ſeceret
when then commeſt home: whereuppon Richard ſayd my maſter
wi
                        •
                     l a
                        •
                     ke mee where I haue béen and with that his tounge
was doubled in his mouth that he could not ſpeake, his legges
burned, his armes and hands ſcorched, his coate pinched of his

back and throne into the fire and immediatly was again coaſted
ouer hedges and ditches ſeu
                        •
                     ed in myre and durt ſcratched with
thornes and bryers and finally to beddawbed, ſinged and diffigu
                     
                        •
                     ed
that it was moſte lamentable to beholde him.
                  Thus being brought againe to his wouted place or dwelling
he went to a ditch to drink and after to a freind of his being now
abſent foure dayes & as then able to ſpeake, his maſter not knowing
him at the firſt, but afterwards with much a doe his tounge
being vnfoulded he tolde all the ſtorie as you haue heard & would
not be quieted till hee had drawne blood of mother Atkins ſince
which time hée is amended.
                  Thús haue you heard the moſtnotorious fact that euer witchcraft
hatched, omitting many other, from all which our good
God deliuer vs. Amen.
               
            
            
               A MASSE OF
Murthers.
               IT is read that ſometime Bithricus ruled in this land of England
and was poyſoned by his owne wife.
               A widow dwelling without Aldgate in London in the dayes
of King Henry the ſixt was murthered for her goodes: the murdepaſſing
by the place where hee had committed the fact, was killed
with ſtones, ſhéepes hornes, kennell doung and ſuch like by
the women of that pariſh that threw them at him: and this was
the rewarde of murther.
               In the raigne of King Henry the eight a ſtraunger was hanged
in chaines for ſtaying his maſter one Capon in a garden for
his harlot. Loe héer the proffit and good of harlots.
               Much about that time was Margaret Dauie a mayde ſeruant
boyled in Smithfeeld for poyſoning of thrée ſeuerall houſhoulders

with whome ſhe had dwelled.
               In the 5 yeare of King Edward the ſixt, Maſter Arden of Feuerſham
in Kent, was murdered by the conſent of his owne wiſe
for which fact ſhe was burned at Canterbury.
               
               In the yeare 1554 a ſpaniard was hanged at Charing-croſſe
for killing of an engliſhman.
               In the yeare 1571. Rebecca Chambers, was burnt 
                     〈…〉
                  
of her huſband.
               A moſte ſhamefull murder was committed about the twentie
foure of May the ſame yeare by one Martin Bullock in this ſort,
Bullock had procured a Merchant named Arthur Hall to come
to the perſonage houſe of Saint Martins in Thrednéedle ſtreat,
in London, to buy plate of him: wherupon this Hall veiuing the
mark of the plate, ſayde, this plate is none of yours maſter Bullock
for it hath Doctor Gardners mark vppon it, and I knowe
it to be his: that is true ſayd Bullock, but he hath appointed mée
to ſell it for him. Now Bullock ſuſpecting this robberye thus to
be detected, ran into a further condemnation both to God & man:
for whilſt Arthur Hall was waying the plate, Bullock goes into
the kitchen and fetcheth a heauie waſhing betle wherwith hee
camming behinde Hall, ſtrooke him on the head that he feld him
with the firſt ſtroke, and then ſtoooke him againe. and after tooke
Halls owne dagger and ſtickt him. with his knife cut his throte,
and after would haue truſſed him in a 
                     •
                  anſ
                     •
                   cheſt, but the ſame
was to ſhort: Wheruppon he turned him downe a payre of ſtares
thinking to bury him in the ſellor but he being ſtiffe and the ſell
                     ••
                  
ſtares narrow and winding he could not drawe him down, wherfore
tooke an hatchet and cut off his legs and truſſed him vp with
ſtrawe in a dryfat ſaying it was his apparell and bookes and cauſed
it to be carryed to the water ſide and caryed to Rye.
               
               The yeare 1573 was one hanged in chaines in Saint Georges
                  
                     •
                  eild néere London for murthering the Iaylour of Horſham
                  
                     •
                  n the ſayd ſeild.
               The 25 of March 1573 George Saunders a merchaunt was
murthered moſt ſhameefully by George Browne by the inſtigation
of his owne wife and other her complices.
               A youngman was hanged in chaines at Miles end néer London
the ſeuenteene of February for murdering a man in a Garden.
               
                  
In White Chaple pariſh néer London in the yeare 1584 dwelled
one Cornelius an enteandiſhman a ſhoomaker, who had his
wife lying ſick ſome certaine time, this woman had a Daughter
maryed to one Arnold a Cobler, who retayned into his ſeruice a
Dutch mayde béeing his néer kinſwoman, and Arnolds wife had
a ſonne alſo being a youth of reaſonable yeares, who whilſte the
mayde was in the houſe, would often be familier with her, yet nothing
ſuſpected for any lewd dealings betwixt them, till Cornelius
his wife dyed, and the mayde went to dwell with Cornelius,
wherupon: his youth get the maide with childe, and was partly
ſéene dooing the déede by a little boy the Cunſtabies ſonne of that
precinct, which tolde it to his fellow ſeruants: who nothing regarding
his wordes ſayd not any thing therof, ſo that the mayde
béeing tall and of a reaſonable proportion went ſo long wt childe
till the time of her labour vnſuſpected, which time of trauell hapned
euen the ſelf ſame day that her miſtreſſe ſhould be buryed, at
what time the houſholde buſied in winding the dead corps, this
mayde departing from the women, went to aback chamber in the
further parte of the houſe and after ſeme ſmall time, was deliuered
none beeing néer the place, but the forenamed boy who wrought
in the roume vnderneath.
               When ſhe was deliuered, ſhe endeuored to ſtrangle it, by laying
her hand vppon the mouth of it, but the Childe beeing ſtrong
cryed ſo that the boy in the neither ro
                     •••
                  e heardit, wherupon ſhée
tooke a knife and laying the childe vpon the fiares cut the throate
of it ſo déep, that a man might haue laid ſeure fingers in ye woūd,
and hauing thus ended her moſt vnnaturall fact, caſt it into the
priuie, and went about her buſines, without any ſigne or ſuſpicion
of any ſuch filthines.
               But the boy partely perceiuing that it was the maides childe,
went priuely to one of the chei
                     •
                   ſeruaunts and tolde him what he
had heard, and that partie tolde it afterwards to one of the neighbours,
whereuppon the cry of the Childe came in queſtion. & ſhe
to examination aud ſearch, where ſhée confeſſed the matter, and
thereuppon the childe was taken vp and bad the law, and ſhe committed
to priſon, had iudgement according to her defert and was
executed at Tibourne.
               
                  
But this one thing is to be noted that being demaunded of the
wiues who gaue her that vunaturall minde & miſcheiuous help,
ſo to kill the Childe, aunſwered that the diuell was with her aud
helped her to diſpatch it in that manner. Thus much haue I
thought good to note at large, foraſmuch as it is more vſuall then
any other and is the more odious, inaſmuch as it is engendred of
two moſt horrible actions: Firſt, of whoredome or adulterie
which is wurſſe: ſecondly, of murther. Let this then be a looking
glaſſe to all maydes wherin to vei
                     •
                   the rewarde of ſilthines
leaſt they in
                     ••
                  rre the like daunger and penaltie.
               I Floſſe of welth affray thy minde,
               If ſicknes dyre oppreſſe thy hart:
               If loſſe of freinds alyed by kinde,
               If all or more tormet with ſmart,
               Yet help in time only ſuccour theſe,
               Before colde death dooth clame his fees.
               But if that mae den head be wrackt:
               Then may dens name and fame are cracke.
               And cannot be reſtorde againe:
               But dooth her ſtock with blemiſh ſtaine.
               No he
                     •
                  th, no welth, no foe, ne freind,
               Can breach of may denhed amend.
               Beware then may des I you exhort,
               Ioue, liue and dye in honeſt ſorte.
               
                  A moſt notorious mnrther committed by an Inkeepers
wife in Lincolneſhyre vppon a trauailer, a matter
woorthie to be knowen of all Trauallers.
                  AN honeſt man trauailing vpon buſines into Lincolneshyre,
not beeing able to reach ſo farre as hée purpoſed the day waxing
toward an end, hee himſelf wearyed, and hauing ſome charge
of money, ryding through Carthrope not far diſtant from Newort
vpon Trent vnderſtanding of lodging in the Towne, at the
houſe of one Tompſon a man of honeſt reputation, went 
                        ••
                     ether,
requeſting the good wife of the houſe that he might haue lodging,

and in ſecret ſort opened to her what ſtore of money he had, and
requeſted a chamber where his charge might be ſafe, the wife very
willing g
                        •
                     aunted and ſeemed ſo carefull that ſhée would that
night lodge none that might be ſuſpected perſons: Supper prepared
and ended this trau
                        •
                     ler going to bedde laid, his money vnder
his beds head, hauing locked the dore and the key ſticking in the
inſide.
                  The hoſteſſe and the reſt of her Famely gone to bed, for ye goodman
of the houſe was rydden from home about certaine buſines,
and knew nothing of this, the hoſteſſe incenſed by the diuell could
not reſt for caſting in her minde how to get the trauallers money
wherfore when ſhée thought euerie one was in their dead ſleape,
ſhe went to the Chamber dore where the traualler lodged, and
hauing a ſleight to open the lock by a little hole in the doore ſhée
went in and found the mans knife, (ſee héer the ſubtletie of ſathan)
to direct her to his knife as the inſtrument, which ſhée tooke out of
the ſheathe, and laying her hand vpon his mouth that hee might
not cry out cut his throate with his 
                        •
                     wne knife, and beeing thus
mortally wounded, he began to ſtruggle with her but all in vai
                        ••
                     
for ſhée ſoone b
                        •
                     reaued him of his beſt ioy in this world and tooke
away the money.
                  Now to couer this her abhominable act ſhée faſtned the mans
hand to the knife, which ſhe left ſticking in his throate, and ſo de
parted. Her ſmock bloodded in the action (other clothes ſhe had
not vppon her when ſhe committed the fact) ſhe put off and put on
a cleane one, hyding the other, leaſt by that meanes ſhee might
come in ſuſpition by her ſeruants: for none of them were made
priuie what money the traualler had.
                  The morning comming, ſhe with her houſhold aroſe, and nothing
was ſayde till the day drawing well on, ſhee ſayde to her
maydes that ſhe maruelled that the trauailer lay ſo long, hauing
a iourney to goe, and therupon, bad one of her maydes goe vp to
ſée if he were ſtyring, w
                        •
                     o knocking at the doore and hearing no
anſwere, at laſt thruſt open the doore by force and went in, finding
this moſt lamentable ſpectacle. The mayde amazed ran downe,
and tolde her miſtreſſe, who after a moſt vi
                        ••
                      faſhion counterfaited
ſwooning, but was comforted by neighbours.
                  A gueſt is pannel
                        •
                     , verdict giuen, that he him ſelf was guilty

of his owne death and theruppon to perſecute the maymed corps
yei further if it might be he was buryed out of chriſtian mans 
                        •
                     uryal
and ſo was it for thrée or foure monthes huſht vp.
                  But what is it that God in his ſecret iudgement wi
                        •
                     l not diſcloſe
though it ſéeme never ſo impoſſible? about thrée or fours monethes
after, this Inkéepers wife caryed out her blouded ſmocke
to a poore woman in the towne deſiring her towaſh it ſaying that
ſhe had ſticked a pig and her maydes had no leaſure to waſhe it,
the woman tooke it: beholde a wounder, murder cannot be hidde
the more the woman we ſhed it thee more freſher began the blood
to looke and the cloth the more blacker, which ſo amazed the poore
womman and troubled her in minde ſo that ſhée could not be quiet
till ſhée had tolde the Counſtable, who immagining what after
prooued trueth, tooke other of his neighbours and went to the Inkéepers
wife who after ſome examinations confeſſed the matter,
and had the law at Lincolne and was executed for the ſame.
                  A wounderfull example it is and worthy to be noted and remembred
aſwell of Inkeepers to keep ſure lecks without counterfeit
keyes, as alſo to take héed what ſeruants they keep to be of honeſt
reputation.
                  Not far from Lincolne at a towne called Bourne were thrée
bretheren whereof one was a countrey mercer who had maryed a
very honeſt woman who had of hec owne a prettie peece of land,
ſo diſpoſe as ſhee thought good during her life, and after to come to
her huſband if he ſuruiued.
                  Her huſband this mercer being an vnthrift would haue had his
wire to haue ſ
                        ••
                     lde this land, which no waies ſhe would conſent
vnto, beeing ſurely perſwaded that beeing gone, to haue nought
left to help her ſelf withall. This her huſband not preuayling,
brake his minde to his other two bretheren, wherof one was a
butcher who counſeled him t deale extreamly, with her who not
preuailing, they met all thrée at the mercers houſe and their conconcluded
to murther her, threatning the maide of the houſe is
kill her alſo if ſhe bewrayed them wheruppon they forced her to
holde the candle while they did the deede, for the butcher after his
butcher like trade qu
                        •
                     kly diſpatched her of her life. But the mayd
going abroade reuealed the matter wherupon they were apprehended,

and had the law accordingly.
                  Wonder it is to ſée to what fond affections and moſt wicked
and abhominable practiſes we are lead to for want of grace: ſome
to murther for welth as in this example, and alſo the example
vpon Towre hill where the ſealer killd the widow for her goodes,
Nottingham alſo can teſtifie it where one kiled his owne mother
for her lands, and many other, ſome vpon harbrannes as Glouer
who killed Seirgeant Grace, the Cooke in Saint Iohns ſtreat,
that killed his wife and infinit others.
                  I might héer ſet before your eyes what miſcheifes haue followlowed
to maſters by ouer hard vſages of their apprentices & ſeruants
a matter to be looked vnto for ſome are brought vp to idle to
proudely, to wantouly with to much exceſſe bothe of meat and apparell
which brings them to lewdnes▪ to dycing▪ to ryoting, to
whoredome to imbeaſling of their maſters goodes and ſuck like,
others on the contrary part want both apparell and ſuſtenance &
beſides and moſte vnreaſonable ſet to taſkes to woorking vppon
Sundayes and holy dayes forbidden, beaten and corrected out of
meaſure and moſte vnchriſtan like vſed, whereby they are forced
for want of further rememdie to runne away or to filth & ſteal
to buye victualles orels to runne to a further miſcheife amongſt
which I might remember the Powderers ſeruant that ſometime
dwelt in Finchlane. Alſo George Collins ſometimes Apprentice
with Richard Haiton taylor in Fanchurch who being badly
vſed his maſter ſought to kill him which he perfourmed being vnable
to doe ſuch a fact, and was for the ſame executed, but becauſe
the ſeand many others and yet freſher in memorie and writing
then that they may yet be forgotten.
                  It ſhall be néedleſſe to reporte vnto you the moſt hainous murther
committed vppon the Chaundlar neere broken Wharff in
London the matter beeing ſo freſh in memorie, the male actor
ſtill hanging as a notable example to our eyes, a greif
to the godly a terrour to the wicked and reprobate:
w
                        •
                     ich God graunt for our Lord
Ieſus ſake. 
                  AMEN
               
            
            FINIS.
         
      
   