
      
         
            
            
            NEPENTHES,
OR
THE VERTVES
OF TABACCO
BY
William Barclay Mr. of Art, and
Doctor of Physicke.
            EDINBVRGH,
Printed by ANDRO HART, and are to be sold at
his shop on the North side of the high street, a litle
beneath the Crosse. Anno Dom. 1614.
         
         
            
            A merie Epistle of the Author
to the Printer
            GOod Master Hart, I haue sent you here a parasiticall
Pamphlet, which, I am sure, will bee as farre
ben at euery banket as Gnatho himselfe or Pseudolus.
It will be a meet piece for Tipplers at Tavernes,
and for Pedlers to helpe away with their rotten Tabacco.
So that by this worke, I feare I shall be better loued
amongst fine scoalers then famous schollers. But if I find fauour
in this Essay, I shal send you shortly Godwilling a scholasticall
subiect, and a curious litle worke: fit onely for those
which aspire to the top of Pindus. The one wil bring to your
shop the common sort of people, the other the most learned,
I deliuer this Scottish broode vnto you, Peraes & libram,
make it your owne if you thinke it worthie, and esteeme me
so long as I liue also
            
               Your owne from my heart
W. Barclay Doct. Med.
            
         
         
            
            TO THE RIGHT
WORSHIPFVLL
PATRICKE BARCLAY
sonne and heire to Sr. PATRICKE
BARCLAY of Tolly Knight
WILLIAM BARCLAY
his Vncle D. M. wisheth
health and happinesse.
            
               VErie worshipfull and my deare Nephew,
I cannot but I must summond
you, the processe beeing in matter of
Tabacco, as a witnesse to testifie the
worth thereof, and since you are charged,
the custome requireth that you haue a just copie
of the Libell, which I present heere vnto you,
not so much that you may depose what you
know of the vertues thereof, as that you may learne

by this discourse to continue with discretion in the
practise of this precious Plant, to the ende you may
eschew by precepts of Art the dulefull heritage of a
naturall and paternall disease, and that you may
blisse the house of your natiuitie with a long, holie
and wholesome life, and that house feele some consolation
by the counsell and care of him who beeing a
bough of that old and vnfading tree, shal endeuoure
to bring foorth such fruit as may both profite and
pleasure all the branches and buddes thereof, and
you before all as the principall stocke, which
I wish may liue longer then many
long liuing Oakes, to the ornament
of our race and
the comfort of
            
               Your most affectionat and
most seruiable Vncle
W. Barclay Doctor
of Medicine.
            
         
      
      
         
            
            NEPENTHES,
OR THE VERTVES
OF TABACCO
BY
WILLIAM BARCLAY D. OF
MEDICINE AND MASTER
OF ART.
            
               HERCVLES to obey the commandement
and will of IVNO,
busied himselfe to overthrow the
most famous monsters of his
time, his Armes were a bagge
and a club. A most worthie Ladie, and, if I durst
say so, the very IVNO of our Ile hath commanded
me to destroy some monstruous Diseases,
so that to imitate the most chiualrous Chiftan
of the worlde, I haue armed my selfe with a
boxe for his bagge, and a pipe for his club: a
boxe to conserue my Tabacco, and a pipe to
vse it, by those two Godwilling, to ouercome

many maladies. If the hostes of such Diseases
doe not betray my endeuoures to their hating
and hated guests by not vsing or abusing my
weapons. But before I enter in the list, I must
whet as it were my wits with these two points,
First why doe I treat of a matter so often handled
by so many, so odious to Princes, so pernicious
to sundrie, and so costly to all?
            Secondly why doe I as another CLODIVS
reueale mysteria bonae Deae, and prophane the
secrets of Physicke? I answere that a good matter
is not the worse to be maintained by many:
and Plus vident oculi quam oculus.
As concerning the hatred of Princes, one mans
meate is another mans poyson. The wine
prince of liquors hateth vehemently colworts,
and yet beere, aile, sider water, oyle, honey, &
all other liquors doe well agree with colworts.
The king of France drinketh neuer Orleans wine
notwithstanding his subjects do loue it well.
            I know sundrie men that haue such Antipathie
with butter that they dare not smell it. It
hath beene pernicious to sundrie I grant it, so
hath wine, so hath bread, so hath gold, so hath
land, and what so wholsome thing is that cannot

be turned to abuse? If it be costly vse the
lesse of it. What? is not Rheubarbe coastly? is
not Muske coastly? is not Ambergreese coastly?
As touching the second point of my reuealing
this secret of Physicke, I answere, I meane but
to reforme the harme which proceedeth of the
abuse, and to shew to my countrey men that I
am more willing to pleasure them then to profite
my selfe, neither did I sweare to conceale
that point when in a robe of purpure I wedded
the metamorphosed DAPHN
                  •
               . It resteth now
to vnfold what moued me to entitule this treatise
Nepenthes, because it hath certaine mellifluous
delicacie, which deliteth the senses, & spirits
of man with a mindful obliuion, insomuch
that it maketh & induceth 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               
the forgetting of all sorrowes & miseries. And
there is such hostilitie betwene it & melancholie,
that it is the only medicament in the world
ordained by nature to entertaine good companie:
insomuch that it worketh neuer so well, as
when a it is giuen from man to man, as a pledge
of friendshippe and amitie
            The countrey which God hath honoured
and blessed with this happie and holy herbe,

doth call it in their natiue language Petum, the
Spaniards, who haue giuen it the right of naturalitie,
in their soyle terme it Tabacco, the
Frenchmen which haue receiued it in their
countrey as in a colonie call it Nicotian, in this
our Ile of Brittaine, as in all other maritime
parts, we vse the Spanish name of Tabacco. But
esteeming it worthie of a more loftie name, I
haue chosen for gossip the faire and famous
Helena, and giuen to her the honour to name
this most profitable plant Nepenthes.
            
            Albeit this herbe disdaines not to be nourished
in many Gardens in Spaine, in Italie, in
France, Flanders, Germanie and Brittaine, yet neuerthelesse
only that which is fostred in India,
and brought home by Mariners and Traffiquers
is to be vsed, as after you shall heare the
reason is.
            Non omnis fert omnia tell us.
            But auarice and greedines of gaine haue moued
the Marchants to apparell some European
plants with Indian coats, and to enstall them in

                  ••
               ops as righteous & legittime Tabacco. Some
others haue Tabacco from Florida indeede, but
because either it is exhausted of spiritualitie, or

the radicall humor is spent, and wasted, or it
hath gotten moysture by the way, or it hath
bene dried for expedition in the Sunne, or caried
too negligently, they sophisticate and
farde the same in sundrie sortes with blacke
spice, Galanga, aqua vitae, Spanish wine, Anise
seedes, oyle of Spicke and such like.
            So that the most fine, best, and purest is that
which is brought to Europe in leaues, and not
rolled in puddings, as the English Nauigators
first brought home.
            The finest Tabacco is that which pearceth
quickly the odorat with a sharpe aromaticke
smell, and tickleth the tongue with acrimonie,
not vnpleasant to the taste, from whence that
which draweth most water is most vertuous,
whether the substance of it be chewed in the
mouth, or the smoake of it receiued. Skillie tasters
of wine, Bacchus butlers, know the wine
Odore▪ fapore colore.
            
            So they which traffique dayly with Tabacco
doe know it by these same three senses. In a
Goose there is nothing which doth not serue
either for meat or medicine, 
                  •
               o not so much as
the doung: But in Tabacco there is nothing

which is not medicin, the root, the stalke, the
leaues, the seeds, the smoake, the ashes, & to be
more particular, Tabacco may serue for the vse
of man either greene or dry, of greene Tabacco
may be made Syrups, waters, oyles, vnguents,
plasters, or the leafe of it selfe, may bee vsed
mortified at the fire to cure the asthma, or
shortnesse of breath, dissolue obstructions,
heale the olde cough, burning vlcers, wounds,
migraim, Colicke, suffocation of the mother:
and many other diseases, yea almost all diseases.
If the Romanes durst haue wanted so many
yeares the helpe of Physick, vsing for all diseases
only Colwoorts. Truelie I think the Romans
might want now all Physitians eternally,
if they knew the vertue of Tabacco, seeing the
spring of al their diseases is defluxiōs & cathars
for which the only antidot is Tabacco. I intreat
here the Lector of this treatise, to haue me excused
if I do not set down in special the forme
and maner to prepare such remedies of green
Tabacco, as I haue mentioned, for I wold wish
to do with Tabacco as Aristoteles did with his
Physicks, for he wrot to his scholler Alexander,
that he had published & not published his physicall

Philosophie: So I must assay to say, that
I haue revealed and not reuealed the quintessence
of Tabacco. As concerning the dry Tabacco,
it may be vsed in infusion, in decoction,
in substance, in smoke, in salt. Touching the infusion
& decoction, because they are as dangerous
& more, than Elleborus albus, or antimonium,
I will forbeare to particularize, remitting
the practise of that part to the presence of some
prudent Physician, except it be in some desperat
case of vnknown poyson. As for Tabacco in
substance holdē in the mouth, as an apophlegmatisme,
or medicin to draw fleame out of the
head by the mouth, I avow it to be one of the
best & surest remedies in the world against Paralisie,
epilepsie or apoplexie, that is, the falling
ill, & Vertigo Idiopathica, the passion of dizzines
in the head by wind, that euer was found out.
These are foure of the most incurable diseases
that besiege the braine of man: for vnderstanding
of the which cure I must remember the
Lector, that since the dayes of Hippocrates,
and in his dayes there haue bene inuented fiue
sundrie sorts of vacuations to voyde this our
body of filthy corruption wherof it is the continual

harbinger, that is, phelebotomie, vmitiō
purging by the stool, by vrins, & by sweating.
Now in the latter dayes hath beene inuented
a sixt way or maner of purging, which is
also by the mouth, not vomiting, but spitting:
The onely medicament which was wont to
procure such spitting, or slavering, was Hydrargyrum,
quicke-siluer: but now of newe is
found out this diuine Tabacco, which if it be
rightly vsed, is a soueraigne helpe, and a present
purgation, and approoued preseruatiue
against the foresaid diseases, as also against Arthritis,
the gowt, Lithiasis, the stone in reines
or bledder, and Hydropisie. But because it is
said that Tabacco and Hydrargyrum, worke
both after one sort, It shall not be amisse to
speake somewhat of the one and the other:
First, there is no vegetall in the world, hath
such affinitie with any minerall, as hath Tabacco
with Mercure, or quicke-siluer, for as
Mercure purgeth, 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                aboue and vnder,
being taken at the mouth, so doth Tabacco,
and as Mercure being applyed exteriourlie,
purgeth all the body by slauering, so doeth
Tabacco being holden in the mouth. As the

best Physicians, Philosophers and Alchimists
that euer were, can not agree vpon the qualities,
neither first nor second of Mercure, some
say it is both hote and colde, both drye and
moist, that it can binde and loose, that it can
rarifie and thicken, and in a word, that it is a
Protheus, or a Magician. So Tabacco is hote,
because it hath acrimonie, it is cold because it
is narcoticke and stupefactiue, it maketh drunken,
and refresheth, it maketh hungrie and filleth,
it maketh thirstie, and quencheth thirst:
Finallie to bring man to health, it changeth as
many formes as Iuppiter doeth shapes to conuey
himselfe to his Mistresse: This difference
onely there is, that Mercure being applyed to
any part of the body, prouoketh spitting: But
Tabacco purgeth by slauer onelie, being taken
in the mouth in substance or in smoake. The
Alchimists vaunt that they are able to drawe
out of euery thing Mercure, sulphure and salt,
but truelie out of nothing can they be sooner
or better separated, then out of Tabacco: I
thinke that I durst be bold to say, that Tabacco
is the Mercure of vegetals, and Mercure is the
Tabacco of minerals. Now to returne to our

purpose, to wit, to the cure and preseruation
of an armie of maladies, Tabacco must be vsed
after this maner. Take of leafe Tabacco as
much as being folded together, may make a
round ball of such bignesse that it may fill the
patients mouth, and inclyne his face downward
towards the ground, keeping the mouth
open, not mouing any whit with his tongue,
except now and then to waken the medicament,
there shall flow such a flood of water
from his brain and his stomacke, and from all
the parts of his body that it shall be a wonder.
This he must do fasting in the morning, and if
it be for preseruation, and the bodie very cacochyme,
or full of euil humours, he must take
it once a weeke, otherwise once a month: But
if it bee to cure the Epilepsie or Hydropisie
once euery day. Thus haue I vsed Tabacco my
selfe, and thus vsed Tabacco Iean Greis a venerable
old man at Nantes in the French Britain,
who liued whill he was six score yeares of age,
and who was known for the only refuge of the
poore afflicted souldiers of Venus when they
were wounded with the French Pickes, I
should haue said Pockes. Thus much for the

vse of Tabacco in substance. As concerning
the smoke, it may be taken more frequently, &
for the said effects, but alwayes fasting, & with
emptie stomack, not as the English abusers do,
which make a smoke-boxe of their skull, more
fit to be caried vnder his arme that selleth at
Paris dunoir a noircir to blacke mens shooes,
then to carie the braine of him that can not
walke, can not ryde except the Tabacco Pype
be in his mouth, I chanced in company on a
tyme with an English merchant in Normandie
betweene Rowen and New-hauen. This fellow
was a merrie man, but at euery house he must
haue a Cole to kindle his Tabacco: the Frenchmen
wondered, and I laughed at his intemperancie.
But there is one William Anslop an honest
man dwelling in Bishops-gate street, hard
within the gate that selleth the best Tabacco in
England, and vseth it most discreetly. Because
the matter of smoake taking is controuerted
and disputed, I will first decide this question
of smoake before I enter to shewe
the commoditie which proceedeth of it.
Suffumigation or receauing of smoake, is
not a newe inuented remedie, it is an

old and well approoued forme of medicine in
many diseases, Hippocrates in his booke of the diseases of women teacheth many kindes
of smoake which women should receaue and
specially of many vnsauourie and stinking
things at the nose and the mouth, to represse
and thrust back the mother in the suffocation,
a fearefull and dangerous disease. The most
expert Physitians in our dayes admit with one
consent the smoake of tussilago to be receiued
at the mouth, by those which are ptisicke, or
asthmaticke or haue the cough of cold. Gordon
a learned olde Physitian, the Vade mecum of
practitians, ordaineth Trochisques of Ambergreis,
Muske, and other Ingredients to be vsed
after the forme as we take the smoake of Tabacco
for the Epilepsie. In the booke called
Aphorismi tonsorum, or Schola Salerni, there is
a suffumigation made of Leek seeds, and white
Insquiā
                seeds for the tooth ache to be receiued
at the mouth. Leonardo Fioravanti an Italian
practitian commendeth for deafenesse a suffumigation
made with cinaber, frankincense and
myrrhe, to bee taken at the mouth. Consider
now good Lector, and repeat againe, Shall

               Hippocrates permit the smoake of stinking feathers,
and of old rotten shooes from a Coablers
dunghill? shall other Physitians permit the
smoke of tussilago? shal Gordon prescribe the aromatical
smoke of musk & ambre? shal Schola Salerni
permit Insquiam to bee incensed in the
mouth which is a venemous plant, shall FIORAVANTI
command the smoke of cinabre,
which is a present poyson to infect the braine?
and shall wee onely banish the poore Tabacco
which hath more vertue for all these foresaide
Diseases, then each of the forenamed things
hath for their seuerall sores. If the mother vexe
and torment a woman, the smoake of Tabacco
either aboue or vnder, shal ease her more, then
feathers or lether. If thou be ptisicke, if thou be
asthmaticke, if thou be vrged to cogh through
defluxion, the smoake of Tabacco is better then
tussilago: if the rage of toothache excarnificate
the goomes, Tabacco is better then Insquiam: if
there be sounding in the eares, it is fitter thē 
               cinabre.
I ad further, that amongst so many thousands
which vse & abuse Tabacco at al occasions
without obseruation of any physicall precept,
there are very sew found that can ascribe their

death to Tabacco: so that if Tabacco were vsed
physically and with discretion there were no
medicament in the worlde comparable to it.
Now to returne from whence I did digresse to
shew the commodities of Tabacco, I lay here as
a ground to build vpon, that by reason of the
situation of mans head, which is aboue al the other
members of the body, the most parte of
diseases flow from the head, as from a fountain,
so that Tabacco going immediatly to the brain,
it not only augmenteth and refresheth the animall
spirites, but drieth the sourse of innumerable
diseases, and fortifieth the braine. So that
there is no man but may receiue commoditie
by the vse of Tabacco, except only those which
haue their braine dry & hot, which is a temperament
vnnaturall to the braine, yea and a dangerous
disease, and the next degree to reauing
to furie, to madnesse. I know that euery one
will be curious to aske me how he shall know a
hote & dry braine. GALEN in his book which
he calleth ars parva, declareth at large the signes
of all intemperies, yet to satisfie the mindes o
                  •
               
curious Lectors, it is euident that his braine 
                  〈◊〉
               
hot & dry who sleepeth very litle or nothing

who reaueth waking, and formeth monstruous
dreames sleeping, and whose nose distilleth nothing.
It were a world of worke to specifie in
particular all the diseases, and symptomes
that are helped or preuented by Tabacco, but I
will only set downe those which I know either
by mine own experience, or by the faithfull reporte
of learned Physicians or of credible patients.
I will begin at the Epilepsie which is called
by HIPPOCRATES morbus sacer, the falling
sicknes, and this plant is called by some nations
herba sacra: then after legittime preparation, &
such diet as a skilful Physician shal prescribe, let
the patient be purged with the infusion of Tabacco
in hidromel, in the strained liquor of this
infusion dissolue foure graines of the salt made
of Tabacco and giue it to the patient to drinke:
herafter, hauing a cauter in his neck, he shal take
euery day the smoke of a pipe of fine Tabacco
fasting in the morning, & once euery third day
hee shall hold in his mouth the apophlegmatisme
of Tabacco in substance.
            Now because this disease hath some occult
venome and maligne qualitie, the olde Physicians
by long experience haue found out some

things which helpe this disease by an indeclarable
vertue, and for this cause he shall take the
smoake of this confected Tabacco euery day.
            Take ambregreese, the seede of peonie, and
stirax, of every one halfe an ounce, of muske
twentie graines, of lignum aloes the weight of
three crownes, of magisterium cranii humani an
ounce, of the sowing thereof, halfe an ounce, of
fine Tabacco as much as of them all, make of all
these a grosse powder, and take the smoake of it
euery morning, and thus the epilepticke shall
attaine to his health rather then by the galls of
dogs & superstitious characters vsed by a number
of ignorant deboshed Vagabondes and
Montebanckes. The Hydropisie is one of the
ordinarie customers that commeth to craue
health at the shop of Tabacco, and specially if it
bee holden in the patients mouth in substance,
or if hee take now and then of the salt thereof,
and euery day a pipe or two. The Arthritis or
gowt, & grauell are preuented prettily, because
the antecedent cause is taken away: it preserueth
from the toothach: it cureth the migraim,
the colicke, the cogh, the cold: It stayeth growing
fatte: it is the antidote of Hypochondriacke

melancholie, it prepareth the stomacke for
meat: it maketh a clear voice, it maketh a sweet
breath, it cleareth the sight, it opneth the eares,
it putteth away the punaise, & openeth the passage
of the nose, it is the nourse of the lights, it
comforteth nerues, and taken in sirupe there is
no obstruction that can abide it: it is present reliefe
against the most part of poysons: And in
few words it is the princesse of physical plants.
To conclude this discourse I must excuse here
my plainnesse and simplicitie with this caveat
to the curious Lector, that albeit the neuer too
much commended Tabacco bee of sufficiencie
to cure many diseases: yet it is not of efficacie
in al persons, in all seasons, in al temperaments,
but it must bee vsed by the direction of some
expert and prudent Physician. There was
on a time a diseased Gentleman, who for to recouer
his health sent for a Physician, the which
vsing prudently & artificially his cure, the Gentle
man became wel, & because he was subject
to that disease often in the yeare, hee remarked
well how the Physician had prepared his potion,
what herbes hee had decocted, what simples
hee had infused, what electuaries hee had

dissolued, howe much of euery one, how long
they seethed, or steeped, at what a clocke he did
minister it, how long hee fasted therafter, & at
the next assault of the sicknesse hee tooke the
same potion, obseruing all Circumstances, but
was nothing the better: he sent againe for Master
Doctor, and inquired what the matter
should be, seeing he was diseased with the same
maladie, hee had taken the same potion, he vsed
it very rightly with all the circumstances and
obseruations, he had not omitted one jote, No
said the Physician you lacked a principal point,
a very necessarie Circumstance & an essentiall
Cause, that is, you receiued not the potion
from the hand of a Physician: for if the patient,
as experience teacheth beginneth to feele the
first hope of his health at the arriuall of his
Physician: how much more shall he be alleuated
when he giueth him out of his owne hand
the Cuppe which conteineth the Couenant of
his restitution, the earnest of his Wellfare, and
the weapon to destroy his disease. Happy were
the land that had no need of Physicians, happy
the lande which hauing neede of them hath
of the best sorte, and happie were the Physicians

whose lote were to come in the lande
where the Law of good King REVTHER were
curiously keeped, that no man vnder paine of
death should exercise physicke that could not
shew a publicke testimonie of his lawfull Calling.
But I must say of Physicke as a holy Father
saide of the holie Scripture, hanc delirus senex,
hanc garrula anus, hanc sophista verbosus
putteth in practise, and is not punished.
God saue the Countrey
from diseases, and God
saue the diseased from
such Doctors
            FINIS.
         
      
      
         
            
            To the fauourable Lector
health.
            
               THere were some pages which I thought not
meet to leaue emptie, good Lector, either
for thy sake, or for Tabaccoes sake, or
for mine owne sake: for thy sake, because
I wearie not to talke with thee: for Tabaccoes
sake, because the worth of it deserueth
some verses: for mine owne sake,
because I neuer hauing sleeped in Parnassus, but beeing a
valley Poete, I persuade my selfe that my verse, shall be read
more for the merites of the maetter, then for the value of the
Work
                  •
               man. Therefore I addresse my selfe first to gaze against
a craig, from whence some musicall influence may bed
                  •
               w
my braine.
            Vt sic repente Poeta prodeam.
         
         
            
            To his good and olde friend,
M. Alexander Craig,
            
               CRaig if thou knowes the vertues of this plant,
            Why dost thou dye thy quill in Inke of blame?
            If thou knowes not, for to supplie thy want,
            Why followes thou the voice of faining fame?
            Is it not slander to this plant and thee,
            To speake of it so poeticallie?
         
         
            
            To his good Cousing
M. Iohn Hay, of Ranasse.
            
               HAnibal had a house in Bythinie,
            
            Builded after his craftie owne conceat,
            On euery side a doore was priuilie,
            For to preserue his life and staggering state,
            But when the Romanes came for to defait
            The onelie one of whom they stood in doubt,
            
               Hanibal would not fight against his fate,
            Knowing the doores were known and siegde about,
            Good Cousing Hay, the soule is Hanibal,
            
            The house with many doores it is the head,
            Death and disease as Romanes siege them all
            To suffocat the life without remead:
            Except diuine Tabacco make defence,
            Keepe open doores, & raise the siege from thenc
                  •
               
            
         
         
            
            To the abusers of Tabacco.
            WHy do you thus abuse this heauenlie plant
            The hope of health, the fewell of our life?
            Why doe you waste it without feare of want,
            Since fine and true Tabacco is not ryfe?
            Olde Euclio w
                  •
               nt foull water for to spair,
            And stop the bellowes not to waste the Air.
         
         
            
            To my Lord the Bishop
of Murray.
            THe statelie rich late conquered Indian plaines,
            Foster a plant, the princes of all plants.
            Which Portugall after perill and paines,
            To Europe broght, as it most iustlie vants:
            This plant at home the people and Priests assure,
            Of his goodwill, whom they as God adore,
            Both here and there it worketh wondrous cure,
            And hath such heauenlie vertue hid in store.
            A stranger plant shipwracked in our coast,
            Is come to help this cold phlegmatick soyle,
            Yet can not liue for calumnie and boast,
            In danger daylie of some greater broyle:
            My Lord this sacred herb which neuer offend
                  •
               t
            Is forcde to craue your fauour to defend it.
         
         
            
            To the most accomplished,
and true Philoclea of this
Yle, L. E. L. L. F.
            SOme do this plant with odious crymes disgrace,
            And call the poore Tabacco homicid,
            They say that it, O what a monstrous cace!
            Forestals the life, and kils man in the seed,
            It smoaketh, blacketh, burneth all the braine,
            It dryes the moisture treasure of the life,
            It cureth not, but stupifies the pain,
            It cuts our dayes before Atropus knife.
            Good Ladie looke not to these rauing speiches,
            You know by proof that all these blames are lies,
            Forged by scuruie leud vnlearned Leiches.
            As time hath taught and practise that all tryes.
            
               Tabacco neither altereth health nor hew,
            Ten thousand thousands know that it is true.
         
         
            
            To his very worshipfull, an
                  •
               
deare Cousing, the Laird
of Boine.
            THe Gut which Vulcan forged in his yre,
            To punish those which follow Venus way,
            Can finde nothing to quench that flaming fyre,
            So fit as fine Tabacco sundrie say,
            For proofe of which great Pillar of my kin
            Tell what thou knowest: for to conceale were sin
            
         
      
   