
      
         
            
            
            OF THE VVOOD
CALLED GVAIACVM,
THAT HEAL
                  ••
               H
THE FR
                  ••••
               E
POC
                  •••
               
AN
                  •
               
               also helpeth the goute in the
feete, the 
                     ••••
                  ne, the
palsey, 
                     ••••••
                  ,
dropsy,
fallynge euyll, and other
dyseases.
            
            LONDINI IN AEDIBVS
THO. BERTHELETI
M. D. XXXVI.
            CVM PRIVILEGIO.
         
         
            
            
            ¶The preface of Thomas Paynel ch
                  •
               
               non
of Marten abbey, translatour
of this boke.
            NOt longe agoo, after I had
translated into our englysshe
tonge the boke called Regimen
sanitatis Salerni, I hapned
being at London to talke
with the prynter, and to enquire
of hym, what be thought, and how he
lyked the same boke: and he answered, that
in his mynde, it was a boke moche necessarye,
and very profitable for them that take
good hede to the holsome teachynges, and
warely folowed the same. And this moche
farther he added therto, that so fareforthe
as euer he coude here, it is of euery man very
well accepted and allowed. And I sayd,
I pray god it may do good, and that is all
that I desyre. And thus in talkynge of one
boke and of an other, he came forthe and
sayde: that if I wolde take so moche peyne
as to translate into Englysshe the boke that
is intitled De med
                     •
                  rina guaiaci, et morbo
gallico, wryten by that great clerke of Almayne
Vlrich Hutten knyght, I shuld, sayd
he, do a verye good dede. For seynge hit is

               
                  •
               oth, as this great clerk writeth of this medicine
Guaiacū (For he hym selfe hath had
the verye experience therof) how nedefull
and howe beneficiall to the common welthe
were it? For almoste into euerye parte of
this realme, this mooste foule and peyneful
disease is crepte, and manye soore infected
therwith. Whan he had sayde thus his fantasye,
and that I hadde bethought me and
well aduysed his wordes, I answered: If
I thought it wolde do good, I wolde take
the peyne with all my verye harte, and hit
were moche greatter, and yet (sayde I) I
feare me, it be as moche or more than I am
able to accomplysshe. For I doubt whether
I may com to the clere vnderstandyng therof
or not: It is in ernest a matter straunge
inough to translate, not onely for the names
of herbes and other dyuers thynges therin
conteyned, but also for the phrase and eloquente
style. But what so euer aunswere I
made hym, I finally determyned to translate
the sayde boke, as I haue done in dede,
not so well I am sure, so playnly and so exquisitely
as many other coude, if they wold
vouchesafe to take the peyn: But yet I trust
I haue not moche erred from the true meanynge
of the auctour. And I saye not the

contrarye, But somme wordes haue I lefte
barely englysshed, and somme not at al, but
they be suche, as are by those names in latine
vsually knowen to phisitions, withoute
whose counsayl (specially those that be approued
and knowen to be syngularly lerned
in physyke) I wold counsayll no man to be
to bolde either to practise or receyue any medycine.
            
               ¶At Marten Abbey. an. dmi. 1533.
               
            
         
         
            ¶The table of this boke.
            
               
                  THe beginnyng of the frenche
pockes, and why it hath dyuers
names. cap. j.
               fo. 1.
               The causes of this disease.
Cap. ii.
               fo. 3.
               Into what diseses the frēch
pockes are tourned. cap. iii.
               fo. 4.
               Howe men at the begynnynge resisted the
frenche pockes. cap. iiii.
               fo. 6.
               what helpe the author of this boke vsed in
this syckenes. cap. v.
               fo. 8.
               The discription of the wod Guaiacum, and
of the fyndynge & name therof. ca. vi.
               fo. 10.
               Of the orderynge of Guaiacum in medycine.

cap. vii.
               fo. 12
                     •
                  
               
               The maner of curynge with this wodde
Guaiacum. cap. viii.
               fo. 15.
               Howe a man muste lyue and dyete hym selfe
in this cure. cap. ix.
               fo. 19.
               That Guaiacum woll not be myngled with
any other thynge. cap. x.
               fo. 22.
               What place the phisitions haue in this cure.
cap. xi.
               fo. 24.
               Whether concernynge this cure there ought
any regard to be taken of the age of the sex,
or qualitie of the bodyes. cap. xii.
               fo. 27.
               whether the vse of this wodde be lyke in all
placis. cap. xiii.
               fo. 29.
               What tyme is best to be cured with this medicine.
Cap. xiiii.
               fo. 31.
               That we must vtterly forbeare wyme and
women in this cure. cap. xv.
               fo. 35
               That salte muste be eschewed in this cure.
Capit. xvi.
               fo. 37.
               Of sklender sedynge and hunger, whiche
are necessary in this cure. cap. xvii.
               fo. 39
               Howe hunger may easely be suffered. Capit.
xviii.
               fo. 42.
               The preyse of Temperaunce in the despite
of ryotte. cap. xix.
               fo. 43.
               Whether a man may be restored to his helth
by reason of the dyete onely, that is appointed

in this disease. cap. xx.
               fo. 55.
               Howe a man ought to order his bely in this
cure. cap. xxi.
               fo. 57.
               Howe in this cure one maye be moued to
sweate. cap. xxii.
               fo. 58.
               Howe this medicine shall helpe this disease,
and whether it healeth men sodeynly orels
by leysure. Cap. xxiii.
               fo. 59.
               What power the wodde Guaiacum is of,
and what diseases hit helpethe besyde the
pockes. cap. xxiiii.
               fo. 62.
               What kynde of dyseases this medycine of
Guaiacum hath taken frome the autour of
this boke. cap. xxv.
               fo. 65.
               As touchynge the order of lyuynge after
this cure is paste, what he that is healed
ought to eschewe and obserue, is shortelye
descriued. cap. xxvi.
               fo. 68.
            
            ¶Thus endeth the table.
         
      
      
         
            
            
            ¶The begynnynge of the frenche
pockes, and why it hath dyners
names. Ca. i.
            IT hathe pleased god, that
in our tyme sycknesses shuld
aryse, whiche were to our
forefathers (as it maye be
wel coniectured) vnknowen.
In the yere of Christ. 1493.
or there about, this foule and most greuous
disease began to spredde among the people,
not in Fraunce, but fyrste at Naples in the
frēchemens hoste, wherof it toke his name
(which kept warre vnder the frenche kynge
Charles) before hit appered in any other
place. By whiche occasion the frenche men
puttynge from them this abhorred name,
calle it not the frenche pockes, but the euyll
of Naples, reckenynge it to theyr rebuke,
if this pestilent disease shulde be named the
frenche pockes. Not withstandynge the cō
               sente
of all nations hathe obteyned, and we
also in this boke wylle calle it the frenche
pockes, not for any enuye that we beare to
so noble and gentyll a nation, but bycause
we fere, that all men shuld not vnderstand,
if we gaue it any other name.
            
               
¶At the fyrste rysynge therof some men
supersticiously named it meuyn syckenes, of
the name (I know not) of what saynt. some
accompted it to come of Iob scabbe, whom
this syckenes (I thynke) hath broughte in
to the numbre of sayntes. Some iuged it to
be the infirmitie, wherwith the monke Euager
was greued, throughe immoderate
colde and ea
                  •
               ynge of rawe meates, whan
he was in deserte. And therfore he also was
sought from ferre countreyes, with great
resorte of men, offeryng gyftes habundantly
at his chappelle, whiche is in Vestrike.
And bycause the name of sayncte. Euager
was not knowen amonge the common people
of Almayne, they called it Fyacres sickenes
for Euagers: Not enquerynge what
the lyues of these were, but onely beleued
that these coulde helpe them. Suche opinions
hadde the people, and thus they dydde
ryse: There was ymages offered and hanged
before saynt Roche, and his olde sores
were newe remembred, whiche thynge if it
were done of a godly mynde, I doo not reproue,
but if it were done, that those might
get auātage that were the inuēters therof.
I meruayle that disceyte shulde haue place
in so great discomforte and sorow, and in so

myserable distruction of mankynde.
            ¶But the diuines did interpretate this to
be the wrathe of god, and to be his punysshement
for our euylle lyuynge. And so dyd
openly preache, as thoughe they, admytted
into that hye counsaylle of god, had there
lerned, that men neuer lyued worse, or as
who sayth in that golden worlde of Augustus
and Tiberius, whan Christe was here
on erthe, moste myscheuous diseases dydde
not begynne: or as who sayth, that nature
hath no power to brynge in newe diseases,
whiche in all other thynges maketh greatte
chaunges: or as who saythe, that within
shorte tyme in our dayes (bycause menne be
nowe of good lyuyng) the remedy of Guaiacum
is founde for this sickenes. So well
these thynges do agree, whiche these mens
myndes, that declare god (as they thynke)
do preache vnto vs. Than began the phisitions
busynesse, whiche serched not what
shuld take away this disease, but what was
the cause therof, for they myght not abyde
the syght of it, moche more they abstayned
from touchynge. For whan it fyrste began,
it was of suche fylthynes, that a man wold
scarsely thynke this sickenesse, that nowe
reygneth, to be of that kynde. They were

vyles, sharpe, and standynge out, hauynge
the 
                  〈◊〉
                and quantite of acornes, from
whiche came so soule humours, and so gre
                  •
               
               
                  〈◊〉
               , thei who so euer ones smelled it,

                  •
               h
                  •
               ught hym selfe to 
                  〈◊〉
                e
                  ••
               ect. The colour
of 
                  〈…〉
                was derke grene, and the

                  ••
               ght therof was more greuous vnto the

                  〈◊◊〉
                the peyne it selfe: and yet their

                  〈◊〉
                were as thoughe they hadde lyen in

                  〈◊◊〉
               .
            ¶This disease, not longe after his begyn
               
                  ••••
               
               
                  〈◊〉
                into Garm
                  •
               nia, where it hath
wondred more largely than in any other
place
                  •
                whiche thynge I do ascribe vnto our
intemperaunce.
            ¶Ther whiche than toke counsayle of the

                  〈◊〉
               , prophecied, that euyll not to endure
a
                  •
               o
                  •
               e .vii. yeres, wherin they were disceyued,
if they ment of this disease and all the
i
                  •
               el that cometh therof. But if they mēt it of
the forsaid most fylthye kynde, whiche cometh
of hym selfe, and not onely of infectiō
but through the corruption of the ayre, or
the ordinaunce of god: than were they not
dysceyued. For it taryed not longe aboue
the .vii. yere. But the infyrmytie, that came
after, whiche remayneth yet, is nothynge
so fylthy. For the sores at sometymes ben

lytell, not so hye nor so hard. And somtyme
there is a certayne brode crepynge scabbe,
for his venym entreth deper, and bryngeth
forth more diseases.
            ¶It is thoughte this kynde nowe adaye
                  •
               
to growe in no person, but throughe infection
by defylynge of hym selfe, which thing
especially happeneth by co
                  •
               ulation. For if
appereth manifestly, that yonge chyldren,
olde men, and other, whiche are not gyuen
to the bodily luste, ben very seldome enfected
therwith. And the more that man is gyuen
to wantonnesse, the sooner he is infected.
And as they lyue, that ben taken therwith,
so other it shortely leauethe them, or
longe holdeth them, or vtterly consumeth
them. For it is very easy vnto the Italyans
and Spanyardes, and so such as lyue soberly,
but through our surfetynge and intemperate
lyuyng, it dothe longe contyn
                  •
               e with
vs, and greuousely doth vexe and chafe vs.
         
         
            ¶The causes of this disease. Cap. ii.
            THe phisitions haue not yet certeynly
diffined the secrete causes of this disease,
although they haue long & peinfully
with greatte variete serched therfore,

But in this thynge all do agre, which is very
euydent, that throughe some vnholsome
blastes of the aire, which were at that time,
the lakes, fountaynes, flodes, and also the
sees were corrupted, and therof the erthe
to receyue poyson, The pastures to be enfected,
venemus vapours to come downe from
the ayre, which lyuing creatures (in drawynge
the brethe) receyued. For this disease
was founde in other bestes lyke as in men.
The astrologers fetch the cause of this infirmytie
from the sterres, sayenge, that it
procedethe of the coniunctions of Saturne
and Mars, whiche was not longe before,
and of .ii. eclipses of the sonne: and they do
affirme, that by these sygnes they myghte
perceyue many coleryke, and fleumatike infirmities
to folowe, whiche shuld long continue,
and slowly departe, as Elyphancia,
lepre, tetters, and all yll kynde of scabbes
and boiles, and what so euer euylles deformethe
and vnfasshionethe the body, as the
gout, palsey, sciatica, ioynt ache, and other
lyke dangers. And that these thinges shuld
chaunce rather in the north parte by reason
of this sy
                  •
               ne Aquarius, wherin fel the first
ecclypse: And in the west part by reason of
this sygne Piscis, in the whiche fell the last
eclyps. But the phisitions affirme this sicknes

to come of yl and habundant humours
                  •
               
as of coler blacke advst yelowe, and fleume
salt or advst, and that of one of these alone,
or of certayne, or els of al these myngled,
whose sharpnes strekinge to the outwarde
partes of the body, burneth and dryeth the
skyn, and fylleth it ful of scabbes, but that
which cometh of rawe heuy and grosse humours,
they saye is driuen into the ioyntes,
and causeth great peine in them, and to arise
knobbes and swellynges, & knottes to gether,
and the skyn to ryuell. And moreouer
the heed to ake, wherby the beautie of the
body is clene altered & gone. Some breuely
concludyng say, that this infirmitie cometh
of corrupt, burnt, and enfect blod. And all
these thinges were in doubtful disputatiō, ye
nature ther of not yet knowen, but now it is
knowē, they be also approued. for in myne
opynion this sicknes is no other thinge, but
a postumation & rotting of vnpure blod: the
which after it begynneth to drye, turnethe
into swellyng and hard knobbes, the which
thinge procedeth of the lyuer corrupte.
            ¶To knowe more of the nature or qualytyes
of this infyrmytie shulde be very tedious
and harde to iudge. For we se in our
tyme, what dyuers concertations, and opinyons
haue benne to boldely dysputed:

and what peyne the phisitions haue taken
therin, sens the begynnynge therof. The
phisitions of Garmanie, for the space of .ii,
yeres medled with suche disputation, and
yet whanne I was but a boye, they vndertoke
to heale me: but what profit cam therof,
the ende hath shewed, not withstandinge
they were bold to medle with strange dregges
and spices, and to myngle and mynister
many thynges, whiche they shulde not haue
mynystred. And I remembre, they forbode
me to eate peasen. For in some places there
growe certayne wormes in them with winges,
of the which hoggefleshe was thought
to be infected, bycause that beaste specially
was diseased eyther with this, or els with
an other not moche vnlyke vnto this.
         
         
            ¶Into what disease the frenche
pockes are tourned. Cap. iii.
            THe peynes of this dysease alredy
rehersed are in maner
no peines to ye grefes that folowe
therof: for this dysease
tournethe it selfe in to great
inconueniēce and peine: In so

moch that al maner of syckenes, hauyng or
causing any peyne in mās ioyntes, semeth to
be cōteyned therin. For fyrst there is sharpe
ache in the ioyntes, and yet nothynge appereth:
afterwardes the gatherynge to gether
of humours causethe the membres to swel,
but after that suche vyle matter is waxed
harde, than a man shall fele the vehemente
peynes therof. This is the fyrste commyng
therof. For it semeth to edifye and fortyfie
a castell, there to reste a longe season, and
thens to disperse and caste into euery parte
of the bodye all maner of ache and peynes.
And the longer the sayde swellynges tarye
fro rottynge and rypynge, the more peyns
shall the pacient suffer. And aboue all other
peynes of this infirmitie, this is the violentest,
and that troubleth man mooste. I my
selfe had suche a lyttell knobbe, and swellyng
aboue my left hele in the inner side, the
whiche after it was indurate and harde, by
the space of .vii. yere, coude by noo power
of oyntementes, or any maner lappynges
and cheryshynges be made softe, or caused
to putrifie and rotte, but contynued flylle
lyke a boone, vntylle that by the helpe of
Guaiacum it vanysshed away by littell and
lyttell. This thing as touchyng women resteth

in their secret places, hauynge in those
places litel prety sores ful of venemus poison,
being very dāgerous for those yt vnknowingly
medle with them. The which sicknes
gotē by such enfected womē, is so moch
the more vehement and greuous, how moch
they be inwardely poluted and corrupted.
By this the senowes (at somme tymes) do
slacke and waxe harde again, at somtyme
they shrinke, and some time the sicknes turneth
it self into the gout, or into the palsey,
or into apoplexi, & infecteth many one with
lepre. For it is thought, that these infirmities
be very neighbours one to a other. And
that for many reasons, whiche are cōmen
to bothe euylles. They that be taken with
pockes, often tim
                  •
               s becom lepres, and oftē
times through the sharpnes of theyr peynes
they shake and queuer as men in a feuer.
            ¶After all this there buddeth out and appere
smalle holes and sores, whiche tourne
them self into cankers and phistuls, or continual
sores: and the more they putrifie, the
more they diminishe the bone. And whā the
bones be putrified and corrupt, the pacient
throughe long continuance of sicknes, waxeth
leane, for the fleshe consumeth awaye,
and there remayneth but onely the skyn to

couer the bones withall: and through this
many a one chāseth to be thisiques, the whiche
inwardly be full of corruption. Beside
all this, out of this infirmitie flowethe an
other, whiche some men do calle cacesia, the
whiche fylleth a mans fleshe & also his skyn
full of water: Somme haue sores in theyr
bladder, and often tymes many mens lyuer
& stomake is vtterly consumed by this
infirmitie. And in this thinge theyr opinion
is fals, that saye that the gatheryng to gether
of humours and swellynges wrinkels
and knottes come not of the nature of this
infirmite, but that it chanceth onely to those
that haue benne rubbed and anoynted with
ointmētes made with quick siluer. I am sure
the moste parte of the phisitions of Almain
be of this opinion, but yet they haue ben disceyued
in this sicknes, as they be in many other.
For I knowe it for a suretie, there be
some, that haue hadde these infirmities and
sycknesses, which were neuer noynted with
quicke syluer, as I haue had experience in
my father Vlriche de Hoten.
         
         
            ¶Howe men at the begynnynge resysted
this insirmitie the frenche pockes.
Cap. iiii.
            
               
VVhan the phisitions were
thus amased, the surgions
came forwarde in the same
errour, and putte to theyr
handes: and fyrste they beganne
to bourne the sores
with hote yrons. But for
as moche as it was an infinite labour, to
touche them all, they wente aboute to aduoyde
them by oyntementes, but dyuerse
menne vsed dyuers oyntementes, and all in
vayne, except he added quicke siluer therto.
they bete for this vse the pouders of mirre,
of mastique, of ceruse, of bayberyes, of alam,
bolly armenie, cinaber, of veermelon,
of corall, of burned salte, of rustye brasse,
of leddrosses, of rust of yron, of Rosen, of
Turpentyne, and of al maner of best oyles,
oyle of bey, oile of pure roses and terebinthium,
oyle of gyneper, of great effect, oyle
of spyke, swynes grece, fatte of oxe feete,
and butter made specially in may, talowe
of gootes and hartes, virgins honye, pouder
of rede wormes dryed in to dust, or consumed
with oyle and beaten, camfere, euforbium,
and castory: and with .ii. or .iii. of these
foresaid thniges myngled to gether they auoynted
the sicke mans ioyntes, his armes,

his thyes, his backe bone, his necke bone,
with other places of his body. Somme anoynted
them ones a day, some twyes, som
thryes, some foure tymes. The pacyente
was shutte in a stufe, kept with contynuall
and feruente hete, some .xx. and some .xxx.
hole dayes: And some were layd in a bedde
within the stewe, and anoynted, and couered
with manye clothes, and were compelled
to sweate. Parte of them at the seconde anoyntynge
beganne to saynt meruaylously.
But yet the oyntment was of such strength
& effect, that what so euer disease was in the
hyer part of the body, it drewe into the stomake,
and from thens vp into the brayne, &
thens the disease auoyded both by the nose
and the mouthe, that dyd put the pacient to
such peyne, that except they toke good hede,
theyr teth fell out, all theyr throtes, theyr
longes, theyr roffes of the mouthes, were
full of sores, theyr iawes dyd swell, their
teethe were leused, and contynually there
auoyded the moste stynkyng skome and mater,
that coude be, and what so euer it rāne
vpon, by and by it was polluted and infected,
wherby theyr lyppes so touched, gathered
sores, and within forthe theyr chekes
were greuously peined. Al the place, where

they were, dyd stink. Which maner of curing
was so peinful, that many had leuer dy thā
so to be esed. How be it scantly the hūdreth
persō was eased, but shortly after fel down
again: so that his ese dured very few days.
wherby men may esteme, what I suffered in
this dysease, that proued this maner of curing
a .xi. tymes, with great ieopardy and
peryll, wrastling with this euyll .ix. yeres.
And yet in the mene time taking what so euer
thing was thought to withstand and resiste
it. For we vsed bathes & herbes lapped
about them, and drinkes and coresies. And
for this we had arsnicke, inke, calcantum,
verdegres, or aqua fortis, which wrought
in vs so bytter pein, that they might be iudged
very desirous of life, that had not leuer
dy thā so to prolong theyr lyfe. but tho curings
were most bytter & peineful, whiche
were made with ointmentes. And was also
so moch the more dāgerous bicause the ministers
of it knewe not the operation therof.
For the surgions only dyd not vse it, but
euery bolde felowe went about playing the
phisition, gyuynge to all maner of men one
ointment, eyther as he had sene it ministred
to other, or as he had suffered it hym selfe.
And so they heled all men with one medycine,

as the prouerbe saythe, One shoo for
both fete. If ought happened amys to the
sike, for lack of good counsel, they wyst not
what to do or say. And these men tormēters
were suffred to practise on al persons what
they wold while the phisitiō
               
                  •
                were done as
in an vniuersall errour and ignorance. And
so with out order or rule, with tormente of
heate and sweat plētie, al were cured after
one facion, without regard of tyme, habyt,
or complection. Nother these ignorante anoynters
had not so moch knowledge, as
with laxes to take away the mater, whiche
caused the euyl, or to diete them, or appoint
any diuersite of meate, but at lēgth the matter
must come to this poynt, that they shuld
lose theyr tethe, for they were losed, theyr
mouth was all in a sore, and through coldnes
of the stomake and fylthy stenche, they
lost appetite. And all thoughe their thyrste
was intollerable, yet founde they no kynde
of drinke to helpe the stomake: Many were
so light in their brayne, that they coude not
stand: & some were brought into a madnes:
and not onely theyr handes trēdled & shoke
therwith, but also their fete and all the body:
som mumbled in theyr spekyng as longe
as they lyued, and cowde haue no remedy.

And many I haue sene die in the myddel of
their curynge. And one I knowe dyd so his
cure, that in one daye he kylled, iii. hushand
menne, throughe immoderate heate whiche
they suffred paciently, shutte within an hote
stewe, trustynge that they shulde the sooner
obteygne theyr helthe, tyll throughe vehemente

                  •
               eate theyr hartes fayled them, and
perceyued not them selfe to die, and so were
wretchedly strangled. Other I sawe dye,
whan theyr throtes were swollen in the intrie,
that first the fylthy mater, where they
shulde haue auoyded in spyityng, coud fynd
no way out, and at length theyr breth was
lyke wise stopped: and an other sort, whan
they coude not pysse: very fewe there were,
that gat theyr helth, & they passed through
these ieopardies, these bitter peines, & euils.
         
         
            ¶what helpe I vsed in this
sickenes. cap. v.
            AS often as I was anoynted,
to kepe these euylles
from my mouthe, that customably
came, I vsed only
alam, whiche I kepte in my
mouthe, rollynge it frome

one syde to an other, vntyll it melted. And
whan I went aboute to wrappe vp my sores,
and comfort my membres, I vsed these
herbes, absinthio, camomilla, hyssoppe, pulegio,
arthemisia, sage, and other such boyled
in wyne and water.
            ¶And ones for my sores I made an oyntment
by the counsel of Eytelvolfe, of alam,
verdigr
                  •
               se, purist hony, and vinegre by equall
portions.
            ¶And afterwarde I lerned 
                  •
               f a souldiour
in Italy an other oyntmente, made of lyme
and water, after this maner. I put wel water
or ryuer water into a newe potte, neuer
seasoned before with any lycour, and sod
it therin: and whan it boyled feruently, I
powred it vppon vnsleyt lyme (that is it,
that no water hath touched) in a bason or a
clene vessell of wodde, before not occupied
with any lycour. And whan the lyme was
dyssolued, and after a lyttel reste laye in the
botom: I toke awaye the skome that swom
aboue, and mouynge not the lyme, powred
out the clereste water, and kepte that for
my pourpose, whan I wolde occupie it: I
toke a sponge or a lynnen clothe, and depped
hit in the water, somme tyme rolled,
as I moughte, and often tymes warmed

and moysted my sores therwith, washynge
and wypynge awaye all the fylthynesse.
Thanne I toke a peece of cloth so moysted,
and lapte it about my sores. And with this
water my peynes were eased, and the swellynge
swaged, the soores were clensed, and
the heate and enflamations dryuen awaye,
whiche thynge is to be meruaylled at, seynge
the nature of lyme other wyse is to
kendle. I founde nothynge lyke this: And
me thoughte I was well holpen therwith,
and had auoyded the distruction, that was
at hande. In so cruel assautes of this disease
I vsed also cassia, if I wolde be laxatyue,
and dyd often tymes sweat, & let go bloode
drawen oute with gourdes. And whanne I
was in Italy monysshed, that to eate in the
mornynge the quantite of a walnutte of rasins
terebinthia, shuld be of great efficacitie
to amende the fa
                  •
               tes of the bloode, what
maner of thynge it is I knowe not, and to
make the bely lanke, and helpe the stomak,
whiche bothe thynges I founde trewe, I
vsed the same. They sayde also, that it dyd
helpe no lyttell thynge the synowes, and
strengthed the ioyntes and membres. And
by this meanes and abstinence of meate and
drynke, and good dyete, I auoyded many

thynges, whiche moughte haue vtterly dystroyed
me in so longe & iniurious seson, for
the mooste parte wandrynge abrode in the
world, and through pouertie dryuen to moche
aduersite, neuer at rest and quietnes, but
alwayes veyed and troubled. And haue so
preserued my selfe, that all thoughe my
legges were eaten with so many depe and
greuous soores, yet was there not one synewe
hurte, nor one bone perysshed. And
if at any tyme the disease toke my face, no
euylle happened in my mouthe and tongue,
so that the inwarde partee were preserued.
For I voyded awaye those thynges, that
myghte hurte my stomake, and with a rare
helpe defended my lyghtes and lounges:
and by these helpes I moughte suffer and
dryue forthe this dysease, but clerely putte
hit awaye I conde not: whiche thynge was
the easynge of peyne, and not the cuttynge
away of the cause of peyne, the differrynge
of euyll, and not the takynge away therof.
            A better remedy came of Guaiacus, ye
of that onely came helthe,
whiche I do intend
nowe to discribe
         
         
            
            ¶The discription of Guaiacum, and the
fyndynge therof and name.
Cap. vi.
            IF we ought to giue thankes
vpwarde vnto god, bothe
for good and euylle: howe
moche are we bounde for
the gyfte of Guaiacum: ye
howe moche doth the gladnes
and ioye of his benygnite towarde vs,
passe the sorowe and pein of that infirmitie?
The vse of this wod was brought to vs out
of an ylonde namyd Spagnola, this ilonde
is in the west nigh to the contrey of Amerik,
set in that place where the length of Amerike,
stretchynge into the northe, doth ende:
and was founde of late dayes amonge the
newe landes, whiche were vnknowen by the
olde tyme. All the inhabytauntes of that
ylonde somtyme be diseased with the french
pockes, lykewyse as we be with the mesels,
and small pockes. Nor they haue no other
remedy for it but this.
            ¶A certayne noble man of Spayne, being
tresaurour in that prouince, was grenously
troubled with that infyrmitie: And after
the people of that lande hadde taught hym

that medycine, he broughte the maner and
vse therof into Spayn, shewyng of what power
and vertue it was in those partes. The
phisitions wold not alowe it, perceyuynge
that theyr profite wolde decaye therby, not
withstanding at length they toke in hand to
cure with the same wod, but with suche arrogancie,
attributyng so moch to theyr preceptes
and order, that except they were obserued,
they affirmed this woode shulde be
spent in vayn. Which thing I meruayle they
coude perswade to any man, and make hym
beleue it, seinge it is playnly knowen, that
in that ylande were neuer phisitions. And
yet hath this wood Guaiacum always ben
there vsed. But in this cure what besines is
mete for the phisition, I wyll here after declare.
Now I wyl speke of the thyng intended.
They haue gyuen it this name Guaiacum.
For so the Spaniardes wryte it with
latyne letters, folowynge theyr owne maner
of founde, whiche worde the people of
that ylande pronounce with open mouthe
Huiacum.
            ¶And Paulus Ritius shewed me at the cytie
of August, that he harde saye of a Spanyarde,
whiche had ben in that yland, that
the fyrste syllable Gua, of this name, was

not pronounced of the Spagnolenses with
G, but that his owne tonge dydde require
it so to be wryten. And they of that Ilande
founde it with, V, puffed out, as though it
were Huiacum, a worde of .iii. syllables
with theym, and not Guaiacum. We maye
gyue vnto it some excellent name, callynge
it lignum vite, as Philo the phisition called
his dregges the handes of god: and this
daye the phisitions with grea
                  •
               te boste calle
their cōfections manus Christi, apostolicū,
gratia dei, Antido
                  •
               um, Paulium, and many
other such superstitious names. They say it
groweth lyke an ashe with vs in height, & is
sounde, bryngyng forth a nutte moche lyke
a chesse nutte, his tymbre is oyle and fatte,
in colour lyke boxe, but somwhat blackishe.
And they iudge that the best, that hath most
blacke: but that whiche is lyke to boxe,
differeth from that, whiche is blacke. For
this is within, and thother without: or to
speke more playnely, the blacke is as hit
were the harte and marowe. The wodde is
meruaylous heuy, for the leest pece of hit,
caste into the water, synketh streyght to the
botom. There is no wodde so harde, as it.
For it is so harde, that it wyl not cleue: nother
hyther to haue we sene any, that was

chyned. And they that sell it saye, it wyl in
no wise yane or chap. Whan it bourneth and
flameth, it maketh a swete odour: and there
foloweth fro it, whan it burneth, a gomme,
which we yet knowe not, for what purpose
it serueth: This gomme is somwat blacke,
& shortly after it is fallen away, it is verye
hard. The barke is not so thyck, but is meruaylous
hard. Whiche tokens well marked,
I thynke he that shal counterfete this wod,
can not deceyue the byer. For be it, a manne
may be deceyued in the colour, howe is hit
possible all these thinges to be in one, a fatnes,
smellynge, somewhat lyke rosen, suche
weyght as no wodde hath beside? Than the
gōme that cōmeth from it, whan it flameth?
suche hardnes that may scantly be cut? And
the lest pece cast into the water wil not swim
aboue? And the tast ones knowen wyll neuer
suffre a man to erre, whiche as it is to
al men vnplesant, so it is to me ye very plesant.
They say it contynueth not after it be
sodden, but paullethe, in the sommer after
iii. dayes, and in the wynter somewhat later.
And therfore we muste chose the fattest
and weightiest therof. For that whiche
is olde, is lyght and leane. Vpon this description
lette the phisitions, if hit please

them, drawe out the causes of suche efficacitie
by theyr longe disputation, as for me I
more rcioyce, that it is, than I serche what
maner of thynge it is. Howe be it I graunt
theym worthy of moche thanke, that shall
first shew vnto vs the nature therof through
out knowen: But nowe there be some, that
wey and esteme the strengthe and vertue of
this tre by these knowen markes, as though
they had suffred it in all poyntes. whiche
thynge is done, as me semeth, very hastyly
and tymely, thynkynge that the cause and
reason of suche efficacie and power oughte
to be serched for in this tre, after his nature
and vse is knowen, lyke wyse as it is done
generally in all other medicines. But nowe
of his vse, and how it ought to be prepared
vnto medicine.
         
         
            ¶Of the orderynge of Guaiacum
in medicine. cap. vii.
            IT is ordred after this maner.
The wod must fyrst be made
as small as maye be, whiche
thynge somme do, at a torne,
and thanne without any more
ado, they laye the shauynges

a water, and somme doo fyrste broyse or
stampe theym in a morter, soo moche that
they brynge them into pouder and duste, to
thyntente they maye the sooner be throughe
soked, and theyr strength sodden out. But
I wote not, whether that make any mater,
I haue sene some, that haue cut it fyrst with
a sawe, and thanne raped the peses with a
rape, and haue taken and putte theym into
water. Howe so euer it be, whether it be
tourned, raped, or beaten to duste, they
soke a day and a nyght one pounde weytght
in eyght of water, taken eyther of a welle
or of a ryuer, or as I dyd, of a pyt, than
they sethe it in a newe glased pot, and clene
wasshed, with a softe fyre of coles, by the
space of fyxe houres, and more, vntyll hit
come to the one halfe, with great hede takynge
and diligence, leeste hit runne ouer
through moche heate. For that which ouer
runneth loseth (they say) moch of his vertue,
and is of lesse power. And therfore it
may not be sodden in the flame, but it requireth
fewe cooles, and a potte not fylled almoste
by the .iii. parte. The skome that floweth
aboue, they taken away to anoynt the
sores with: for we knowe it to haue moche
power to drye. After it is thus sodden, they

streyne it, & powre it in to a glasse. And than
they put to the grondes eyght pound water
and sethe it agayne (as before) as it were
a seconde messhynge. This thynner they
gyue them to drinke with theyr meate: the
fyrste is dronke in the stede of a medicyne.
And this is all to gether, that delyuerethe
vs from so great and greuous disease, this
decoction is it. This is the chiefe poynt and
anker of our helth. And it hath so lytel nede
of any other thynge, that it wyll not abyde
any maner mixture, or mynglynge, as I
wyll shortly after declare. Somme wolde,
that lyght water and clere shuld be gotten
for this purpose. Some admytte all maner
swete water indifferently, bycause in sething
what so euer it be, it is purified. All wolde
that good diligence and hede shoulde be taken
in tyme of sething, that it rūne not ouer,
or boyle to fast, and they byd that the pot be
close stopped, that nothynge brethe out: but
whā the skom is perceiued to ryse, it must be
softely opened, and the skomme taken out,
and so couered agayne. They putte this decortion
(whan it is streyned) into a glasse,
onely bycause it shulde be sene, and bycause
a glasse of all vessels is purest and clennest.
The colour of this decoction is some what

lyke muddye water, whan it is some what
troubled. Wete lynnen in it, and it wexeth
grene of a meruaylous shewe. The relesse
therof at the fyrste tastynge, is some what
soure, but to hym that vsethe it, by lyttell
and lyttel it waxeth pleasant. The phisityons
were so bolde, as to put, to a pounde of
this .iiii. vnces of hony. Whiche thynge, as
I do not improue, so do I denye it to be necessarye.
And I wolde nothynge shoulde be
added vnto suche a thynge, beinge of suche
power, where as it nedeth not. For what
nedeth a man there to bestowe his labour,
where as no nede is: And to say the trouth,
the relesse of Guaiacum is not so grenous,
that it requireth to be tempred with hony.
Yea were it not for my maysters the phisytions
all men wolde be contented therwith.
Howe be it what nedeth me to name phisytions,
whan I speke onely but of tryflers?
For they that be counnynge and experte,
as is O moste noble prynce, Stromer thy
phisition (and throughe frendshyppe myne
also) and thy other phisition Coppus, suche
I saye, vnderstode and knewe, howe hit is
not conueniente, eyther to meddle it with
vnknowen thynges, and myngle theym,
or elles to adde oughte vnto those thynges,

whiche as yet are not perceyued to
lacke oughte. The whiche thynge as hit
chaunced vs to haue communycatyon of
this woode Guaiacum, at the citie of August,
whan many had auysed me to commyt
my selfe to this maner to cure: and I, for
newnes of the thynge wolde here none of
them: Stromer spekynge after this maner
of this wodde with great grauitie of wordes
sayde, that he feared leest the helthsom
and excellent power of Guaiacum shoulde
be diffamed through the superfluous additions
of vnlerned phisitions: whiche thyng
if hit were not done, nothynge coul
                  •
               e be
founde better agaynste this sycknes. And
with his wordes caused me streight without
any taryenge to caste my selfe hedlynge into
this experience of Guaiacum. And therfore
I wold this, now ones spokē shuld be generally
vnderstande, that as often as I shall
conplaine in this smal treatise of phisitions,
all men shulde thynke me to meane theym,
that haue no erudition nor experience, and
that boste them selfe amongest the common
people, of the title and name of their doctorshyp,
which they bought that knewe nother
greke nor latyn, and yet no science requireth
more erudicion or knowledge of the tonges

than phisike, the whiche beynge mooste ignorant,
do lyghtly abuse the symple people
of Germaynie, seynge there is no doubte
made of his lernyng, that is ones garnyshed
with the name of Mayster doctour. But
why haue I vsed in this thyng so many wordes?
Veryly to make my cause good with
the, excellent prince, and to defend my selfe
agaynst them, that by this occasion mought
accuse me, as one that spake wordes more
snappyshe than besemed me. Whiche thynge
whan somme of the lawyers and diuines
dyd of late, agaynste whose lernynge they
sayde I inueyed without good maner, whan
I dydde snybbe but onely the vnlerned, and
them whiche were soore gre
                  •
               ed and were
bytter ennemyes vnto suche good lernynge,
they caused many a good manne to thynke,
that I was agaynst them, and yet was that
thynge far from my maners, and also the
purpose, wherin I than was occupied. whiche
thynge seing I perceyue your excellentnes
to knowe wel ynough, I wyl leue these
runne agate anoynters, and theuyshe phisitions,
and also these vntaughte doctours,
and come vnto Guaiacum, the which in me
dicine must thus be vsed.
         
         
            
            ¶The maner of curynge.
Cap. viii.
            THe pacient must be kepte in a
close chambre, without ayre
or wynde, where fyre muste
be nourysshed contynually:
or els he must be in a stewe,
after the maner of Almain,
whiche shall not nede alwayes to be kepte
hotte, but must be close, and defended from
ayre, that noo ayre blowe vppon hym for
the tyme of this curation, he muste also beware
of colde. Therfore if he be cured in
wynter, or in Autumne, he must loke, that
he haue fyre in his chaumber, erely in the
mornynge specyally before daye: for than
is the colde fernente, he must cause the cleftes
of the wyndowes, if any be, to be stopped
with playster, or other lyke matter, and
vpon the chaumbre doore must he hang carpettes,
or other lyke thynges, within and
without, that no colde or ayre entre into the
chaumbre, or come out. whan he is thus ordered,
his meate must be dimynisshed. First
the fourthe parte of that he was wonte to
take, and than the thyrde parte, and shortly
after the one halfe, that he maye lerne to

beare hunger: and his wyne muste be well
watered: thanne muste he take a purgation,
other with regarde that hit be suche a one
as shall be thought sufficient to cutte away
the cause, or take awaye the matter, that
norisheth the disease, other such a one withoute
any regarde at all, as maye emptye
the hoole bealye. For that thynge, as I
perceyue, onely is requyred, whiche thynge
done, thanne maye ye ther vppon begynne
this worke after this maner. The decoction
whiche was fyrst sodden, and is strongest,
must be ministred vnto hym twise adaymy
                  •
               ke
warme, a gobblet or cyat ones in the
mornyng at .v. of the clocke, or there about,
and again at nyght, at .vii. of the clocke, we
call a ciates, a cuppe that wyl receyue half
a pound, wherof we may gather, seing .viii.
pounde of water is required to the sethynge
of one pounde of wodde, and the one halfe
therof muste be consumed in the sethynge,
that so there muste .iiii. pound remayne, and
muste drynke therof twyse a daye, that the
decoction of one pounde of Guaiacum is
suffyciente for the foure dayes. For hit is
nowe a cōmen maner with phisitiōs, to measure
theyr lycoures by weyghte, and they
haue cleane caste vppe the names of measures.

It must be dronke at one draught with
out any breth takynge.
            ¶After he hath dronke, let hym rest more
than .iiii. houres, and let hym the fyrste .ii.
be couered, that by the helpe of heate this
medicine maye be dygested abrode into the
membres, and the pacient maye sweate out
that that noyeth. whiche thyng to do howe
profitable it is, I wyll declare whan place
cometh. And it shall not hurte, if he be close
couered one hole houre before he drynke,
that he maye be hotte.
            ¶Some wyll not in any wyse he shuld rise
from his bedde in fiue houres after he hath
taken his ciates of drynke.
            ¶He must take his meate in the myddaye,
and not before, and than as lyttell as maye
be, for this medicine aboue all thynges requireth
an emptye bealy. And therfore he
muste eate, not to fyll his emptynes, but to
beare vppe the lyfe, not to gether strength,
but to kepe hym selfe frō feinting. Nother is
there any ieoperdy to be feared. For Guaiacum
hath great strength in it selfe both to
refresshe, and also to comforte, not suche
as be full, but onely those that are empty.
Ye they saye, that none faylleth, eate he neuer
so lyttell, so that he drynke faythfully

this decoction. In the meane tyme, he shall
not be anoynted in the out syde, excepte he
haue soores or swellynges. And for this
there is a whyte oyntment made of Cer
                  •
               ssa,
rose, oyle of rosis, with camphire, whiche
is layde on with a lynnen clothe. Some
anoynt them onely with the skom of Guaiacum,
or els drye it into pouder, and caste it
vppon theym. And besydes this skomme,
there is nothynge of this decoction occupied
in the out parte. Some be healed in shorte
tyme, and some in longe. The moste parte
in .xxx. dayes. They commaunde hym to
be pourged agayne the .xv. daye. For this
reason I thynke, bycause, as Alexander Aphrodicius
thynketh, they that hungre and
receyue not theyr meate as they were wont
to do, falle awaye, and gather a certayne
sharpe matter and eger, so that such matter
muste be auoyded, that the body of the 
                  •
               ike
may be emptie. This decoction shall not be
dronken that mornynge, whan he receiueth
his purgation: but at nyght lette hym take
it agayne, and after that day, he maye eaie
more largely. And agayne the .xxx. daye
more lyberally: how be it this more liberally,
and that more largely must be very lyttell,
as I shall shewe you in the next chapiter

But some, leste any impedime
                  •
               t shoulde
be to lette the operation of this medycine,
haue kepte one order of eatynge equallye
throughe out the .xxx. days: and truly the
stronglyer a man abideth to hunger, the better
and more quyckely he shall be healed.
            And althoughe the desyre of eatyng growe
dayly more and more, yet must he remembre
to absteyne, comfortyng hym selfe with
the suretie of helth, if he so do. For the bodye
beyng so wasted and emptied, not onely
with hungre, but also with sweat, ye beinge
longe tyme as a deed bodye throughe the
greuousnes of this euyll, shall hyghe faste
to the appetite of meate and drynke.
            ¶Whan this cure is comme to an ende, so
that the sicke is almoste redy to goo abrode.
he muste than take agayne some medicine to
purge hym with, but so that after that purgation,
he may drinke agayne as he dydde
before .iiii. or fixe dayes space, wherwith
they make vp the hole cure. Some wyl not
that he shulde go out of the chambre, where
he lyeth, before he be through hoole. Some
thynke .xxx. dayes suffyciente to kepe his
chambre: and that he may than go forthe.
But yet warely by lyttell and lyttelle, and
not streyght into the open ayre: but fyrste

he must walke in the same house, from chambre
to chaumbre, and than to some neyghbours
house, not ferre of: vntyl he be vsed
to suffer the ayre. For there maye be no sodeyne
chaunge, but muste vse hym selfe to
all thynges by lyttell and lyttell. And that
whiche remayneth of the syckenesse they say
wyll lyghtely be hoole, after he ones stere
abrode. And that to be trew I haue proued
in my selfe. For whan the .xxx. days were
passed, the soores of my legges were not
yet closed, and therfore I kepte .x. dayes
more. And whan those .x. days were gone,
yet was not I hoole. Wherfore, ferynge the
colde, bycause wynter than beganne. I intended
to kepe in other .x. dayes: but I was
compelled by the phisitions counsell to goo
abrode, and put it in auenture, which thing
happed not amysse. Howe be it the soores
that I had than, were not depe in the fleshe,
or swollen outworde: But onely in the hier
parte of the skynne, and lacked nothynge
els but 
                  •
               kynne to couer them with, whiche
they had scantly the .xl. daye after I wente
out. And I that tyme, in very sharpe wynter,
made my iourneye frome Vindele into
Frannce. The causes of this slowe healyng
I dyd coniect this to be. The phisition

suffred me to eate more mete (as I after perceyued)
than I shulde haue done, and also
he sodde my drynke thynner than he ought.
For I occupied not fully .v. pounde of this
wodde, where as other occupie .viii. and
some .x. wherin my phisition was deceyued.
For he, seinge my body weke of nature, and
moreouer exten
                  •
               ated & consumed with the
longe continuance of this grefe, thoughte
that a lyttell thynge was sufficient to driue
away the disease, and for that cause fedde
me the largelyer, fearynge soore leeste my
strength shulde fayle me, which was double
errour. For so moche as he oughte not to
haue loked what my body was thanne, but
what maner body it was wonte to be, and
agayn the nature of this medicine is suche,
that it wyl suffer none to faynt for lacke of
strengthe. Wherfore be they neuer so weke,
they ought not therfore to ministre the lesse,
but rather somwhat the more. For it dothe
nothyng sodenly, but werketh helth by litel
& litel. And therfore I alow best that decoction,
that was longeste at the fyre, and is
comme to a lyttell of moche wode: so that
I wolde counsaylle them, to the intente hit
mought be the stronger, to sethe hit often
tymes to the thyrde parte.
            
               
¶And if any wolde be lose belyed, that is
wonte to be bounde, they wyll hym to take
the ponder of Guaiacum soddē in the water,
and to drynke halfe an vnce therof in
the mornynge. And if that helpe not at the
fyrste, to go thervnto agayne. But this framed
not with me, noo nat whanne I toke
it agayne.
         
         
            ¶Howe a man must lyue and dyet hym
selfe in this cure. cap. ix.
            THere is yet moche a doo for
the orderynge of a man, as
thouchynge his dyet. Some
thynke beste to eate nothyng
but breade, whiche Galenꝰ
calleth the cleannest fedynge
with, a fewe rasyns, whiche breadde they
gyue to the weyght of .iiii. vnces, withoute
salte or other sauce. And they thynke best to
absteyne generally from all maner meate,
excepte it be a lyttell brothe made with a
chekyn: whiche they are contented he 
                  •
               uppe
or eate with his bread moysted therin ones
a day. For at nyght they gyue nothynge but
a fewe rasins, and an vnce of breadde.
            Other wyll that he haue halfe a chekyn, if

it be yet yonge and tender: but if it be any
thynge growen, they thynke a quarter y
               
                  •
               onghe,
which muste be sodden in clene water.
Whervnto they put nother salte, nother
other sauce, but somme put a lyttell suger
therto. Of breadde they gyue .iiii. vnces at
nyghte, as before, a fewe rasins, with an
vnce of breadde. But as longe as he is vnder
cure, he muste take hede, that he neuer
so moche as tast salte. They allowne white
breade, made of wheate, well bulted, whiche
made for the nones, they season with
suger. Whiche thynge is not euyll. There be
som that adde to his fedyng (not so moch in
the place of meate as of medicine) a lyttell
borage, other of the leaues onely, or (if
there be any) of the flowers, which he shal
eate sodden in water alone, or with his chekyn.
And this is the order of fedynge that
some do kepe continually, some thynke .xv.
dayes sufficient for this dyete, and thā they
wyll his hunger to be eased: and the .xx.
day they gyue hym meate twyse. But lette
them take hede, that folowe that. For truly
this medicine require the, that the pacient be
made as thynne with hunger as maye be
possible. Howe be hit somme chaunce to be
throughe healed within .xv. dayes, and yet

that not withstandynge they put to a fewe
dayes more therto. They drynk vnto theyr
meate of that seconde decoction not warmed
but colde. And this is all the fare, for
hyderto none durst passe this measure. Not
withstandynge I dispyse not the phisitions,
that dispute of the daungers, that maye
chaunce to drye and hotte bodyes, if they
be dryuen to this strayte dyete, bryngynge
for them Galen and also Hipocras, whiche
seme in many places to be agaynst this exquisite
dyete in fedynge. But of these that
vsed Guaiacum, I sawe as yet none in ieoperdye,
and I gather at this tyme preceptes
and monitions out of experiēce, and not
doctrine out of bokes. And also I my selfe
am of drye and hotte complexion, and yet
this hūger brought me nother into a p
                  •••
               ike
nor etyke, whiche thyng they seme to feare.
            ¶For as moche as it is thought wysedome
to pronyde for all thynges, I wyll that if
any man feare hym selfe, that he gette phisitions
to kepe hym, and that this is suffyciently
spoken of this thynge. I wyll nowe
go forwarde with other thynges.
            ¶In the tyme of this cure, the pacyent
muste forbeare al busynes, and cutte away.

                  •
               ll sadde thoughtes, and rest from al care.

And therfore they commaunde reste and
quietnes from consultations, and also studyes:
so that the mynde may vtterly be free
from all motions & workinges, and gyue
him selfe holly to ydelnes & rest, losed from
al trouble and care, which thinge muste be
vnderstand of all maner of men, but mooste
specially of them, that be naturally melancoly:
They muste also beware of angre:
for that as Galene sayth, kendleth chefely
the coleryke mater. And more ouer we must
take hede, that nothynge happen in that
tyme, that may moue vs to heuynesse.
            Let the sicke person here syngers and mynstrelles,
and gyue hym selfe to sportes, pastymes,
and musyke, and some tyme delyte
hym selfe with mery talkynge. But to company
with woman, howe moche he muste
eschewe that. I wyl shewe hereafter. I toke
great pleasure in redynge & makynge mery
thynges. And the phisitions spake agaynste
hit, and not without a cause, seinge they beleued
it to be labour and busynes vnto me:
but I toke it not as my studye, but as a pastyme,
and for my recreation. But yet wold
I nat this to be to other for an example.
            ¶Nowe some begynne to waxe very hungry
after the syxte day: but I felt no grefe

before the .x. daye. And in this case this is
the onely comforte, not to se other eate, nor
to see meate, nor to smel the sauour therof.
Neuer the lesse whan any perceyuethe hym
selfe to faynt, and wexe feble for lacke of
meate, I wolde not that he shulde by and
by receyue meate or straunge confection, to
comforte and brynge agayne his strengthe,
but to refreshe his spirites with odours and
plesaunte smelles: for euen with the sauour
and smell of suche odours Galenus thynketh
the spirite and lyfe to be nouryshed and
comforted. Yet in this thynge as regarde
muste be had, what euery mans complexion
requireth, leste lyke thynges be ministred to
them, that be drye and hotte, and vnto them
that be moyste and colde, or thynges of one
qualitie be minystred vnto them all, that be
of bothe extremes.
            ¶As I do more alow through out the thinges,
that growe amonge vs, as famyliar
& nygh to our nature, so by the example of
Democritꝰ, who with the vapour of hote
breade made his spirite euen than departing
to tarye hole .iii. dayes, thynke I that we
shulde helpe theym that faynte other with
that breed, or els with a rosted oynion hold
to the mouthe? For I playnly knowe, that

in an oynyon was sometyme suche vertue
and power. Whiche thynge is also proued
to be done with the odour of wyne. For
therwith Philip the phisition dydde recouer
Alexander, as we may se in Quintus Curtius.
And by the traditions of the olde phisitions
we se his power and vertue in this
purpose preferred aboue al. But by al meanes
we muste nourysshe the spirite with the
swete sauours and smelles: for so moch as
that is the lyfe, and aboue all thynge the
odour of olde swete wyne is praysed in this
thynge. Next is the smelle of hony, specyally
rose hony, also of appuls, of the whiche
thynge Stromer neuer ceassethe to monysshe
me, affermynge that he knowethe,
howe stronge, and howe helpyng they be in
this thing. Of these som prefer orenges: other
prefer cotonia mala. Vyneger is also
praised, but specially vineger made with roses:
and mustarde is wel alowed. For these
thynges, saye they, do refreshe the wyttes,
and susteyne the strengthes. As for cynamom,
nutmegges, styrack, citrous, saffron,
a giloflower, muske, camphire, and
suche costly ware, I leue to deinte felowes,
But cumm
                  •
               , an
                  •
               sse, coryander, lauander,
amarake, roses, mynte, rue, rosemary,

violettes, sage, castorye, with other growynge
amonges
                  •
                vs, none of the phisitions
that haue any iudgement, improuethe, but
they affirme these to be good for this purpose.
And I oftentymes do vse such helpes
to the greatte comforte of my helthe. The
sycke man may also vse rubbynges, so that
they be softely done, by all the tyme of his
sayde lyinge: whiche as they are for other
thynges profitable, so I beleue they wolde
not hurte in this thynge. Lette his heed be
rubbed with a warme clothe, and combed
with an yuory combe.
         
         
            ¶That Guaiacus wyll not be myngled.
Cap. x.
            FVrthermore this medycine
wyll abyde nothynge to be
putte to hit. Where at the
phisitions be commenly astonyed:
whiche wolde we
shulde haue none other medicines
in price, but suche as receyue theyr
power frō the .iii. partes of the world, which
think that they shuld lose al theyr auctorite,
excepte they ioyned to gether for vs in their
poticarye compositions, Indie, Aethiope,

Arabie, and the Garamantes, that dwelle
in the extreme parte of the worlde. For
what wyll they allowe, that is not deere
and costly? And I beseche god, that theyr
counsell be neuer harde nor obeyed in the
vsynge of this wodde Guaiacum. And that
Stromer maye be in this thynge as a prophete,
and in my iudgement a trewe. For he
feareth, and that very wysely, leest they at
length wyll put theyr handes thervnto.
            Therfore lette al men beleue me, that haue
proued this medicine, that it is sufficient to
heale this disease: and that of it selfe without
any other thynge. But as I sayde, a purgation
in the begynnynge, and agayn a lyttell
the .xv. day, and than in the laste ende,
Whiche thynge I wold haue done with somone
thynge, not with any medicine made of
many thynges. For I verely beleue, that
the phisitions loke than to theyr owne profyte
and lucre, and not for the helth of men,
whan they saye, they must serche, what taketh
away the cause of this infyrmytie, as
thoughe this wodde dyd it not. And veryly
this is euident, there is no other cause to
vse suche purgations, but to clense the bely,
and agayne with abstinence and hunger to
drawe out and emptye the holle body. But

what saye ye therto: In that rude countrey
where this Guaiacum groweth, are no phisitions,
no straunge nor ferfetched wayes
nor rules of phisike. But perchaunce menne
vse there some herbe or rote to purge with,
and all do vse one thynge, not to take away
the grefe, but that whan the bely is emptied
Guaiacum may the better worke. wherfore
in this, my coumsel is, that ye tourment not
your belye with thynges costely prepared,
and speciallye to auoyde the compositions
made of many thynges.
            ¶In this mynde I stycke surely, that I
wolde suffre nothyng to be poured into me,
but onely cassia by it selfe, and yet they offered
me gladly many thynges, And I was
also wont before to poure in not onely Reubarbarum
but other thynges also more barbarous
than Reubarbarum, but my counsel
came to a very good ende. whiche counselle
if any wyll folowe, he hathe an exaumple,
commaundement he hath none. For we teache
not these thynges being our selfe taught
of other, but we monyshe you, that whiche
we haue proued, whiche thynge I wold all
shulde remembre, that I teache nothynge
here rasshely, but that whiche I haue lerned
by myne owne experience and proue, I

delyuer vnto other. And if I hadde lerned
ought els, it shulde not be kepte close: but
nowe seinge by diligent serche and studious
labour I haue founde oute the power and
vertue of Guaiacū, whiche if I do not well
perceyue, it is a faute. But if I haue lerned
it, as it is in dede: I do not greatly couet rewarde
ne la
                  •
               de, I wyl shew you al the hole
faythfully. For that hath this medicine deserued
of me, excepte I wolde be vnthankfull
for soo great benefites. And therfore
seynge many well lykynge men of nature
are corrupted through the diuersitie of medicines,
yea and some of them vtterly dystroyed,
my sentence is, that nothynge shall
be added to helpe this medicine, for this
wod of it selfe is sufficient to plucke vp this
dysease by the rootes. If any thyng be put
vnto if, specyally of these thynges, that are
inwardely receyued, this medicine takethe
no helpe therof, but rather is corrupted and
lette from his workynge. This thynge
muste be added thervnto, that they, which
drynke of this Guaiacum, of whatte soo
euer state they be, in this sycknes haue soo
lytel nede of bathes, that they be vtterly for
bede by them that be experte, to washe soo
moche as theyr heed, as longe as they shall

be in this cure, and are permytted very seldome
to washe theyr handes, but neuer with
colde water.
         
         
            ¶What place phisitions haue in this
cure. Cap. xi.
            BVt now I knowe, that
some suspectethe me to
be of this minde, that I
wold no phisition to be
vsed in this cure, which
thyng is far other wise.
For my mynde is, that
somme, that is wel lerned
and wyse, shoulde be gotten, whiche is
not bolde ne lyberall in pourynge in of potycarye
ware. His custody and also his order,
if he haue lerned the vse of the admynistratyon
of Guaiac
                  •
               m, I wolde the sycke
personne should vse. And these myscheuous
busy felowes, whiche are soo gladde to offer
to vs this straunge waare, and medycines,
if any be broughte frome the heedes of
Nilus, of whiche, the more they coste, the
more they make of thē, auāsyng them aboue
the mone, these I saye I wolde haue driuen
away, and in no wyse to se the sycke, no not

throughe a latis. I haue proued this thinge
euen so to be as Asclepiades iudged, which
thought all maner drenches vnfrendely to
the stomake. And Celsus also saythe, that
medicines for the moste parte hurte the stomake,
ye and moreouer that happened to
me, that the same authore shewed before
shulde happen, that medicines receyued into
the body, whan they had ben kept in the lower
partis, were driuen back again into the
heed, and caused great peyne, whiche thing
lette all remembre that wyll entre into this
cure, that they cōmyt not them selfe rasshly
to suche tourmenters, not onely bycause the
nature of this woode is not yet well knowen,
but also bycause it is theyr maner neuer
to knowledge ignorance, but always to
commaunde somewhat, to ministre and giue
some what, vnto whom a man shall at noo
tyme shewe his water, howe well and helthfull
soo euer he be, but they wyll make
theyr bylle to the potticaries, recipe, recipe,
take, take, sayinge, that outher they suspect
some sycknes to be begon, outher els that,
the which is nowe at hand, must be preuented
or it come, excepte thou swallowe this
(saye they) or drynke that, thou haste the
axes. O my scheuous men, if they maye be

called men, and worthye to be hated of all
the worlde. But what so euer they be, they
haue ben bolde to take vppon theym many
thynges of late about the administration of
Guaiacum, trustynge in them selfe, vnto
that worke, the sellers therof helpynge
them forwarde through some conuention &
bargayn made betwene them I beleue. For
whā they sawe, that by meanes of this rude
vile, and contemptible medicine there shulde
be hereafter no nede of theyr disceptations.
For I knowe some that wolde withstande
soo fauorable and good a thynge, and yet
durst not. And of the other syde, whan the
marchantes feared, leest they shoulde selle
but lytel, if the phisitions allowed it not, for
no man wolde lyghtly go vnto a medicyne,
that came from so strange a place, and was
ministred so farre from the commen maner
of medicines: than they agreed betwyxte
them, I beleue, that this shulde be spredde
amonges the commen people, that the phisitions
labour was necessarye in this cure:
So that they sellynge a remedye approued
of the phisitions, moughte gette as they
were wont, and the phisitions in the meane
tyme shuld lose nothyng of theyr stipendes,
seynge that they were called vnto this cure.
            
               
¶I knowe certayne phisitions of a better

                  •
               orte, that wente into Spayne in the emperours
name, and in the name of a bysshoppe
here, only to enquere & serch for this thyng.
And these, whan they were taught of them
that lerned and knewe the thynge in Spagnola,
tolde nothynge in maner other wyse
than our experience hath: but that they added
of theyr own braynes, what medicines,
vpon what dayes, with what obseruations
ought to be receyued, and by a mathematicall
dyete, howe they shulde behaue theym
selfe in eatynge and drynkyng, which thing
I beleue, they dydde of noo euylle mynde,
but after theyr maner and supersticiousnes,
vsed of seme good phisitions, whiche are
so desyrous to helpe the sycke, and are soo
tender towarde them, that sometyme they
do more than they shuld. Their good mindes
I do allowe, but yet I thynke it daungerous,
to agree vnto all men in all thynges.
But to retourne agayn to these yl mynded
phisitiōs. I thynke they be agreed with
the marchantes, that they may be admytted
into parte of the lucre and gaynes. For I
my selfe dyd se a certayne phisition, if we
vouchsafe to calle a rude and an vnlerned
asse by this name, who with many wordes

dyspraysed this wodde Guaiacum, as a
vayne thynge, and nothynge worthe: but
that the marchauntes fained it to do these
thynges. But shortely after this lewde dispreiser
was called vnto the cure of a certain
ryche man, and shortely after to an other:
And whan the man beganne to smelle the
golde, and sawe greatte gaynes to comme
throughe the multitude of suche sycke men,
he began fyrste to be more gentylle, and to
diminishe his cruelnes and malyce more and
more, and within a whyle preised this wod,
and greatly auanced it, and sayd: Nowe at
the last, I my selfe haue proued the meruaylous
power and vertue of this wodde. Nay
naye asse, but nowe thou haste founde thyne
aduantage therin.
            ¶And after this maner this medicine semeth
to come into theyr canons, lykewyse
as all other medicines haue done, whiche
thynge if it be done by the auctoritie of the
wyse, experte, and lerned phisitions, I improue
it not: Howe be it my mynde gyuethe
me, and I verely beleue, that they can not
do it as yet: And agayne I thynke hit not
very necessarye. For eyther in Spagnola,
where are no phisitions, somewhat is lackynge
vnto this medicine, or elles it oughte

here lykewyse to be ministred without such
supersticiousnes and formalities. May there
any man be so lyght of beleue, as to thynke
that the phisitions can handel this busynesse
more counnyngly, than they whiche knewe
it by experience in them selfe, consyderynge
howe that Guaiacum hath not continued so
longe with vs, that they might in that space
haue serched and lerned his nature. And to
speke in fewe wordes, men do yet meruayle
at the thynge, and is not as yet come vnto
perfyte knowlege. Therfore canne it not be
vnder theyr canons in this shorte tyme, or
any cause of his operation shewed.
            ¶Lette this therfore stycke fast in al mens
myndes, that they thynke this symple diete
sufficient to cure and heale them, which we
teache by experience, in our selfe. Let them
be seene and looked vppon, of the sober
and lerned phisitions: but lette them leaue
the dregges and spices of this other sorte.
Let them bede farewell for euer and a daye
to these that goo aboute to restore vs from
diseases with theyr disputations. These are
they, whiche, as I sayde, allowe nothynge
that is vile and of smalle price, and whiche
thynke that I telle fables, whan I say that
I haue driuen away the axes mo than eight

tymes by drynkynge of myn owne water,
by and by at the begynnynge: and with noo
other medicine. And that I haue seene men
in Saxonie, whiche haue quenched all maner
diseases with drynkynge hotte buttred
beere. And agayne they wyl not beleue me,
that there is a seruant of my faders, which
with .iii. certayne herbes sodden in wyne,
hath healed a mannes brayne panne broken
to peces: and many sore and euyll woundes
hath he heled with a few herbes of our own
growynge, sodden in wyne or water, and
that within .x. or .xii. dayes, without any
feare of feuer. But this they thynke a vyle
medicine, sayinge it is not done after theyr
canons. And the same thynge do they iudge
of Guaiacum, whose nature and power,
howe clerelye they vnderstande, and what
maner wordes they vse to haue of hit, we
may perceyue by the answere of a certayne
noble phisition, not nowe yonge, that he
shulde begynne to practise, but of extreme
age, that it is very lykely he fealethe A
                  •
               icen,
Mesuen, and other authors of phisike,
as well as his owne nayles. This phisition
whan I was wrytinge these thynges, and
takyng my iourney from Frankeford, wher
he was wrytyng of his recipe, was asked of

a certayne frende of myn, what he thought
of Guaiacum, I haue not sene it, sayde he,
but what so euer it be, the weyght, the colour,
the sauour, must be consydered in quā
               tite
and qualyte. Than sayd I, his weighte
is very heuy, and synketh in the water, how
lyttell so euer the cuttynge be: and hathe
the same colour almoste that is in boxe, and
it smelleth fayntely, somewhat of rosen:
doeste thou knowe nowe by this, what the
nature and power of Guaiacum is? Than
he thynkyng to face me downe with wordes,
chattered I wotte not whatte, out of
Arystotels predicamentes. Than sayde I,
It may be, good fader, seinge the disease is
newe, and this a newe medicine, that the
holle matter is yet vnknowen vnto you.
            Thou arte deceyued sayde he, it is no newe
disease, seinge Plini wryteth therof. Than
I, beynge desyrous to knowe, what he
knewe in Plini, that I knew not, asked him,
what name Plini gaue vnto this dysease?
Mentagran sayde he, quia vexar mentem,
that is to say, bycause hit vexith a mannes
mynde. Than sayde I, why and do not
other infirmities and sycknes than tourmēt
and vexe a mans mynde? or doth not frensyes,
madnes, the fallynge euyll, and other

ra
                  •
               ysshynges of the wyttes this thing more
than the frenche pockes? As he was interpretynge
I can not telle what: good olde
man, quod I, lerne agaynste an other tyme
to aunswere more wysely, and speciallye in
suche thinges as apertaigne to mans helth.
For if ye hadde redde Plinie, ye wolde not
saye Mentagram to come a mente, but a
mento. For in the chynne that disease fyrste
began, whiche thynge declareth it to be an
other syckenes than the frenche pockes.
            And who coude forbere to rebuke this mischeuous
madde asse heed? But let vs passe
ouer these rascall phisitions, of the whiche
we se a great parte ryche in wordes, but in
the knowlege of thynges verye poore, and
lette vs retourne to our purpose, wherof
this is the pythe, that phisitions shal be taken
in this cure, not as ministers of medycines
or healers, but as kepers. And these
to be, as I haue ofte sayde, chosen, wyse,
and well lerned, and mooste experte, and
suche as hadde leuer be wyse by them selfe,
than erre with the cōmon sorte. And suche
as if they coude heale a sycke man with eatynge
beanes, wolde not seke for any costly
and especially straunge medicines.
         
         
            
            Whether concernynge this cure there ought
any regard to be takyn of thage of
the sexe, or the qualitie of bodyes.
Cap. xii.
            VVhan they, whiche I tolde
you went into Spayne, to
know the vse of Guaiacū,
enquered, whether chyldren
and great aged persōs
moughte be hospen. with
this remedy. For seynge they were weake, it
was in deut, where they coud abyde this
                  •
                diete:
answer was made by them that had bē
in that ylonde, that they neuer sawe chyldren
by this remedy delyuered from syckenes:
But the menne of that ylonde shewed
them, that chyldren were wonte so to be cured,
and women lykewyse without any difference,
and olde men also very often.
            Whervpon I remebre the notable sayenge
of Hipocras, that olde men may well away
with fastynge, but men in stronge and stedfaste
age scantly, yonge men moche wors,
and chyldren worste of all, speciallye they
that are of a forwarde and quycke mynde.
Howe be it Galenus wyl not old men there
to be vnderstande men of the laste caste.
            
               
¶Furdermore it is wel knowen, that they
that are of a sanguine qualite of body, may
abyde hunger better and longer than the
colerike. For in the sanguine the humours
that nourysshe the bod
                  •
                are more abundant
and plenteous, the heate is temperate and
lesse burnynge: for it is myngled with moysture
to make hit slacker, but in these other,
all thynges are thynne and drye, and nedy
of humours. Nowe who doubteth, but they
that be fleumatike may beste abyde hunger,
seinge they haue more moysture than theym
nedeth. Whiche thynges marked and per
               
                  •
               eyued,
none that wyll take this matter in
hande can lacke counsaylle, in what age or
complexion so euer it be, but he shall knowe
howe to diminyshe the meate, and howe to
enlarge it, and agayne howe to brynge in
strayte fastynge, and howe to lose it. Nother
that onely, but also howe moche or
howe lyttell of Guaiacum oughte to be
spende. Howe be it in this thynge I thynke
ly
                  •
               tell regarde to be taken, bycause this decoction,
as I haue before tolde, is not suche
as healeth by violence, or hastely bryngeth
helthe, but suche as bryngethe forthe his
effecte slowly, and by lyttel and lyttel, and
in a maner can not be perceyued, so that I

thynke hit not to be feared, whether hit be
ministred to an olde manne, a chylde, or a
mayden, leest there be to moche gyuen, soo
that no man passe to farre the mesure, whiche
I haue appoynted. Therfore ye se, that
I commaunde no more to be gyuen to the
fatte, than the leane. And also Celsus 
                  •
               aith,
there is moche diuersite betwyxte a stronge
bodye and a fatte, and agayne betwyxte a
thynne bodye and a weake. For they that
be thynne haue moche blode, and they that
be fuller haue more fleshe. Whiche thynge
ofte tymes deceyueth the phisitions, as I
tolde you it happened in me, whyle they iuged
a sklender body to be weake, and a fat
body and great to be stronge and myghtye.
This one thynge I thynke beste to shewe
you of in the waye, that my father beyng
almost, lx. yere olde, was holpen with
this Guaiacum, obseruynge and
kepynge this diete straytely,
and yet suffred no great
grefe: and in the
meane tyme
counsaylled
with no phisition, noo he sawe not ones
a phisition, but onely vsed
my prescriptions.
         
         
            
            ¶Whether the vse of this wodde be lyke
in all places. Cap xiii.
            FVrthermore I wote it wel,
that men wyl aske me, whither
the vse and effecte of
Guaiacum be euery where
lyke. And also seynge it is a
gery straunge thynge, whether
it be as conuenyent for the Germayns
as the Spanyardes, and for those that liue
soberly, as for these that lyue otherwyse.
            For as it semeth no doubte in other medicines,
but that there ought a regarde to be taken,
of the nature of the place, soo lykewyse
ought there, as it semeth, about the admynystration
hereof. For as the season of the
yere muste be marked, soo lyke wyse muste
the plage of the skye be consydered, and
that for many causes, and specially bycause
we may abyde hunger otherwise in a thycke
ayre, than in a thynne. But the resydue of
these thynges, I leaue to the phisitions, to
be more diligently discussed of them. That
that I haue lerned, and as moch as semeth
to apperteyne to the Germaynes, I wyl open
vnto all men.
            ¶They of Spayne thynke, this medycine

ought to be lyke wyse ministred in al places
for this disease, seinge it hath nothynge, but
that that al men maye vse euery where indifferently,
and also hathe ben proued among
the people of .v. diuerse nations. Fyrste hit
came frome Spagnola into Spayne, and
than other nations about them sought what
profite wolde come therof. And whan they
vnderstode, that many had vsed it sprosperously,
the Ricilians receyued it. Frō thens
it came into Italie: and shortely after we of
Germanie haue lerned the power therof by
experience. And of late we harde saye, that
by the helpe of this wodde, many be cured
in France. Whiche thynge seinge it is so, and
seinge we lyue vnder that ayre, whiche is
not so moch subiecte vnto syckenessis, as the
contrey of Spayne and Italy are, through
the subtylnes of the aire, and therfore nede
lesse to feare those yuels, whiche may other
wyse chaunce, as the feuers, stytches, and
suche other: And agayne seynge we haue
stronge bodyes, that maye wel awaye with
labours, hunger, and thurste. And also the
myndes of the Germaynes, for the mooste
parte, are meryly set, what shulde cause vs
to thynke, but that our region and men be
very apte vnto this medicine? Whiche thing

Paulus Ricius, a phisition of pure iugement
and hygh erudition, approuethe, and more
ouer affirmeth, that he knowethe by playne
experience, that no nation is more apte vnto
this dyete. But if we had not sene some restored
vnto helthe throughe the helpe of
Guaiacum, and nowe shuld begyn to proue
hit: we oughte not beleue, that god were so
moche sette agaynste vs, that he wolde eyther
kepe this helthfull medicine from vs,
or defraude vs of the vertue therof, seynge
it was brought frō Spagnola into Spaine,
and had the same vertue there, whiche hit
hadde at home: excepte a man wylle saye,
that Guaiacum disdayneth to be caryed vnto
vs, his nature fyrste not chaunged, or
whan it commeth to the Germaynes, that
than it suffreth that great and myghtye power
and strength of his, to be taken from
hym, and no where els. And it is playnely
knowen, that with vs his helpe is very present,
and peraduenture more presente than
els where. And our men, as they be moche
gyuen to surfetynge, so can they, if nede require,
abyde very longe and strongely both
hunger and thurste. And more ouer as our
bodyes abunde with heate, so are they very
strong. For after the iudgement of Aristottle,

they that inhabyte cold countreys, haue
moche naturall hete in them, and they that
haue moche heate, for the moste part are of
great strengthe. And bycause the Almayns
vse moche eatynge and drinkyng, Ricius the
phisition was demaunded of late, what he
thought, whether it were best to remyt somwhat
vnto them in this cure of this sklēder
and thyn dyete, and he sayd: No by sayncte
mary, not thus moche, but rather handle
them the strayter, lette these greatte belyes
vsed in eatynge and drynkynge, be dryuen
to a moche thynner dyete than these thynne
and leane Italians. And he shewed me hym
selfe, that he hadde punysshed with hunger
one of these fatte felowes .x. dayes lenger
than he ought to haue done, bicause he wold
haue nothynge remayne that myght let the
operation of Guaiacum.
            ¶This thynge and suche other I do gladly
reherse by Ricius, and doo make often
mention of Stromer, that such as shal rede
this boke may vnderstād, whom I cal good
and right philitions, and howe vnworthy I
th
                  ••
               ke these commen tormenters of men of
the dignite of this title and name. And that
straunge countreyes may knowe, that Germaynie
hathe some good and excellent phisitions.

And that I delyte as moche in the
lernynge and amitie of them, that be good
and well lerned, as I hate these vnlerned
and foolehardy felowes, whiche after they
be for theyr moneye ones made doctours,
streyght professe, that they can reuyue the
deed, and restore lyfe to theym that are buryed.
But I wyll retourne vnto these .ii.
whiche be of an other sorte, of the whiche
two Stromer, whan I asked hym the laste
yere a medicine to pounge me with, sayde,
Do not vexe thy stomake with medicines in
this age of thynne, in whiche nature is able
of her selfe to do all thynges moche better.
For as he is very scarse in pourynge in of
medicines, so bryngeth he all sycke people
vnto a verye strayte rule of dyet. Wherfore
whan he had taken in hande to cure one in
the cytie of August after these wayes, and
he sayd, that he 
                  •
               eared, leste he coude not absteyne
hym selfe from women: Seinge than
(sayde he) thou haste decreed to dye, thou
hast no nede of my helpe, and so forsoke him
and lefte hym to his intemperauncie.
            ¶Of this sorte there are two phisitions
moo, of excellent name: wherof the one is
thy phisition, mooste noble prynce, named
Gregory Loppus, whiche hath holpen me

no lyttell thynge in the wrytynge hereof,
the other continuethe in the archebysshoppe
of Colyns courte, called Iames Ebelly,
a man of so great auctoritie, that foure yere
afore, that he was made the commen phisition,
all phisitions were they neuer so counnynge,
gaue place vnto hym. The other
was hadde in great honour of all the chiefe
lerned men of Papia, where this study floryssheth,
as well for the knowlege in phisike
as for other good lernynge, whiche he
had ioyned vnto phisik. But this is no place
to reken vppe the excellent lerned men, but
my purpose is to wryte myne experience of
Guaiacum. And therfore in this place I repete
this to conclude with, that I verylye
thynke, that this wodde wyll helpe al maner
of men, where so euer they be become,
brought vp, or continue.
         
         
            ¶What tyme is best to ta
                  ••
                here
vnto. Cap. xiiii.
            IT semeth for somme causes
that folowe, that it is better
to proue this cure in sommer
than in wynter. Fyrst bicause
(as Galen saythe) the moysture
in sommer increasethe

and runneth in all the body, and dothe goo
and comme: and therfore the pestilente humours
maye lyghty be seperated from the
good, and they maye be expelled and banysshed:
and these that be holsome & good kept.
Secondely bycause all diseases in wynter
do fasten theyr rotes deper, and take surer
holde, and in sommer contrarye wyse, the
humours be styll mouynge, and the body is
apte vnto all chaunges. But these consyderations
apperteyne generally vnto all diseses:
But as concernynge this our cure of
Guaiacum, for as moche as a great parte
of hit stondethe in dyete and sufferaunce of
great hunger, therfore it is most expediente
to beginne in sommer. In that season a man
may better away with this dyete thanne in
wynter, whan men are very hungry. For if
the body, beynge hotte and boylynge of it
selfe, as it is in sommer, shoulde moreouer
be loded with meate, hit wolde lyghtely be
dissolued into diseases. But in the wynter if
woll not soo, for so moche, as hipocrates
saythe, that in wynter a mannes bodye inwardly
aboundeth with naturall heate, and
outwardly lacketh it, for so moche 
                  •
               as than
it auoydethe and fleeth from the sharpnesse
of the cold, wherwith the body outwardly

is compassed, into the inwarde parties, as
vnto a stronge holde and castell: and there
closeth it selfe vppe: But contrary wyse in
sommer the same naturall heate in mannes
body foloweth, as Aristotle thynkethe, the
nature of the ayre, and therfore puttethe
forthe it selfe, and fleeth out to the extreme
partes of the bodye. But so it is, that the
very nature and propretie of this medicine
is, to reduce into the body, and bryng home
agayne suche naturall heate as is loste.
            And therfore this it semethe vnconueniente
to go in hande with, or pu
                  ••
               e in experience
this cure in the winter. For thā it is thought
daungerous, whan the hete of the outward
partes is drawen vnto the inwarde partes,
fe
                  •
               te the outwarde lymmes be forsaken and
fe
                  •
               te emp
                  •
               ye of theyr strengthe and power,
specyally in them that be colde of nature,
whiche other wyse in the wynter lose theyr
heate, and haue theyr bodys slayn through
the violence of colde, and be lyke vnto deed
folke.
            ¶But here maye we not passe ouer that,
whiche Coppus admonyssheth, sayinge,
Guaiacum moueth a manne to sweate, cas
                  •
               ynge
out the euyll humours, that be noy
               
                  •
               ull
to the body: Therfore sayth he, the

sommer is moste apte for this cure, whan
the humours are more subtylle, and the
skyn thynner. And in the wynter the wayes
and poores, by the whiche the sweate shuld
haue his course, and be expelled, are stopped,
and the humours gathered to gether,
and clodded. But on the other syde for soo
moche as in this cure doone by Guaiacum,
the sycke are greued with nothynge more,
than with thurste, it is thought, that the syck
maye worse absteyne from drynke in somer
than in wynter. Wherfore in Spayne, and
where the heate is vehement, they durst not
hytherto proue this experiment in the sommer.
Furthermore in wynter (after the
mynd of Alexander Aphrodisius) there ingendreth
on a man throughe moche eatynge
(For than haue men moche better appetite
thanne in other seasons) an humour called
pituita, that is fleume, which thyng mought
be auoyded, if this cure were than in hande,
in whiche, great abstinence must be obserued
and kepte. These thynges we haue spoken
as touchynge the tymes of feruente heate
and feruent colde, and nowe we wyll speke
of the other two seasons that be betwyxte
bothe, of the whiche two. Autumne semeth
the worste of both. For than is there great

abundaunce of all maner syckenes, and the
humours wa
                  •
               e worse and worse, bycause
this tyme of the yere is vnegall and without
order, alwayes chaungynge and inconstant,
brynging in many kyndes of diseases.
For as Celsus affyrmeth, Autumne killeth
many a one.
            ¶Furthermore the french pockes are very
noyful to the synowes, and the sayd author
teacheth, that wynter and Autumne be not
mete nor apt tymes vnto medicines, for the
resolution of the synowes. But these are
the reasons of them that dispute generally
and speake not onely of the vse of Guaiacū.
Wherfore this I thynke, that sommer (at
the lefte wayes in Almayne) maye be beste
taken: but that is that part of sommer, that
begynneth whanne vere endeth, as in May,
for than there is not here soo moche heate,
but the sycke maye well abyde and suffer
thyrst: And in wynter the cold is very feruente,
and lykewyse in vere and Autumpne
the colde is sharper, thanne the sycke maye
abyde in this cure. For it is one of the chiefe
poyntes for hym that is restored by Guaiacum,
with all diligence to eschewe colde.
            And as for suche incommodities, as maye
happen in the sommer, to the intente they

maye the lesse be feared, I haue spoken of
before, and shal repete them agayne, whan
place shal be. And neuertheles at this tyme
I do affirme, that this drynke of Guaiacū
doth meruaylously stere vp the naturall power
and strengthe, and hathe power and
myght to quicken and to make lusty the bodye,
whiche for lacke of naturall heate is
weake and consumed: Whiche thynges if
they were not as I haue sayde, and had not
Hipocrates in a certayne place, if I well remembre
me, sayde: that Vere and Autūne
are the moste aptest tyme
                  •
                to lett
                  •
                blod and
minister medicines, veryly the counsayll of
Celsus shuld than haue sem
                  •
               d beste, whiche
sayth: Vere is the holsomest tyme to go to
phisike, and next vnto that wynter, and that
is very daungerous, and Autumne mooste
daungerous of al.
         
         
            ¶That we muste vtterly forbeare
wyne and women in this
cure. Cap. xv.
            ANd maye I not boldely affirme, this
medicine to be gyuen vs 
                  〈◊〉
                god, seynge
hit neuer helpeth, excepte a mā
               
be gyuen to holynes of lyfe? Verily where
as we be brought into the fauour of god by
two vertues specially, that is by the chastite
of body, and abstinence of meate and drink,
as the lawes of chrysten people beare recorde,
let hym be 
                  •
               ure excepte he bynde him
selfe straytly in these bondes, he shall nat
onely come vnto this medicine in vayne, but
shall go forwardes also in the same with no
lytell danger. In so moch that it is playnly
knowen, that he shall dye without remedy,
that vseth any woman before the .xl. daye
after the cure is begonne, either bycause the
body so emtyed, is not able to suffer the iniurie
of that acte, or elles bycause god wyll
not that any man shulde vse suche his great
benefyte vnpurely. And therfore amonges
al them that proued this wod in Almayne,
it hapned one felowe to dye, & that through
this faute, as they that were present affirmed
by theyr othes.
            ¶And nexte vnto this the vse of wyne is
knowen moste pestilent, and muste be auoyded
in this cure. For it loseth the ioyntes of
the body, and hurteth the sinowes. And for
as moche as it hath vehement power to enter
into the lymmes, and shake al the body,
it is thought, that this decoction of Guaiacum

shal not profyte in his body, that vseth
wyne, but shall rather put hym in ieoperdy
and feare of death, whanne these thynges
Guaiacum and wyne, whiche are most contrary,
mete and come to gether. Therfore
some there be, that monysshethe to absteyne
from wyne an hoole moneth after the time
of this cure is paste for so moch as this medicine
kepeth his course of workynge many
dayes after it is dronken. And therfore lest
any thynge shulde stoppe or let it, they take
away the vse of wyne, and he that fleethe
the voluptuous pleasure of the body, muste
take hede, that he gyue no place to glotonie.
For the olde prouerbe witnesseth, that hunger
neuer begetteth adultery. And agayne
it is sayd, that Venus waxeth cold without
bread and wyne. Aelian
                  •
               s wrytethe, that
Zaleucus the lawyere of Locrense, forbede
sycke men wyne vnder peyue of dethe, with
out the phisitions coūsel. But be it the nature
of Guaiacum might suffer this voluptuous
act, and dyd not abhorre wyne, yet doth the
phisitions bokes with ful mouth make mentiō,
that they are very hurtful & greuous vnto
that body, whiche is take with this sicknes,
and principally for the ioyntes. Wherfore
Celsus reporteth, that there were some

that were vexed with ache in theyr limmes,
whiche throughe one yeres abstinence from
wyne and women haue benne safe all theyr
lyfe. And the same Celsus concludeth, that
suche as are borne chaste, or be gelded, or
chyldren, or euer they fal to womans company,
and lykewyse women, excepte theym
that haue their flowers stopped, are seldom
tempted with this disease. And Alexander
in his problemes sayth, that suche as drinke
water onely, are quycker in all senses than
other. For wyne stoppeth the wayes of the
mynde, and dulleth the senses. And Cicero
sayth, that for so moche as wyne profyteth
the sycke but selde, and hurteth very often,
it is moche better not to gyue it, than vnder
the hope of doubtfull helth to runne into open
ieoperbie. And Venus, in what so euer
state a man be, coldeth the bely, and dryeth
it, if Aristotle be true. For in such coupling,
the naturall heate departeth, and throughe
the euaporation that than is made, drynes
is caused and ingendred.
            ¶Lo sobernes and chastite two holy ordynances
of lyfe, be the principal obseruation
in this thynge, the highest precept, the chief
poynt of helih, whiche diligently kepte, noo
ieoperdye can ryse. For be it they tarye the

medicine or vtterly stoppe and lette hit, yet
they put not a man in ieoperdye of his lyfe,
whan they be neglected.
         
         
            ¶That salte must be eschewed in
this cure. Cap. xvi.
            AMonges al the thinges
that muste be auoyded,
somme men do meruail,
why salte is forbydden
to be vsed for the space
of this dyete, consyderynge
there is other tymes
nothyng more holsome
for mannes bodye: and they say, that
they can not perceyue, howe any hurt shuld
comme therof in this disease. The whiche
commeth all to geter of the corruption and
putryfaction of the bloudde, seynge onely
salte mooste of all thynges preseruethe and
defendeth frome bothe these. And more
ouer the nature of salte is to make faste and
drye vppe, to bynde and clense: whiche propretie
were thoughte mooste metest and necessary
to be ministred, to plucke vppe this
disease by the rotes. Fyrste bycause the bodye
infected with the pockes, is loosed and

shaken: secondly bycause the humours procede
and flowe out from one matter. Thirdly,
whiche is the chiefe poynte of al, bycause
the corrupt and infecte blo
                  •
               de is yet within
the bodye vnpourged. For this syckenesse
is no other thynge, than a certayne order &
state of the body changed through the trouble
of the bloode: Euen as it hapeneth in a

                  •
               ytie, whan a sedicion & partakynge entreth
into a commen welthe, and the cōmen people
be moued in theyr myndes: than are all
thynges scattered abrode without order,
and moued out of theyr places, nothynge
hangeth to gether, nothynge standethe, nothynge
abydeth, no quietnes, no peace, but
all full of trouble, vnto the which chaunge
of the body, motion of membres, and thakynge
of ioyntes, with all suche troubles,
there muste come some sadde and wyse father,
a man of hygh auctoritie in the comen
welth: for his godlynes and good deseruynges
towarde all men (who as Virgyll
sayth) maye gouerne and rule with wordes
theyr hartes, and quiete theyr stomakes.
So in lyke maner is it in salte, whiche as I
sayde, through fastynge, driynge, byndyng,
and purgynge, dothe put to quietnes thynges,
that are moued, doth vnite and knytte

thynges that are broken, doth bynd to gether
thynges that are plucked aparte, doth
make caulme and quiete thynges, that are
troubled: and bryngeth quietnes and sauegarde
vnto all thynges: yea how greatte a
thynge and howe necessary thoughte Plinie
salte to be, sayinge without salte a mans life
can not indure? And therfore say they, how
can that hurte in this syckenes, which in other
diseases conserueth all thynges? And
for as moche as in this cure we muste take
hede, that no corrupt humours be abundāt,
and salte resolueth and clenseth all fylthye
moistnes, and also kepeth down and restray
neth the flowynge of the body: it is thougt
we shulde be more plentuous of salte herein
than elles where. Notwithstandynge these
reasons, we muste haue an other consyder ation
herein. And fyrste of alle as moche as
appertaynethe vnto his dysease, howe the
sycke muste forbeare salte meates, not alle
maner, but onely suche as are very sharpe.
Lette it be asked of the phisitions, whiche
haue long before tyme prosecuted that matter
to the vttermost, for this tyme, seynge
the medicine of Guaiacum is specyally intreated
of, we may say, that though all phisitions
knowe the vse of salte, excepte hit be

very lyttell, to be noyous and hurtefull in
all other passions of the synowes, and in suche
diseases as sprynge of corrupte bloude,
and of yelowe and blacke colour, or salte
fleume, for so moche as with his tartshes, it
narpeneth coler, and burneth the bloudde,
and with his natiue drynes causeth the humours
and nutriment of the body to dry vp,
and by that meanes distroyeth all thynges,
that shulde helpe vnto helthe. Yet neuer the
lesse about the administration of Guaiacum
they forbede vtterly all maner vse of salte:
for the same consyderation they fordede all
sharpe thynges, and moreouer all thynges
penetratine: and amonges these, spices, and
wyne. For so moche as all suche throughe
theyr sharpenes and persynge power, do open
all poores and entreyes, and goo depe: whiche
violence runnyng through the body,
Guaiacum can haue no place to worke. If
these reasōs do not satisfie those mens mindes,
I wyl say vnto them, as the philosophers
say of the stone Magnes, if it be anointed
with garlyke, it draweth not yron to it,
so lyke wise Guaiacū hath a certayne secret
vertue, and can not tell whither it be as yet
knowen, to abhorre specially the vse of salt,
and whiche power is loste if salt ones come

vnto it. And this haue we spoken of the for
bearynge of salte in this cure. Nowe wylle
we speke of the sklender fedynge and hunger,
wherwith the body muste be weakened
and made leane, whervpon al the matter of
this dieth hangeth.
         
         
            ¶Of sklender fedynge, and hunger, necessary
in this cure. Cap. xvii.
            ALthoughe we spake before
of the smale and thynne fedynge,
that the sycke muste
vse, and howe his meat must
be diminished, & he brought
to hunger, yet we thynke it
very necessary to warne you ones agayne of
the same thynge, in this place, not onely bicause
this medicine requireth a voyde and
an emptye body, frome all maner fulnes,
but also bycause I wolde declare, that in
olde tyme there was a lyke maner to cure
the sike. And we may also rede in Diodoro,
that the Egiptians dydde heale theyr sycke
other with fastynge or els with vomyt. For
they affirme, as he recyteth, that sycknesses
are ingendred specially of the superfluitie
of meate. And therfore they thoughte that

waye of curynge to make moste vnto helth,
that tuketh awaye the fyrste causes of the
disease. Let not therfore these dronkerdes,
these interpretate felowes, gyuen to surfetynge,
be greued with this dyete, which as
Persius sayth, delyteth only in delitious fedynge,
and may lyue scantely halfe a daye
without meate: whose bealy as the prophet
saythe, is their god, and all theyr mynde
and lyfe is nothynge but fedynge. Let such
felowes, as I sayde, cesse theyr grudginge
agaynst this dyete, seyng that therby so excellent
and so good a thyng is obteyned, and
so great an euyll is auoyded with so lyttell
labour. And let them not than in this thyng
speake of the great ieoperdye, whiche maye
comme of weakenes, throughe longe abstinence:
as who saith, that he may faint, that

                  •
               ateth after this maner. For Plini saythe,
that none dyethe for lacke of meate before
the .vii. day: and may continue vntyl the .xi.
day. And al be it he writeth, that in his time
there was a woman in Germani, which lyued
sometyme full twenty dayes withoute
meate: and sometyme .xxx. And that he
sawe a man, whiche contynued .vii. wekes
without meate, drynkyng euery second day
onely water. Plini also sayth, that he knoweth

for a suretie, that the Scythians hauynge
certayne herbes in their mouthes, abyde
hūgre & thirste somtyme .xii. days. And
some also say, that the christen philosopher
Amonius, neuer eate but only tosted bread,
whiche thinge if any man greatly meruayle
at, lette hym remembre, that this is also
wrytten in the storyes, that certayne of the
mages lyued ones by meale and herbes only.
A
                  •
               d that Diodore writeth, that the olde
Egiptians meate was herbes and rootes.
            And Hesiod
                  ••
                monysheth, saying, we shuld
lyne & eate Malus & asphodelo. And Plato
writynge of the lawes maketh mention,
that Epimenides was contented sometyme
so to lyue. If any man wyl set these thingis
before his eies, & cōsider thē, thā shal he perceiue,
that we lyue very deinteously in this
diete, and do take in a maner more than nedeth.
But if it were a very harde thynge to
absteyne so from meate, what is he that loueth
him self so lytel, but he wold to get his
helthe, suffre this griefe? or that hadde not
leuer suffre .xxx. dayes hunger, than to be
sycke as longe as he lyueth? or had nat leuer
passe ouer so many dayes with stronger
hunger, that he may lyue the resydue of his
lyfe holle and sounde of bodye, than to anoyde

this lyttell griefe, and to be turmented
all the dayes of his lyfe with intollerable
sorowes, and to haue runnynge frome
hym stynkynge and fylthy matter? I haue
tolde you, that this is no new maner of curynge:
for alwayes the best phisitions haue
commaunded abstinence to the sycke. Of
the whiche nombre is Asclepiades, who, as
Celsus sayth, writeth, that the mooste soner
aygne remedy agaynste the feuer is, as
he hath proued it, to diminisshe the strength
of the patient with moche watche and abstinence,
in so moche that at the fyrste begynnynge
of the syckens, they shulde not soomoche
as wasshe theyr mouthe.
            ¶Abstinence, sayth Eusebius, both kepeth
the bodyly helth, and the shamefastenes of
minde. Wh
                  •
               rby it appereth, that lyttell and
temperate feding is profytable to the flesh
and the soule, as wytnessethe Timotheus,
whiche beyng on a seson with Plato at supper,
hauynge before hym such meate as he
was wonte to haue, tourned towarde his
frendes and sayd: They that Plato receyueth
to super, shal be wel at ease long after,
meanynge that after moche eatynge of dyuers
and aboundant costly dysshes, deynteously
dressed, there folowed euyll and rawe

digestion, and greatte grefe of the stomake.
Wherfore afterwarde whan it chanced him
to mete with Plato, he sayde vnto hym: Ye
Plato do ete this day rather for to morowe
than for the tyme present.
            ¶And in Lucian Gallus the cocke Pithagory
iugeth it a great benefit of god giuen
to Micyllus, bycause he coude alway with
hunger auoyd al feuers. And for that cause
was without such dysease. Nowe what shal
we saye to that, whiche as sayncte Hierome
wrytethe, that certayne dyseased with the
ioint ache and the goute, after theyr goodes
were gone, and were from them, and were
broughte to poore fare and symple meate,
they dydde recouer theyr helthe? For they
(sayth saynt Hierome) toke no thought nor
care for theyr houshold, and the habūdance
of meate and drynke, which do breke both
the body and the soule. And anone after he
sayth: There is nothynge that dullethe a
mannes mynde so moche as a ful bealy: rysynge
and tournynge hyther and thyther,
blowynge out wynde with balkynge fysting
and fartynge.
            ¶This story may be a lernynge vnto many
men, whiche is redde of a certayne great
belyed and fatte abbot. As he was caryed

vnto certayne bathes, it fortuned hym to
mete with a gentylman, who asked him whither
he was goynge? the abbotte made him
answere and sayd, that he must go vnto the
bathes. Why (quod the gentylman) are ye
sicke? Nay (quod the abbot) I am not sicke,
but I haue no appetite vnto my meate. I go
therfore now vnto the bathes to get againe
myne appetite, whiche I dydde of late lose:
for they are holsom therfore. Veryly (quod
the gentylman) In this thynge I can be a
better phisition vnto you. And toke the abbotte
with hym, and put hym into a depe
and da
                  •
               ke dongeon, where he fedde hym
certayne dayes hungerly: and than at laste
he asked hym, whether he had an appetite to
hie meate? Ye mary (quod the abbotte) I
sayth (quod the gentylman) than is it reson
that thou gyne me a rewarde for my medicine,
and made hym pay two hundred crownes,
and sente hym awaye in good helthe,
with suche an appetite, that he coude haue
eaten bothe beanes and lekes, where as before
he refused all maner meate, were it neuer
soo deyntie: and so was he well ordered,
seynge he soughte not meate with hunger,
but hunger with meate. But peraduenture
we haue spoken more than ynoughe of

this thynge, therfore let vs go vnto other
matters: But first I must tell you (to make
an ende of this chapiter) that Guaiacum
requyrethe not a bealy that is replenysshed
with varyetie of meates, or troubled with
wynde in the inwarde partes, but purified
and clensed from al rawnes and grosnes of
humours.
         
         
            ¶Howe hunger may easely be suffred.
Cap. xviii.
            ANd this scarsenes of meate
canne not only be borne, but
also m
                  •
               ye easely be borne,
and that throughe the vertue
of Guaiacum: whiche
after that the body is ones
brought downe, doth both preserue the life,
and also causeth that the fycke shall not nede
to eate any thynge at all. Therfore dydde
I not without a cause gyue warnynge, that
the sycke shuld absteyne from meate as moche
as may be. And if he way feble or faint,
he maye not be holpen with meate, but with
the swete sauours, which I speke of, as moche
as is possible, put to his mouthe, and
specially with hote breadde. But if any fele

hym selfe to be wasted and redy to slyde awaye
throughe weakenes. Whiche thynge
howe it shulde chaunce in any manne, I can
not telle: for in me there happened no suche
thyng at all, that I neded any maner helpe:
Than I wolde counsayle hym to vse these
thynges, which Plinie thynketh easeth hunger,
and quenchethe thyrste, whan they be
very lyttell tasted of, that is butter and lykeresse,
reclisse likoresse. Drels in this thing
we muste folowe Celsus, which sayth thus:
This one thynge muste alwayes be obserued,
that the phisition be often tymes caused

                  〈◊〉
                sytte by the pacient, to consyder what
strength he is of, and to cause hym as longe
as he hath any strength to wrastle and fight
with hunger. And if he begynne to doubt of
his weakenes, to helpe hym with meate.
            Excepte any had leuer folowe that, whiche
Gellsius sayth, that Erastrat dydde write,
that the Scythians, whan they for somme
cause muste nedes suffer hunger, do thruste
together theyr bely and bind it round about
very straitly with brode swadlynge bondes,
thynkyng that by suche pressynge to gether
of theyr bealy, hunger may be putte away,
or the easelyer borne. For seing, as he saith,
hunger commeth of emptines, and is caused

of the voydnes and holownesse of the intrayles,
and of the bealy, than whanne the
bealy is gyrded in harde, so that the emptines
is filled, and the holownes ioyned, there
can be no hunger where as these thynges be
not, and vtterlye forbearynge of meate,
may lightly be born. But why say I, vitterly
for bearyng of meate, whiche can not be in
this cure? I may well calle it hunger, what
so euer it be, that any abydeth. For it maye
be suffred well aud easely, thoughe a man
take nothynge in the worlde to helpe it. But
vnto these deynteous sycke persones what
thynge can be lyght? whiche can not onely
suffer no hunger, but also not to haue a stomake
vnto meate, they thynke it intollerable.
For the whiche if at any tyme they be
sycke, we mought praye god, that they neuer
recouer, consyderynge they esteme hit a
greatte grefe to bye helth with a lyttel sufferynge.
            ¶Of these maner persons if I speke some
what largely, I do it after myn accustomed
maner, specially whan I perceyue many of
my countrey men the Almaynes, to er
                  •
               e in
this behalfe
         
         
            
            ¶The prayse of temperaunce in spite
of ryotte. Cap. xix.
            BVt I beseche almyghty god,
that this nation maye ones
knowe it selfe. Whiche thing
I do not desyre so moch, bycause
it is vncomely, that the
people that rulethe all the
worlde, shoulde so lyue, as for that, that
suche intemperancie and ryotte is an occasion
to vs of great euyls, and also to be greatly
dispised. If other people shoulde eate and
drynge as moche as they coud, they thinke
they shulde passe the lawe of nature: but
whan we cromme in so moche, that we can
not beare it, we loke after laude and prayse.
What meneth these strynes and contentions
of our valyant drynk
                  •
               rs? Whanne he that
drynketh is receyued with triumphe, whan
it is glorye to ouercome in drynkynge, and
no shame to be dronke and cast it vp agayn.
O count
                  •
               ry, O empire. As for the Polonians,
or if there be any other that passeth vs
in dronkennes, I regard them not, but this
nation I say ought to remembre them selfe,
and haue regarde to theyr dignitie: excepte
it seme, that other nations are comen vnder

this empere, not for the reuerence and opinion,
whiche they hadde of our noble forefaders,
but to dispise and mocke vs. Verily
it muste nedes be, that they were far other
men, that had such honour giuen vnto them,
than we be, that are thus dispised. Is there
so moche as a chyld in Italy, that knoweth
vs by any other name, than by the name of
dronkerdes? Seynge thanne that other
straunge nations doo speke sooner of our
vice than of our humanitie or vertue: shal we
not chaunge our lyuinge? Shal we not fere
to lose this honour to our great rebuke and
shame? Or shall we not thynke, that hit is
more shame to vs to lose the title and profyte
of the empire, that hath benne a glorye
to receyue, whan it was offered vnto vs?
            Or that sober men and reasonable wylle
be content to be vnder the rule and dominiō
of a dronke and barbarous nation, beynge
without all good humanite. But if hit can
nat happen into the braynes of our men to
vnderstand theyr own shame, yet at the lest
lette them knowe theyr owne dystruction.
And if we set so lyttell by the loste of oure
glorye and the rebuke and shame of our voluptuous
mynde, that we wyll not leue for
that, our vnthryfty lyuynge: lette vs at the

leste wyse haue soo moche wytte, as to care
for our bodely helth, whiche must nedes be
troubled and brought to nought in such festynges,
surfetynges, and drynkynges: about
the whiche, as the satirike poete sayth,
leapethe and skyppeth in greatte companyes
of al kindes of deseses. But Germani
hath loste his wytte and vnderstandynge,
and hath forgotten it selfe, nat all Germanie,
but many in Germanie. These be they
that drawe theyr dyners vnto soupper, and
theyr suppers in to farre nyghte. These be
they, which throughe theyr mysorder, haue
caused a straunge poete, but yet not an ylle
poete, for he semeth to hate yl men, to write
to the greatte selaunder of this countreye,
sayinge: Bacchus sytteth at the deyse, and
Appollo is caste out of all company. For al
the lyfe there is nothynge els but drinking,
that is, they set more by drynkynge than by
wysedome. Howe be it these drongerdes,
that erre throughe madnes and lyghtnes,
mought lyghtly be dispised: but these that
with theyr deynteous fare, and nyce and
wanton apparell cast them selfe heedlonge
into the mydmayne see of voluptuousnesse
and pleasures. These I say, be worthy to
by hated of all the worlde. These be they,

that lye vpon theyr pyllowes of downe heped
together, that consume what soo euer
may be gotten by land or see, not to susteine
theyr lyfe, but to delyght theyr swete mouthes,
that muste weare the fyneste lynnen,
that muste be robed in purple, that reioyse,
to be wrapped in softe myes skynnes, not so
moche to kepe them from colde, as for delicacie
and wantonnes. These be they, that
may not touche commen clothe, whose skyn
can not suffer but the finest and softest thing
that maye be gotten: that take theyr counsel
in quaffynge, and in theyr counsels quaffe,
that meddle with no sadde matters, but lede
all theyr lyfe in feastynges.
            ¶These thinges ar not vsed (I say ageyn)
throughe al Germanie, but specially, which
thynge is to our gret shame and rebuke, amonge
the chiefe and the nobles of Germanie:
whiche pamperde vp dayly with all
maner deyntie fare, exercisyng dyners and
suppers meate for popes, in them they bankette,
in them they brynge one to an other,
and therin haue suche pleasure, that they
had leuer dye, than to be plucked from hit.
They haue none other care, but to fylle the
bealy: by whom Salust if he had suspected
such bestes euer to come in Germanie, might

well haue spoken this his sayenge. Many
men gyuen to fedynge and slepynge, haue
passed euen as straungers theyr holle lyfe,
without knowlege and lernynge. But let a
man caste with hym selfe what opinions the
Romaynes 
                  •
               ad in these dayes of the people
of Germanie: and thanne sette before his
eies, what a monster, and howe hateful this
cherysshynge of our throtes, that we nowe
vse, had ben then? In the whiche whanne
we haue spente a great part of our lyfe, and
haue receiued thens those thinges that must
nedes solowe that kynde of lyfe, that is innumerable
kyndes of diseases: than do not
we cōfesse nor knowlege our faut, but do accuse
god of crueltie. And thoughe hit be we
our selfe, that gette and bye with great cost
and expenses the sedes of all our syckenes,
and norysshe with all oute harte our owne
mischiefe and distruction, cherysshynge out
euyls with the lost of our holle patrimonie,
yet whan we be ones downe, and sette vppe
with quosshens and pyllowes heped rounde
about vs, not able to moue hande nor fote,
than we blame nature, and saye, we maye
thanke god of all our euyls and peynes.
            For no glottons doo otherwyse, than they
dydde, whiche Iunenall spekethe of, whiche

beleue, that god in his fume and wrath
doth caste these diseases vpon theyr bodies:
and therfore calle them the gonne stoones
and weapons of god. But wolde to god we
wold returne to our oten porage, and be couered
as we were in tyme paste, with wollē
garmentes, so made that euery lymme and
parte of vs mought be sene, & to waxe wery
of this sylke, and hate these garmentes soo
ful of plaites. For what other thynges are
all these, but fyrst the wastyng of our patrimony,
and than the purchasyng and incresse
of all euylles and diseases? Verily our a
                  •
               
cetours, beynge verye nyggardes in this
thynges, dydde greatte actes and excellent
thynges with hyghe glorye. But whan dyd
we, that to fulfyll our plesant affection receyue
venom in the stede of meate, any thing
worthye the honour and glorye of Germanie?
It was farre better for vs to be called
and counted barbarous, whan our lyuynge
was homely and rude, than nowe to haue in
this ryottous lyfe, and this shame, the laude
and prayse of wyttes and good lernynge.
            ¶What wolde great Charles say nowe, if
he came agayn to vs, and saw our princis in
theyr vtter garmentes of sylke: seynge that
he hym selfe wore a shert of habergyn? Or

what wolde one of the Othons saye, which
stretched out and enlarged theyr vertue and
valyantnes in duste and durte: whan oure
men anoynte them selfe with straunge and
costly bawmes?
            ¶There is a notable execration of Chrysyppus
agaynste them, that vse oyntmentes
voluptuously to the pleasure of other. The
deuyll take these delycate felowes, saythe
he, that haue sclaundered so good a thynge,
the people that were wanton and gyuen to
pleasure vsed it in tymes paste. But it was
neuer thought, that the Germayns shulde
euer come to this poynte, to smell of oyntementes
and bawmes. And nowe we cal for
pomāders, muskeballes, damaskepo
                  •
               ders,
and all maner sauers as thynges necessary
to our lyfe, and thynke it great honour to
vs to smell of suche straunge sauours. Nother
is it women onely that are in this faut,
but men, specially princis and priestes.
            ¶Solon forbade oyntmentes to be sold in

                  〈◊〉
                cite of Grece: And the Lacedemones expelled
them from theyr citie, sayinge, that
they corrupted and marred theyr oyle.
            ¶And Lic
                  •
               rgus toke away from the same
Lacedemons bankettynge, feastynge, and

                  •
               ostely dyners. And Socrates (as 
                  •
               enophon

saythe) dydde greuously rebuke suche
ryottes abundance.
            ¶Trewely the old Germayns mynded no
such voluptuous plesures, and they thought
it a very straunge thynge, to lyue any thing
wantonly or nycely. I haue harde some old
men say, that whan they were yonge men,
it was a suspecte thynge to weare a gowne,
whan we now a dayes do honour and worshyppe
purpull. And therfore we may well
crye, O corrupted and wretched worlde.
            They were couered with the skynnes of
wylde beastes, and laye in theyr feldes vnder
the skye, and were made stronger with
contynuall labour, where we that be wantonly
and nycely clothed, and take our pleasure
vnder our gaye gylted houses, be
throughe all kyndes of ryotte and voluptuous
pastimes vtterly weaked, and of all
manly strengthes depriued. And maye any
man thynke, that this maner of lyuyng can
lightly haue an ende, seyng the chefe & principall
example therof cometh fro them specially,
that be called prestes? What they be
in dede god knoweth, & they only, to whom
it hath pleased god to gyue trewer eyes to
se with. These do not vse al maner pompes
and excesses in thynges appertaynyng vnto

the seruice of god, but euerye one of theym
must swym at home in his house in al maner
of costly and deynteous dyshes and cuppes,
and they calle eatynge and drynkynge lyuynge,
or if they do not so call it, yet veryly
they so esteme it. And therfore seyng they
do soo, other menne thynke they maye doo
the same.
            ¶And this the laudable and naturalle custome
and fascion of Germanie is banyshed.
For we be so farre gone, that we excede all
other nations, be they neuer so euyll, in suche
abundaunce and voluptuous pleasures.
It had more becommed vs to haue dryuen
these thynges out from the myddes of vs,
and as Diogenes dydde to the Tartis and
fyne manchettes, soo to haue sayde to this
straunge ryottous maner, O gueste go and
gette the hens quickely. Ye the examples of
strange nations ought ones to haue taught
vs. And seynge to bankette and surfet most
largely is nowe adaye counted moste kyngly,
why do we not here the answere of Menedemus
the philosopher, whiche he made
to Antigonus, askyng him whither he shuld
go to a daynteous and costely feste or not?
Haue in mynde (sayde he) that thou arte a
kynges sonne. Antisthenes, to a certayne

persone praysynge delicious fare, sayde, I
wolde our ennemies fared delycately. The
wordes also of saint Paule ought to be writen
in our harte, sayinge: Meates are gyuen
to the bealy, and the bealy to meates,
but god shall make an ende of bothe. The
same Paule whan he condempned the workes
of the fleshe, amonges whiche he nombred
excesse of drynkynge and eatynge, he
addethe to these wordes, Of the whiche
thynges I nowe warne you, lyke as I haue
before tymes warned you, that they, whiche
commytte suche thynges, shall not be
the inheritours of the kyngedome of god.
            But they nowe do the same thynges, which
ought to be our gides into the kyngdome of
god, priestes, chanons, bysshoppes, and
prelates, in so moche, that it is nowe come
into a prouerbe through out all Germanie,
Let hym be made a man of the churche, that
loueth to lyue pleasantly, as thoughe suche
a lyfe were metest for them.
            ¶The frugalitie of my grandefather Laurence
Hutten, whiche is worthy to be written,
ought to moue vs vnto moche glorye,
who allthough he were ryche, and moche
occupied in greatte matters of our princis,
both in warre and peace, yet wolde he neuer

admytte into his house pepper, saffron,
gynger, nor suche other straung spyces, nor
vsed garmentes but only of our owne wol,
al thoughe there were sometyme precious
vestures gyuen vnto hym for the well doing
of his busynes. And he dydde not onely this
hym selfe, but also amonges his equalles
he rebuked gretly the fascions & maners of
men, sayinge. We seke euer straunge thynges,
as though we had not growynge with
vs, wherwith our meate may be made delicate.
If we wyll please and delite our taste,
or as though the great price of our garmentes
dyd increase the qualities of the mynde.
But I wyll ceasse to speake more of this
man, leest I shulde seme to couet myn owne
glory. If I had fyrst told you this one thing
me thynketh it is not so goodly a thynge to
be borne of this my stocke and familye, in
the whiche be somme causes besydes this,
wherof I maye glorye, as to be borne his
neuewe, that thus hath lyued. Our predecessours,
and suche as I my selfe haue sene
olde men, whan I was but a chylde, whan
they dyd kepe in theyr meate, drinke, and clothynge
such temperance, they were of good
lykynge of body, and through great labour
were hardned agaynst hunger and thurste,

heate and colde, where as we at the fyrste
frost, sheuer and shrinke together both hand
and fote: and as sone as wynter begynneth,
we be treble 
                  •
               urred, and be shut vp in oure
hot houses, out of the which we go not vntyl
mydsommer, whan the sonne and heate
bourneth and parcheth all thynges. And as
I saye, where as nowe scantly the .x. person
of the noble men can be founde in Germania,
but he hath eyther the gowte in his
fete, or in his handes, or is greued with the
dropsye, sciatica, or lepry, or is tourmented
with this frenche euyll, whiche bry
                  •
               gethe
these greattest euyls with hym.
            ¶But at the last let vs retourne and enter
into that lyfe, whiche is metest for this nation
and empire of Germanie, and which euen
they, whom I tolde you lyued wantonly,
can be wel contented to here praysed. For
I thinke there is not one of these, that gyue
them selfe to such delycate & ryottous lyfe,
but he hateth the same in other, except he be
so blynded through intemperancie, that he
loueth these vnthryf
                  •
               ie manered Sardanapales,
and Heliogabalos, or doth hate the
persimonia of many, which be of the contrary
facion. Truly vertue semeth very amia
               
                  •
               le
euen to them that dothe lyttell folowe

or regarde it.
            ¶It was an olde meate of Catos, porage
made with chese and egges. And Plini rehersethe,
that gruelle made with otemelle
grootes was ones the meate of the verye
and true Germaynes, as it is yet of many
vnto this day. But we fede vppon straunge
and beyonde see victualles, thynkynge that
we haue so moche nede of them, that euerye
house holder hathe decreed to sell these
thynges, that growe with vs, to bye the
other with: whiche one thynge hathe enryched
the Fucher
                  •
               : whiche in the meane season,
that we thus nouryshe our bodies, haue
all the money, and lyke wyse all the excellent
goodly places in Almayn. For they beinge
the ministers of our voluptuous lyuyng,
are so incresed, that there is no prince
in Almayne able to compare with theym in
ryches. So farre be we gone, and so lyttell
perceyue we, what thynges Germanye denoureth
and consumeth. Wherfore I thinke
that he was of excellent wysedome (if any
suche was) that feared in tymes paste, leste
suche voluptuous and delycate lyfe shoulde
entre into Germanie: wherof (as euery m
                  •
               
may playnely see) spryngeth so moche pestilence,
and so many diseases: and ageyn perceyued,

that they shulde lyue quietly, that
coulde be contented to lacke such pleasures
and delyciousnes. For they that dresse oure
herbes, and line with them (as there be some
trewe Germaynes yet remaynynge) they
are of good helth and bodily lykynge, but
they that be spice fyngered, and belche synamom,
and smell all of clo
                  •
               es, and haue
all theyr pleasure in goodly araye, these be
they, that are subiectes to al kyndes of diseases
and euylles. Howe properly therfore
dydde the Satirike Poete calle the gowte
Ryche? For it medleth not with them that
are poore, and drynke no wyne, but hit is a
companion for ryche men, dronkerdes, surfetours,
and delycate lyuers, whiche (as the
same poete sayth) to gette swete morselles,
leue no place vnserched.
            ¶And soo, thoughe this countreye brynge
forthe that that is necessary for the lyfe, yet
as though nature had vtterly forsakē them,
they ron vnto straunge thynges, fetchynge
theyr garmentes theyr meates and medicines
from Hercules pyllers, from the ilonde
of Taprobana, from the ryuer of Ganges,
and from places farther of than these, euen
almoste from the heed of Nilus.
            ¶The wrache of god lyghte on these deed

mēs heedes, that fyrst receyued these euyls
into Germanie. For they haue done a thing
vnworthy for the grauite of the Germains.
Truely they, oure forefathers, were none
suche, the whiche preferred the labours and
peines of Hercules aboue the fleshly lustes,
obone the delycate meatis and softe beddes
of Sardanapalus. But O lorde Chyrste,
howe delycate, howe holsomme fedynge is
breadde made of rye or whete, and gruelle
made of millio, oriza, ptisana, and otemele
porage? Adde thervnto so many kyndes of
herbes, and so many dyuers garden spyces,
as anyse, coryandre, cynomum, fenell, musterde,
neppe, oynions, lekes, garlyke, and
specially if we wyll beleue Plinie, persley
hath a singular good grace, to season meates
with. And for drynke we haue ale and
biere. And for the ryche men there is wyne,
whiche is the pure and cleane drynke of the
erthe, as Appollonius iudgeth: so that it be
vsed scarsly, whether it growe in France, or
vpon the bankes of Rhenus. We haue also
of our owne beestes fleshe bothe tame and
wylde, whiche are not of vnpleasante taste.
We haue fruites of trees, not to be dispised,
howe ryche is Germanie, howe plenteous
of all meates, howe abundantly dothe hi
                  •
               
               
minister all thynges necessarye for the lyfe
of man? Wherfore my chiefe desyre & vowe
is, that they neuer lacke the gowte, nor the
frenche pockes, that can not lyue withoute
pepper: And I pray god, they may ones be
brought to extreme hunger, whiche nowe
serche in all places, not for meate to lyue
with, but for delycates and deintees, wherwith
they may stere vp their swete mouthes
and prouoke theyr appetites. Howe iustely
dyd Galenus enuie helth to suche felowes,
whan he forbode all phisitions from the curinge
of dronkerdes, and of theym that are
gyuen to the bely? If such at any time were
sycke, for they by and by (sayth he) through
intemperate lyuynge hepe vppe again grosse
and vndygested humours, soo that they be
clensed and purged in vayne.
            ¶The necessitie of nature is lyghtly contented,
sayth Hierom. Colde may be expelled
with course clothyng, and hungre with
lyttell meate.
            ¶Whan Anaxerses the kynge of Perse
was brought to that necessitie, that he eate
drye fygges and barly breade, than he beholdynge
his fortune, and suche a greatte
chaunge, sayde: O what pleasure is this,
that my regall abundaunce kepte me from?

By the which example we may knowe, that
they onely lyue in knowlege of theyr owne
lyfe, that lyue scarsely and soberly: And on
the other syde, they that be gyuen to the norysshynge
of theyr bodyes, and the pouring
in of al thinges, be as men erryng in darkenes,
and perceyue not theyr owne lyfe, soo
farre are they from the lyfe of pleasure.
            Howe be it within short space, whan they be
ones fallen into diseases, than they begynne
to fele and perceyue, what lyfe they haue
chosen, and what is the reward of the same.
For as Persius sayth, whan the harde, and
stony go
                  •
               te, the braunches of their olde sursetynge,
hath broken theyr ioyntes: than
they mourne, that they haue passed theyr
dayes so grossely, and consumed theyr lyfe
so fylthely, and be so sorye to late of theyr
lyfe to comme.
            ¶Do we than doubte, what is the cause of
all the syckenes, that the Germayns haue?
seing we may yet remembre, that this pestilence
and mischefe of the bodye dydde enter
with that ranke and riottons lyfe. For here
we do nowe so gyue our selfes to whores &
pleasures, that we seme to stryue with other
straunge people for the maystry of fylthye
lyuynge, as menne do in games for the best

wager. And for this purpose we haue certayne
ministers very experte. The
                  •
               e gette
and conueye vnto vs from the fardeste partes
of the worlde prouocations of glotony.
These brynge in from farre, with meruaylous
delyght, both to eate, to drynke, & also
to clothe our selfes with. Wherin seinge they
haue longe and many dayes contynued, to
theyr owne (as I sayde) great aduantage,
they haue made some so delicious, that whā
they be here in Almayne, they muste drinke
wyne of Corse, they muste haue meates out
from Italie, and contrary wyse, whan they
be at Rome, they vse wine of Rhene, or that
whiche Neccarius bryngeth forthe. O peruersed
custome of lyuynge. O my scheieffe,
worthy to be hated of all men, euen so m
                  •
               
               che
the more that they be byshoppes, whiche
doo these thynges, and are the rynge
leaders thervnto. Suche maner of persons
I beleue do desyre of god, as Aristotle writethe
of Philoxenus, to haue the neckes of
cranes.
            ¶Aristophanes reproueth the tables of the
Syracusanes, and the voluptuous aboundance
of the Sibarites. If at that tyme he
blamed suche thynges, what wolde he saye,
if he nowe lyued, and sawe our banketing?

feastynge, our quaffynge and drynkynge?
Therfore as many as coueyte vertue and
knowledge, lette them take hede and harken
to Pythagoras, whiche saythe: that a
man, that ryseth not aboue man, can not ta
                  •
               t
or atteyne any hygh thyng, that is to say, as
longe as a man lyueth vnchastely and dyssolutely,
be shall neuer do any great thinge
with wytte or mynde. The mooste holsommest
fedynge for man (sayth Plinie) is one
maner meate, the heapyng of dyuers tastes
is pestiferous, and sawces are worse than
that. ¶Persins well perceyued these thinges
whanne he thus spake in greatte mode.
Thou woldest haue lyttie ioyntes, & a hole
body in age. Ye but the full dysshes, and the
fatte denteous, wyll not suffer the goddes
nor Iupiter to graunt thervnto.
            ¶And Cicero bringeth in Cato saying: that
a libidinous and intemperate youth, maketh
age very feble. And he aduyseth and counsaileth
vs to eate and drink so moch as may
susteine the bodily strength, & not oppresse it,
thynkynge that nothing can be so vnfrendly
vnto the mynde of man, whiche he callethe
an heuenly reward and gyft, as voluptuousnes
is. Nor as longe as luste and pleasure
bereth rule, Temperance can haue no place:

Neither vertue may beare any stroke, where
luste and pleasure reigneth. And therfore he
iudgeth, that we ought to gyue great thankes
vnto age, whiche causethe that we lyste
not to do that thynge, whiche we ought not.
For voluptuousnes, sayth he, beinge an ennemye
vnto reason, stoppeth and letteth all
good counsell, and blyndeth the eyes of the
mynd, aud medleth nothyng at al with vertue.
And therfore he thinketh, that olde men
are happy, whiche whan they lacke feastes,
full dyshes, and the cuppes ofte walkynge,
they lacke also dronkennes, rawnes of stomake,
and be not combred nor vexed with
dreames, whiche maner of thynges, accompany
them that are gyuen to suche wantonnes.
For Hierom sayth, that diseses come of
to moche eatynge.
            ¶There is a prety ieste, of a certeyne phisition
of this countrey, whiche hadde a syke
man in cure, that hadde runnynge legges,
and that not withstandynge was gyuen to
bankettynge and drynkynge myghtyly, and
yet complayned that his medicines preuayled
not, And that his soores ranne faster,
than they dydde at the begynnynge: Truly
sayde the phisition, they wolde ceasse ro
                  •
               nnynge
out, if thou woldest cesse powryng in.
            
               
¶Galenus affirmeth, that the great chuffes,
whose lyfe and occupation is fedynge,
maye neither liue longe nor be helthful, and
theyr myndes be so wrapped with ouer moche
bloude and fatnes, euen as it were with
myer, that they haue no maner heuenly meditation,
but do alwayes thynke vppon eatynge,
drynkynge, fartynge, and shytyng.
            ¶The olde Romaynes called that fedynge
necessarie, that was slender and sparyng.
            ¶And amonge the grekes litell meate was
moche commended by the writing of many.
            ¶The Essees, whiche were a certayn sorte
of philosophers among the olde Iewes, are
lauded of Iosephus, bicause they had tourned
theyr dayely abstinence into a custome,
and an other nature. The same Ioseph prey
seth the continencie of the Phariseis. He that
wolde ones haue had vs distroyed, I thinke
hath desyred, that this custome of lyuynge
myghte enter amonge vs. And therfore seynge
Marcus Cato (as hit is written in
Plinie) dyd take great care and feare, leste
the Grekes shulde inuade Italy, with their
wanton and voluptuous lyuynge: whiche
of our forefathers hath prouided, that none
of these spycis and sylkes shulde be solde in
Germania? farewell pepper, farewell saffron,

farewel sylke. Or if there be any vse
therof amonge other nations, I praye god
that this nation neuer knowe it, or se it. And
Christe sende our countey men this mynde,
that they may call home agayne the frugalite
of theyr elders, and facion them selfes
to theyr honest sparynge.
            ¶With what stoute stomake doth Anacharsis
bost the order of his lyuynge? Vnto me
(sayth he) hunger is a swete morselle, the
grounde is my bed, a cloke of Scithia (that
is a beastes skyn) is my garmente.
            ¶Sober Demosthenes draue dronkē Aeschines
out of the citie. Socrates hatyng the
tauerne haunters, and such as haue al theyr
delyte and pleasure in theyr throtes, sayde:
Many men lyue to the intente to eate and
drynke, but I eate and drynke to lyue. O,
very wyse man, and worthy soo to be taken
by Apollos commendation.
            ¶And this sayenge of a greke poete is to
good to be forgotten: Thou thy selfe must
rule the bridell of thy bely.
            ¶What saye you? Whatte maner felowe
thynke you Epicurus was? Whom all the
world persecuteth, as a felowe of pleasure,
whiche put the hyghest felicitie in pleasure?
Truely what so euer it be, that he made soo

moche of, he ment in the onely vse of breade
and water, and dyd moch commend slender
liuynge, and suche as may quickely be gotten.
And writinge vnto a certayne frende of
his, he saythe: Sende me a lyttell che
                  •
               e of
Cithridi, that I maye, whanne I woll, fare
somwhat more deynteously.
            ¶Anaxagoras sayde, He that eatethe sauourly,
nedeth but lytel meate. Porphirius
wylleth the mynde to be clensed and purged
with abstinence. And Philostrate wrytethe,
that Porus, the kynge of Inde, was excedynge
strong and mighty, not withstanding
he neuer fedde but vpon breade and water.
Masinissa lyued .lxxxx. yere without any
maner delicate fedynge. And Mithridates,
kyng of Ponte, which kept warres with the
Romaynes .xl. yeres, vsed to eate his meate
standynge, so farre he was from our facion,
that he wolde not sytte downe on a softe
quoysshen.
            ¶Titus Li
                  •
               i
                  •
               s writing of Annybal, 
                  •
               aith,
He measured his mete and drynke after the
nede of nature, and no
                  •
                after pleasure. He
had not the tymes of watchyng and sleping
distincted by the daye and the nyghte, but
whan his besynes myghte spare hym, than
toke he his rest, and yet not suche as is caused

with a softe bed and silence.
            ¶And amonges the laudes of Augustus
Cesar, this is the chiefe, that he was content
with lyttell meate and drynke. But we
hadde leuer order our lyfe after the facion
and maners of glottons and pleasaunte felowes,
lyuynge contrarye vnto nature, to
the destruction both of body and soule, than
to the preseruation of theym bothe to sette
before vs these examples of lyfe, soo noble
and soo helthfull. And I praye you, the
Turkes and other, that are not of this our
religion, wyll they euer desyre to become
christen men, whan they se
                  •
                vs thus to lyue?
But I truste that oure nation wyll ones at
laste beware and waxe wyse agayne, beyng
taught with our owne harme,
            ¶Nowe agayne vnto our pourpose. And
for so moche as I haue spoken of abstinence
and sklender fare, I wyll shewe whatte
I thynke of hym, that ordereth hym
selfe after this dyete, whether he
maye be restored, whiche
some men do thynke,
euen without
the drynkynge
of Guaiacum.
         
         
            
            Whether a man maye be restored by
this dyete onely. Cap. xx.
            OF them that be good oughte
to be none euyl opinion, neither
suspition: but trewely
these comen phisitiōs be sore
gre
                  •
               ed, that this medycyne
can do so moche, and that it
alone can do it, euen without theyr medling.
They fume very sore, that so many in euery
place be sodeinly holpen, of whom they trusted
to haue had a perpetuall stipend and continuall
lucre. Wherfore they stryue verye
styffely, fearynge leste in tyme to comme it
shall take away the truste that men haue in
theym. They haue spoken of late certayne
trifelynge and vayne wordes, which if they
spake as they though, muste be ascrybed to
theyr ignorance: but if they spake it of enuie,
than vnto theyr mischeuous mind. They
say, that a syke man may be recouered only
by this dyete and order of lyfe, whiche is
prescribed in this cure of Guaiacū, thoughe
he neuer drinke of this docoction of Guaiacum,
nother receyue any other medicine.
            And I my selfe haue sene theym, that haue
promysed, that they wolde sethe the shauinges

of Iuniper, and of oke, or asshe, or
pine tree, or al these together, and they douted
not, but that they wold with these helpe
men of suche dyseases as well as with this
decoction of Guaiacum. Where vnto (all
thoughe I suspecte their malicious intente)
yet I pray god sende them as good fortune
as they wolde wysshe. For what coude be
a greater commoditie vnto this nation, then
to haue such a remedy growyng in our own
woddes, which must els be fet from so far?
But I greatly feare, leste they go in vayne
about this theyr rashe promise, both bicause
I thynke this to be a greuouser disease then
may be put away with hunger, withoute any
other medicine ministered, speciall after
it hath fastned his rootes depely, as for the
most part it is wont to do. And also if these
trees, whiche I spake of, coude do any suche
thinge, theyr vertue and power I thinke
shulde not haue gone so longe vnkowen, seinge
they growe here amonge vs. Neuer
the lesse I am contente, they make a profe.
For what other thynge hath a phisition to
do, but dayly to fynde out somwhat, and to
knowe by experyence, and to serche what
wyl helpe euery griefe and syckenes? But
this thynge I wolde all shulde be admonisshed

to beleue, wherof I spake before, that
the helpe of frugalitie and scarsenes, as hit
is great in other diseases, soo it is, and that
specially, in the frenche pockes, but yet not
so great that it may amende the bloude that
is infected and corrupted thorughe the ve
               
                  •
               oum
of this disease, without suche medycines,
as haue theyr power and strength to
do it. As by example. If two kepte warre
together, and the one of them obteyned of
me, that I shulde not helpe his aduersarye:
veryly I may impute vnto hym, that I hurt
hym not, but that I haue holpe hym, I may
in no wyse. And lykewyse the absteynynge
from meate and drinke, as it dothe not take
awaye the disease, so doth it not noryshe. As
one myght say, that he nother bound a persone
whā he myght, nother losed hym whan
he myght not.
            ¶I haue shewed you, that many haue bene
restored to theyr helth from the gowte and
ioynt ache, whan they brought them selfe
to a more sklender and a sobrer diet, and ab
                  •
               steined
from wyne and women: but I neuer
thought so of the frenche pockes, and the
maladies that folowe therof. For that entreth
so depe, that it can not lyghtly be pl
                  •
               cked
vp, and spredeth soo brode, that it can

not with a lyttell thynge be brought to gether,
but it so infecteth the hole bodye, on
which it ones catcheth holde, that it can not
be taken from any part alone, but whan it
is driuen out from the hole, as at one brayd
or plucke. Beleue me, that haue proued many
thynges herin to my great hurte, if any
man mought haue auoyded this euyll with
sobre and scarse lyuynge, I had auoyded it
long sins. For by the space of .iii. hole yeres
I kept my body as low & as leane as coude
be, in so moche that in that space I felte no
grefe of my disese, but yet I was not cleane
ryd from it. Neuer the lesse goo to ye noble
promysers, sethe ye asshe, make ye redye
Iuniper and pyne tree, and take boxe to, if
it please yo
                  •
               , and horne beame, and plane
tree, and ye shall gette ryghte great thanke
of all men, if throughe your dylygence we
may haue here at home, that we muste elles
seke soo farre of. Ye and ye shall do moche
more for vs, than the Fuchers shuld, though
they made pepper or cynamum to growe in
this countreye. And soo gladly as I wolde
receyue this thing at your hand, if ye wolde
euer gyue it forthe: so before ye gyue it, I
wyll not beleue, that there is any such thing
in you, no I wyll not so moche as hope for

it, seynge I haue gaped soo often tymes in
vayne lokynge for those golden hylles.
         
         
            ¶Howe a man must order his bely in
this cure. Cap. xxi.
            AL the tyme of this cure the
bealy auoydeth very lyttell
and harde, and that with
moche ado, and that is not
onely bycause he eateth litel
but also bycause the nature
of this medicine is to dry and byndeth. How
be it I haue harde saye, that this thing hapneth
nat to euery man a lyke. For some say
that anone after the begynnynge they were
lose belyed, and some were so contynually:
Wherof I dyd meruayle. For in these .xl.
dayes it neuer wente from me so moche as
ones, but as it was compellyd. For in this
diete it maye be kepte to the .v. or .vi. daye,
without any ieoperdy: And than in the mornynge
the shauyng of this Guaiacum soden
in water, muste be dronken to the mountenaunce
of halfe an vnce. And if it moue not
at the fyrst, it must be geuen agayne the next
day, and so the thyrd day, and if it help not
so, ye must than poure in clisters vnderneth,

or suppositories prepared for the nones. For
the bely muste nedes be losed. And if a man
wyll lose hym selfe by drynkynge or eatyng
Cassia, I thynke he doth not moche amysse,
so that this be done but ones, and that mornynge
lette hym not drynke Guaiacum: I
wolde not that he shulde be eased with vomites:
for they make the bodye colde: and
(as Plini sayth) they be euyll for the eyes,
and specially for the tethe. There be many
thynges in this cure, that stoppe the bealy.
Fyrst bycause the body is emptied in the begynnynge
with a pourgation, and than bycause
there is lyttel meate receyued. But as
this place is closed and shut from eiections,
so is there somewhat in the meane season,
other by sweatynge, throughe the strength
of Guaiacum, that expelleth thynges hurtfull
and superfluous, or els in the vrine, the
whiche is more moyste than that cometh of
the meate. And one thynge is greatly comfortable,
that in the tyme of this cure there
chaunceth no swellynge, nor there are noo
peynfull throwes or aches felt, nor the tast
cometh not bytter, nor there rysethe no lothynge
of meate, nor vaporous breathe not
lyghtly ascendynge from the stomake to the
heed, as in other diseses. And that the paciēt

is purged, it is easely perceyued by making
of water: nor to the intente that shoulde be
doone, none other prouocation shoulde be
soughte. Nowe wyll I speke a lyttelle of
sweatynge.
         
         
            ¶Howe in this cure one maye
be moued to sweate.
Cap. xxii.
            IF the pacient can not sweate,
somme thynke, that meanes
shulde be sought to prouoke
hym therto. And therfore
they caste on hym many clothes,
and lette hym lye thre
or foure houres couered hot. And thoughe
this amonge all thynges that we suffre, be
one the hardeste: yet I felte euen to the very
feyntyng, that so chaunceth no fayllyng,
all they that were cured with me, indured it
moste greuously, and they sayde, that this
was the hardest thynge in all this cure
            But if I myght laufully say my minde here
in (all mooste I dare not shewe that that I
haue lerned) I wolde no man shuld be prouoked
to sweate, saue that the pacient shall
as the thynge requyrethe, kepe his bedde

thre or foure houres, and passe not, and let
hym be couered, but not with ouer manye
clothes, nor to lye ouer stylle and stere not:
but in any wyse let hym not be putte to moche
vexation.
            ¶And I thynke verily, that as wel in this
cure as in other, the phisitions of my countrey
do many thynges fondly, whiche ought
not to be done. For as this medicine of hit
selfe causeth one to sweate, euen so hit wyll
not abyde compulsion. Wherof this maye be
a dewe proue, that I perceyued my selfe no
sooner to sweate, whanne I was couered
with thre or foure furres, than whan I had
to wrye me but one couerlede. But this I
wold ye shuld vnderstande, that the pacient
muste nedes sweate, and if it wyll not come
naturally, than it must be prouoked meanly.
For I allowe nothynge that is forced. And
I warne you, that ye eschew those, that are
wont to toste the bodyes at the fyre, or that
wold haue the stewes ouer hotte. For suche
hea
                  •
               is distroye the bodies, and drye vp the
humours that nouryshe the strengthes.
            And where I sayd swette must be prouoked
meanely, or easily, it must be thus taken: that
if one be wryed with the clothes of one bed,
so that the loode of the clothes greue hym

not or erke hym: I suppose through the operation
of Guaiacum, he shal sweate inough.
         
         
            ¶Howe this medicine shall helpe,
and whether it he aleth men
sodaynely, or at leysure.
Ca. xxiii.
            BVt nowe I suppose, hit is
hygh tyme to declare, howe
the effecte of this medycyne
may be perceiued and vnderstande,
and whan the pacientes
begynne to mende, and
whether this curynge be sodaine and swyft,
or late and slowe. Wherin, as I vse in all other,
I wyll open to you those thynges, that
I my selfe haue both sene and knowen: but
this I warne you of before, that if it haue
chaunced other wyse to any manne, thanne
I wryte, that he laye not the blame in me.
            ¶I haue lerned, that Guaiacum helpethe
by lyttell and lytell, and not sodaynly, and
gothe forwarde fayre and easely, and not
violently. For it is so far from the trouthe,
to thynke that it helpeth one sodaynely, that
somtymes, from the first daye to the .xxv. the
disease cometh so sharpe, and the peyne and

ache so augmenteth, and the soores soo enlarge,
that a man wold thynke hym selfe in
worse case durynge these days, than euer he
was before: either bycause thā the disease is
rooted vp and drawē from the inner partis,
and the rootynge vp is peynful, or els that
the alteration, whiche than is caused in the
disposition of the body, breakyng out with
a great violence and shaking, putteth a man
to greuous peyne. For vndoubtedly this me
dicine draweth out this myscheuous disease
by the rootis, and that dothe it vnto somme
forth with after they begyn to take it, and
to some other it tarieth a longer tyme: but
it doth so to no man before the .vii. day, and
to many (as it dyd to me) after the .xx. day,
if it tarye longer er hit worke this effecte,
than the defaute is other whyle in the pacientis,
whan they wyll vse excesse in feding.
In me (as I sayde afore) the fa
                  •
               te was in
sythynge of Guaiacum, for by reason that
the phisitions in preparynge therof, made it
smaller than they shulde haue done, I was
the longer er it wrought on me. And I haue
harde phisitions say, that accordynge to the
complexiō of the bodies it worketh soner &
slowlyer. And this is sure & certayne, whiche
thyng Stromer ofte affirmed vnto me,

that if they, the whose wyt is more subtyle,
and are ryghte attentiuely gyuen vnto study,
happe to falle sycke, theyr diseases shall be
more vehemente and longer continue. And
many thynke, that it skylleth greattely, as
well in this disease, as other, in what placis
of the body the syckenes shuld chaunce, for
the ryghte part is more healeable than the
left. Bycause, saythe Alexander, by larger
exercyse the matter is stopped, and made
more apte to heale. Also they say, it is more
harder to heale the vttermost partis, bicause
they be farre of from the body, it is longer
they can be nouryshed and fedde. And there
it is to be taken hed, whether the grefe doth
ascende or discend. Celsus sayth, that what
so euer grefe goth downeward, is the more
curable. And agayne. All grefe, which procedeth
vpwarde, is worse for the medycyne
to come vnto. And that suche diseases, that
chaunce in our secrete partys, as they are
moste plentefull and sharpe, by reason of inflamation
(whervnto those partes are specially
subiectes) so are they forth with and
soonest healed. Whiche as in all other medicines
they maye be moued, so for the newe
vse brought vppe of Guaiacum, I wote not
whether it be alway so or no. But this lette

euery man take hede of, that where so euer
the grefe be, and with what soo euer kynde
of the pockes they be peyned, that they prepare
well Guaiacum, and after they haue
dronke so long therof that it be spredde and
ronne into the veynes: thanne ye maye be
sure theyr ache lyttell and lytel goth away.
And otherwhyle the ache commeth agayne,
and is more sharpe and peynefull: and goth
away agayne. For after it ones begynneth
to swage, and than waxeth soore and peynfull,
it endurethe not longe. And they that
haue soores, shall haue the flesshe eaten away
about the soores of a greate breadthe.
And that is a token, they begynne to heale.
For vnto me it chāced, as it neuer did afore,
that about the .xxv. daye my legges were
eaten so bare, that ye myghte haue sene the
bone the breadth of a mannes nayle, whiche
thynge putte me in great feare: but with
out any difficultie, within a fewe daies after
the fleshe grewe and was restored agayne.
And by this I perceyue well, that the nature
of this medicine is to purifie and clense
the soores vnderneth and vnder the fleshe,
to proue and shewe fyrste the vertue therof.
Hytherto haue I sene fewe or none, whose
soores were cleane healed, that were kepte

close tyl they healed. And therfore I haue
hard many expert therin say, that thā Guaiacum
maketh an ende of his operatiō, whan
the pacient returneth to his meate, and in euery
thynge taketh agayne his olde custome
of ly
                  •
               inge. I tolde you before, that it was
necessary for me to kepe in, tyll the .xl. daye.
Al thynges wel pondered, I perceyue, that
this medicine requyrethe a longe season to
worke perfectly. For the nature of this medicine
is not to breake, or plucke awaye the
bloud, but by lyttel and lyttel to amend and
purifie it (in whiche bloud beinge corrupte,
resteth all the force and strength of this dysease)
and to expel and diuide fro the body
the hurtful humours, that are norysshmentes
of this disease, from some in theyr vrine
and sweatynges, and from other somme in
their sieges. And whan of this disease a man
begynneth to waxe whole, than the fyrst operation
of Guaiacum is to make a man to
sweate, and secondly by the passages of the
vrine it purgeth, by which menes it fetcheth
out & voydeth marueylous foule fylthynes.
And than the handes and feete waxe meruaylous
colde, in so moche that they seme to
haue no heate in them at all. Wherof physitions
saye this is the cause, that than this

medicine draweth the heate from the vtter
partes to the inner, the whiche inward parties
after they be warmed and made hotte,
than the heate spredeth it selfe in to the outwarde
parties. For this, without any doubt
is proued, that theyr lymmes, that be heled
with Guaiacum be moste hotte. And .vi. or
vii. wynters nexte folowynge, my legges
and fete wolde be so colde, that I coude neuer
gette them warme inoughe, thoughe I
wrapped them in neuer soo many clothes,
nowe they waxe so warme, that with a very
thyn hose or suche lyke garment, I put a
way the colde. These thynges thus vnderstand
and knowen, we muste comme to this
poynte, that is, to knowe the operation of
Guaiacum, and agaynste what sycknesses
it helpeth.
         
         
            ¶What power Guaiacum is of,
and what sycknesses it helpeth.
Cap. xxiiii.
            THe mooste principall and the
chieffest effect of Guaiacum
is to hele the frenche pockes
cleane, pluckyng them vppe
by the rootes, but specially
whan a man hath ben diseased

with them of alonge tyme. For I haue
sene them, that many a day laye soore peyned
with the pockes, sooner and better restored
vnto theyr helth, than they, on whom
the scabbes beganne newly to appere. Not
that on those, newelye diseased any thynge
shoulde be lefte vnhealed, but that the curynge
goothe forwarde more hardely, and
the disease stycketh faster and is more greuousely
plucked out. For Guaiacum doth
resolue & distroy meruailously swellinges,
getherynges to gether of yll matters, hardnesses,
bumpes, and knobbes. Fluxions or
runnynges it vtterly taketh awaye, eyther
consuminge or tournynge the same an other
waye. It causeth the soores to impostume
withoute any maner of grefe. And if any
thynge lye hydde within, it rooteth it oute.
And soo of some (as hit dydde to me) hit
maketh the bones bare, of some it shewethe
the synowes, and breaketh the veynes, or
eateth moste depelye in, and it healeth these
partyes that be infected with this disease,
and with suche stynche and fylthinesse, that
the sauoure canne not be abyden.
            And therfore the phisitions saye, that the
vertue of this medicine is to heate, to drye,
and to amende the fautes ol the bloude and

of the lyuer: but it worketh all these thynges
with suche a temperaunce, that indifferently,
whether the cause be hotte or colde
it easethe the pacientes. Wherfore with the
drynes therof it restreyneth the flyde, destroyenge
the hurtfull humours that flowe
oute, orelles plucketh vp by the rootes the
cause of theyr begynnynge, and restorethe
agayne the good disposition of the body. It
dothe extenuate fleme, and the poores or
passages of the vryne, that chaunce manye
tymes by perunctions to be shutte, and also
other in this disease hit openethe, ye and
prouoketh & compelleth the vryne to make
and haue way. For the whiche skylle some
thynke it helpeth them that haue the stone,
and that it compelleth the stones to issue out
of the bladder. I haue experyence, that hit
greately mynisheth blacke coler. And therfore
it maketh a man more gladsome, and
quencheth anger. Vndoubtedly hit hathe a
a greater vertue agaynst melancolye. And
hit taketh away runnynges and droppynges,
and it lyghtneth his heuynes, by heatynge
(as it may be thought) the brayne. It
is sayde, that hit amendeth soores, whiche
were before yll healed, howe soo euer they
come, and cuttethe agayne the scarres. It

amendeth the leannes, whiche hath longe
contynued in the body. And therfore whan
this cure is done, mē waxe very fat al their
lyfe after. They saye it hath a meruaylous
vertue ageynst the stynkyng of the mouth, &
doth amende the griefe of the brethe, whiche
also cometh through the faute of anoyntynge.
It helpeth the inwarde parties, and
specially the stomacke, the which it holle reneweth,
and maketh the brokynge as good
as euer it was before. His effect is excellēt
for the membres that be fallen awaye and
diminished, it increaseth theym and fyllethe
them vp, it stretcheth forth the sinowes that
are shro
                  •
               ke, and those that be lose it fastneth
and maketh stronge. It is also proued, that
suche parties as throughe this disease be
made deed and without felyng, are agayne
quickened and brought to theyr olde felyng
and lustynesse. I sayde before, that as touchynge
the bealy it varyed. For some it dyd
bynde, and some it made laxe tyl they were
wery. And agayne, somme it dyd bynde in
the begynnynge, and afterwarde hit losed
theym, and made them lanke belyed. And
that the verye shauynges broken as smalle
as coude be, to the mountenaunce of halfe
an vnce, was gyuen in drynke to prouoke

a siege. I haue also sayde, that the measure
therof is not gyuen after the proportion of
his strength, that receyueth it. For hit maketh
not one weaker whan it is mynistred.
And now this one thyng I affirme, that if it
be .iiii. tymes sodden, yet is not all the vertue
gone out. Wherin I do not beleue other
men, but I my selfe haue proued it. Howe
be it I deny not, but the fyrst broth is moch
stronger. Somme there are, that stedfastly
beleue, that it is very good for fistules and
cankers, and for the parties that be eaten
with cankers. Certayne it is, it helpeth them
that fetche theyr wynde with peyne, and can
not breth, if that faulte come throughe this
sickenes, or throughe anoyntyng.
            ¶And for as moche as I haue shewed before
what euyls come with this sickenes, it
were but labour in vayne to repete them,
whiche all it taketh awaye, distroyeth, and
vanquyssheth, as I before tolde: and that
(if they be olde) very lyghtly. And in lyke
maner it helpeth the gowte. For I my selfe
haue sene two restored to helth, which were

                  •
               ore vexed in their fete: but yet the physytions
saye, that it helpeth onely those that
haue gotten the gowte through colde, whiche
thynge I leue to them to complayne of.

It is also an helthfull remedy for the palsey,
and especially whan it is new and lately
begonne. For than it quencheth and dryueth
it away: whiche thynge I doo wryte
vppon the reporte of faythfulle and sadde
men, that haue knowlege therof. For as for
me, I dyd neuer hytherto se any that was
so delyuered.
            ¶Ricius tolde of a leper, the which though
he were not cleane delyuered by this medicine,
yet was he made moch better and cleaner,
and suche a man as men myght suffer
his company: so that Ricius iudgeth, that
this medicine is able to hyde and stoppe leprosie,
though it can not take it clene away.
But if this cure were vsed ones agayne or
often, than he beleued, that the great hurte
of that disease shulde be put of for a longe
tyme. And more ouer he hadde great hope,
that if this syckenes were thus preuented
in the beginninge, it myghte vtterly be purged
and clensed, and the syke restored. And
for as moche as this medicine hath vertue
to drye vppe, some go aboute to minister hit
for the water betwexte the flesshe and the
skynne, whiche is called the dropsie, the
ende wherof we loke for. It is well knowen
to be profitable agaynste the fallynge

euyll, as the phisitions saye, if the dysease
be of a colde kynde. I haue sene theym that
were inwardely dyseased and greued with
manye other syckenesses, that were of an
euyll and corrupted stomacke, and coulde
but badly digeste, and whan they wolde recouer
them selfes from theyr long feblenes
and sycklynes, and repayre agayne theyr
strengthe and helth, haue prepared theym
selfes vnto this cure, the phisitions not aduysynge
them the contrary. And Ricius approueth
the same in many. For so moche as
he knewe (as he sayde) that a hoole man, or
but lyttell acrased, myghte come vnto this
cure without any hurt: and he dyd perfectly
beleue, that the good lykynge of the bodye
was kepte, preserued, defended, and
confirmed therwith. Let hit nowe contente
you, to haue harde spoken these thynges
of the helpes of Guaiacum, of the whiche
if any man wyll aske me the causes, I wyll
sende hym to the phisitions that be experte.
For as for me, I professe no suche thynge.
Neyther yet dydde I begynne this boke, to
thentent that I wolde by and by gyue a reson
of these thynges that I wolde wryte,
but this thynge I promysed, what so euer I
founde of Guaiacum, and perceyued by experience,

other in my selfe, or in other, and
what so euer I had eyther sene or harde of
other, that wolde I faythfully and trewely
putte in wrytynge, leauynge an occasion to
many after me, to declare the thyng as it is
worthye. And nowe that all menne maye
knowe, what Guaiacum hath done in me,
I wyll shewe in what partes of my body,
and after what fascion I was diseased.
         
         
            ¶What diseases this remedy hath
taken from me. Cap. xxv.
            BY this one chaunce hit is
knowen, that we ought not
to dispeire in any bodily disease,
though we be brought
neuer soo nere to deathes
dore. For howe many were
we, after the phisitions had gyuen vs vppe,
that were restored to helthe through the sodeyne
and (as a man wold say) the heuenly
helpe of Guaiacum?
            ¶I knowe one, my very sure frende, whiche
whan he sawe me so bytterly vexed with
this siknes, that for pein I could nother rest
by nyght, nother eate by day, aduysed me to
kylle my selfe, seinge there coulde no remedy

be founde, and my dody semed to droppe
away in fylthy matter, to my great peyne
and sorowe, and noo hope at all of recouerye,
sayinge to me, it becommethe the to
be delyuered frome this euyll, whether hit
wyll or not. But he hadde forgotten, that
we were christians, and remembred to wel,
that we were frendes and louers. For hit
is our parte to be holde all thynges in them
that wytnessed in tymes past, whom we now
calle martyrs, vnto the worlde, our sauiour
Christe manfully sufferynge for his sake
great tourmente; and peynes. Howe be hit
if any thynge maye cause a man to longe for
dethe, truely it is the tourment of this sicknes.
For I vtterly deny, that euer the father
of Licinius Cecine, suffered any suche

                  •
               orowe or peyne, whan he slewe hym selfe
with the iuise of Papa
                  •
               ers, Or that euer
any other, whiche dyd lyke wyse, felte so in
               
                  •
               ollerable
euyls, as this syckenes causeth.
For this pestilence besydes al his vexatiōs
and tourmentes (which passe farre al other)
onely with his fowlenes and lothelynes is
able to make one wery of his lyfe.
            ¶Whan Speusippus the philosopher was
ones plucked and drawen with the palsey,
that he dispeyred to escape, and then mette

with Diogenes, and bad hym well to fare
and good helthe: Diogenes (they say) answered,
sayinge: And thou lykewyse farewell
in no meanes, seinge thou art suche one
and canst be content to lyue.
            ¶The same Diogenes, that was wonte to
be so styffe a philosofer, what trow ye wold
he haue sayd, if he had beholde and sene me,
whan I was lykewyse vexed, as they that
hadde the palsey, and besydes that was so
lothe some both in syght and sauour, that al
were greued with me, and some dydde hate
me? And yet I dyd lyue and had some hope,
although I had ben oftentimes deluded and
mocked through the great promyses of the
phisitions. And lest any man shulde thynke
that my disease was eyther lyght, or in one
parte onely, I wyl shewe in what takyng I
was. Fyrst I coulde doo nothynge with my
lefte foote, for there had this euyl dwelled
viii. yeres and more, and in the mydlegge,
where the shyn is couered with flesshe very
thynne, there were sores inflamed through
the inflamation of the fleshe, rottyng with
great ache and bournynge, and as soone as
one waxed hoole, an other brake vppe. For
there were many, here some and there some,
whiche coulde by no helpe of the phisitions

be brought to gether in one. Ouer them was
a knobbe soo harde, that a man wolde haue
thought it a bone, and in that was exceding
peyne and ache, beatyng and pryckyng without
ceassynge. There was also verye nyghe
to the ryght ancle aboue, a certayne swellynge
and gatheryng, which was also hard
lyke a bone, and was the oldest of all, wherin
remayned the remenantes of this pestylence
fresshe and newe rysen.
            ¶Whan the phisition went about this with
yron, with fyre, with hotte yrons, or with
any other instrumēt, they profited nothinge:
somtyme it was swollen very vehemently,
with great peyne and akynge, somtyme hit
aswaged and was gentyller. And it greued
me lesse whan my foote was holde towarde
the fyre, and yet wold it not suffre to be couered
with moche geare: it ranne soo that a
man wolde haue thoughte hit wolde neuer
haue ben stopped. And as often as I wolde
reste or stonde vppon my foote, my peyne
was intollerable: than vpwarde the calfe
and the knee were meruayllous colde, and
as thynges deed. The thyghe was cleane
worne away and consumed to extreme leanes,
and the skynne was so thyn, that there
semed nothynge els lefte to couer the boone

with. Moreouer the ioyntes were so louse,
that longe tyme I had moche adoo to stande
hilone, and to be shorte: the one of my buttockes
was but a thynge wethered awaye.
In my lefte shulder there was suche peyne,
that I coulde not lyfte vppe myn arme: the
extreme partes of my shulders were weke
and woxen verye styffe: in the myddes of
the brawne of myn arme there was a swellynge
as moche as an egge, and as for the
reste of myn arme euen to the verye hande,
was cleane worne away. And on the ryght
syde a lyttell vnder the lowest rybbe, there
had I a sore, whiche was not in dede peynfull,
but it boyled out certayne fowle and
stynkynge matter, and issued very fylthyly
after the maner of a fystule with a narowe
mouth outewarde, and inwarde it was of a
large holownes. And aboue hym there was
also an other as thoughe a bone hadde bene
bredde there vpon a rybbe. And to conclude
I dyd playnly feele a streme and issue come
downe behynde from the toppe of my heed
vnto all these. And where it began the leeste
touche in the world made my heed to worke
as though the brayne panne had ben broken,
nother myghte my face be tourned backewarde,
but as it was tourned with the hole

bodye. This one thynge yet wolle I not
passe, wherfrom if Guaiacum had delyuered
me, and done nothynge elles, yet oughte
I to haue lauded and preysed his vertue
greatly, and that is noone slepe, whiche I
coueted so deedly, and was soo moche gyuen
thervnto, that almooste in .vi. yeres
space there scaped not one daye, whan the
phisitions cryed oute vppon me, sayinge:
that was the cause of all my diseases, and
yet I coulde not refrayne my selfe frome it.
But nowe is that gone so far from me, that
I trowe if I shuld enforce my selfe to slepe
in the day tyme, I coulde not. With all
these, and so great euyls all though I was
so maystred, that al men dispeyred my helth:
yet my good angel (I beleue) wylled me to
tary and loke for somwhat. And lo through
the helpe of Guaiacum I am bolde nowe to
lyue, and to drawe brethe agayne. Whiche
mynde god gyue to all good men, that they
neuer ceasse to hope and truste. As for me
I repent my selfe in nothynge, and i
                  •
                by any
meanes longe lyfe myght be graunted vnto
me, I haue greatte hope that I shulde lyue
hoole, sounde, and lusty. And of this disese,
and of the remedy of Guaiacum, I haue
wrytten these thynges, that cam to my mind

               
                  •
               ery faythfully, truely, and as my lernyng
wolde suffre me, and here wold I make an
ende, if I thought it not necessary to admonysshe
them, that shall rede these thynges,
howe after this cure, the sycke muste be ordered,
as touchynge the order and maner
of theyr lyuynge, which thynge I wyll performe
and that breuely
         
         
            ¶As touchynge the order of lyuyng after
this cure is paste what is to be
obserued. Cap. xxvi.
            I Gaue warnynge before, that
after this cure is paste, and
the pacient is departed owte
of the cloyster of this medycyne,
wherin he was close
kept, he must vse consequently
in his lyuing a certayne diet and order by
the space of .iii. or at the lest .ii. hole monthes.
And nowe that we be come to the very propre
place to entreate of the same thynge,
I say that it is so necessary to be done, that
who so euer hath recouered his helthe, except
he afterwardes take good hede, dilygently
obseruynge many thynges, and lyue
for a space vnder a certayne rule, as though

he were yet shut vp: I say playnly that his
helth shall not longe endure. And therfore
thre monethes are appoynted vnto suche as
were eyther greattely consumed and lowe
brought in theyr syckenes, and hadde many
issues, and auoyded moche, or els were sore
hurt in theyr synowes and lymmes, or be so
weakened in their body, that a lyttell tyme
can not be sufficient to gether vp perfitely
theyr cromes agayne. And on the other side,
they that be stronge and not so farre gone,
nor broken, vnto suche .ii. monethes, after
their settyng out ar inough as it is thought.

                  •
               ut by cause I wolde prouyde surely for
them that wyll folowe me, I wyll aduyse
them to obserue and kepe this prescrypte
very longe, and to begynne with, they shall
absteyne them selfes longe tyme frome the
fl
                  •
               shely acte: Bycause they that be recouered
through Guaiacum, haue theyr bodyes
very tender and vtterly weake as yet, as
thoughe they had bene lately newe borne?
And therfore if they shoulde haue the company
of woman, wherby the newe gotten
strength is weake and grene, and not yet ryped:
it wolde by and by dissolue and destroy
the strengthe and myghtis of all the membres
for euer. And for as moche as the vse

of carnall copulation bryngeth into perylle
not one membre by hym selfe but al the hole
bodye at one choppe: What other thynge
maye we saye, he pretendeth, that medleth
carnally with women (being so febled) than
wyllyngly to slee hym selfe, or at the leste
spedily to distroy his naturall strength, and
playnly caste his helthe away.
            ¶And if some be forbodden the companye
of women, whiche be neuer the lesse of good
lykynge in body, and haue no disease at all:
Howe moche ought they to auoyde and flee
it, that thus haue lost theyr helth & myght,
and must labour al that they can to repayre
the same agayne? And if before .xiiii. yere
of age none is stronge inough vnto that act,
bycause his strength is not full furnyshed to
putte so ieoperdous a thynge in experience:
How thā ought be to beware and take hede,
that is thus nowe borne agayne, and hathe
so yonge and tender a body, that he offer not
hym selfe to be rashely plucked and torne
before he haue receyued his strength, and is
well hardned therin.
            ¶The nexte poynte here vnto is this, that
thoughe they shall haue a gredye and sharpe
appetite to meate, beinge emptied with continuall
hunger, yet they muste resyste the

same, and as moche as maye be to behaue
them selfe very soberly and scarsely in their
fedynge. And therfore they muste fyrst vse
verye lyttell meate, and afterwarde some
what more, goinge forth by lyttell and littell,
soo that there maye be a good space e
                  •
               
that they come to theyr olde custome of eatynge,
exercysynge them selfe softely, begynnynge
no newe thynge hastely or sodenly,
vtterly absteinyuge fro al wynes except
it be fyrste delayed with moche water, and
be also of hit selfe smalle and of good sauour
and clere, and yet so, very moderatly.
Let hym also, that is cured, be well fensed
agaynst the violence of the ayer, and specially
in those tymes, that be greuous with
colde wynde and rayne, orels let hym goo
forth abrode verye seldome. He maye take
meate twyse a day, but at euentyde very lytell,
and all that tyme he maye neuer folowe
his appetite, but muste auoyde fulnes,
as the greattest euyll, that can be. He muste
also aboue all thynges forbeare fyshe, and
feade vpon yonge and tender flesshe, suche
as is of lyghte dygestion, and nourysshethe
purely, whiche they be ye maye knowe by
the phisitions teachynges. And these thynges
must haue place, in the sayde two or .iii.

monethes, for other thynges whiche shall
be further obserued, maye be lerned more
playnly in the thynges folowyng. For nowe
I wyll aduyse and monyshe with fewe wordes,
not onely theym that are recouered by
Guaiacum, but other as well from what so
euer disease they be delyuered, if they tender
theyr good helthe and wellfare, and desyre
to be longe in prosperitie, whatte thynges
they shall folowe. And here it is chiefely to
be noted (howe be it al doth nowe knowe it)
that this one thynge is hit that maketh this
sycknes to be verye greuous, bycause there
is great difficultie in dyetynge. For whan
this disease is ouercome, it is not one onely
that must be obserued in the order of our lyuynge,
but many thynges: and dyuerse must
be rekened vppon. In so moche as what so
euer thynges there be, whether they be with
or agaynst all the diseases, whiche I sayde
before folowed this syckenes, he that is recouered,
must set them before hym, endeuorynge
him selfe with al diligence to obteyne
them, that make with hym, and to anoyde
them that be ageynst him. Wherfore he must
be alwayes very careful in his lyuyng, that
al thyng maye be done ordinatly. Not with
standynge if this medicine haue saued any,

there is for theym great comforte, bycause
they that are expert therof, plainly thynke,
that after the pacientes haue ones receyued
theyr helth, & the time of obseruation, which
foloweth this cure be past, nothinge that is
not contrary to theyr olde maner of lyuyng
can putte them in any daunger, soo that they
vsed not before to lyue without order vtterly.
For that same order shal serue hym, that
is thus restored, as shall serue theym, that
neuer had the sycknes. Wherfore they thinke
it not so moche to be regarded, what a man
eateth, as howe moche he eateth: And therfore
no kynde of meate to be forborne, no
choise of meate to be hadde, concernynge
the qualitie of fedynge, nothynge to be cared
fore, but that whiche is knowen to apperteygne
to the commen conseruation of
helthe, and to the vniuersall auoydynge of
all maladies and diseases. Wherin that that
Celsus teacheth, perchance shall not be the
leest, whiche is, that euerye man take hede,
leste whyle his bodye is in prosperitie, the
aydes and succour ageynst aduersite be consumed
and wasted.
            ¶Helth is preserued (as the same Celsus
sayth) by dyet, by medicines, by oyntynges,
by frictions and rubbynges, by baynes, by

exercyse, by caryage aboute, by clere and
pleasant readynge: whiche thynges howe
they ought to be considered fully and holle,
I leaue you to aske of hym. Here wylle I
breuely touche a fewe thynges, and suche
as apperteyne to dyete. This I thynke they
muste fede pleasauntely and moderately,
and take suche meates and drynkes as be
of lyghtest dygestion. For as Poule saythe,
The chiefest poynt of education is, that the
meate be suche as wyll lyhgtly dygeste and
nourysshe well, not slowe in digestynge, nor
clammye, nor plentuous in superfluities:
and the drynke to be smalle wyne, whyte,
pure, and a lyttell delayde with water.
            And Celsus saythe, Se your meate be not
fatty, clammy, nor wyndy. And by his coū
               sell
ye muste absteyne in all suche dyseases
from all maner salte meates, sharpe, sowre,
and bytter. For the same reason I thynke,
wherof I made mention before. And Paule
saythe, In eatynge, the greatteste faute is
satietie and fulnes. For all thoughe the bely
digeste well, yet the veynes to moche replenysshed,
labour soore, they swelle, they
breake, they be stopped and fylled with
wynde, and playne it is, that the worst dyseases
of all comme of sacie
                  •
               ie. He thynketh

this onely to be auoyded, that no man fylle
him selfe. And I iudge the same but not only,
for I wolde more ouer nothynge to be
dressed deintuously, nothynge to be 
                  •
               auced
curiously, and that many dysshes of dyuerse
kyndes be not sette before vs, nother wyll
(as these ryche menne vse) sixe, or .vii. or
sometyme .x. messes at one soupper to be
broughte in. For a manne wolde not beleue,
howe moche these thynges hurte, not onely
the stomacke, but also the holle digestion.
            And therfore I wil repete again this thing,
whiche is spoken of the same authore: Varietie
of meates is greattely to be auoyded,
specially whan contrarye operations and
vertues be in them. For whan they be soo
thruste in, they resist digestion, and the same
thinketh Galene, and Auicene, and as many
as be of pure iudgement in phisicke.
            ¶Cato (as Tully wryteth) commandeth
so moche meate and drynke to be receyued,
as may refresshe the strength and power of
the body, and not oppresse it. Wherfore by
the counsell of Xenophon, we muste make
for the most parte a small dyner, that there
may be a place for the supper.
            ¶Playnly this disease is of that sorte, that
Galenus thynketh to come of fulnes, whiche

thynge is thus to be vnderstande, not
that I thynke all that lyueth in surfetynge,
streight waye to be cast into the french pockes
(all thoughe suche shall not escape dyseases,
no not most greuous) but if any haue
ben vexed before with them, and than healed,
eate and drynke intemperately, he must
nedes fal agayne into theym. And therfore
the meate that is receyued, let it nother be
dyuerse nor moche, that the stomake be not
loded, and dygestion letted. And agayne let
it be (as I monysshed) easye in dygestynge.
Plinie sayth, all maner sharpe meates, all
that is to moche, and all that is hastely receyued
be harde in workynge, and harder
in somer than in wynter, and harder in age
than in youthe.
            ¶It is wryten in Tully, he that medleth
not with exquysite meates, looded tables,
and often cuppes, shal not be combred with
dronkennes, rawnes of stomacke, or dreames.
But for as moch as whan this cure is
done, we muste prouyde, howe the bodye,
that hath hytherto benne emptyed and made
leane, may be brought ageyn vnto his olde
state, therfore peraduenture those meates
muste be vsed, that increace and fyll the
body, not with noyfull humours, but suche

as Celsus reherseth in the .iii. chapter of the
fyrste boke.
            ¶Plinie also sayth, The bodies growe and
increace with sweate and fatte meates, and
with drynke, they diminisshe and go downe
with drye, leane, and colde meates & thurst.
But this muste be wysely vnderstande, for
those thynges, whiche I haue often before
monysshed. But seinge Galenus warnethe
vs in all thynges to take hede to the bealy,
For what so euer, sayth he, is corrupted, in
that it is a cause of rot vnto al the body, and
so of diseases, I thynke it best to take those
drynkes and meates, as Celsus teachethe,
which do both noryshe & make the bely soft.
            ¶But if any, through the dyuelles prouocation
fyll hym selfe, and lode his stomake
with meate, more than it is able to beare:
if he lyste to seke helpe by slepe, let him here
Plinie, saying, To dygest in slepe, it maketh
more for the corpulentes than the strengthe
of the body. And therfore the phisytions
wolde haue the great fat wrastlers to make
theyr digestion by walkynge. But if he had
leauer ease hym selfe by vomyt, as many do
counsell, and Paule specially teacheth, for
throughe vomytes many euyls oftentymes
haue ben stopped, and withstande, lette him

rede his doctrine, shewynge howe one maye
lyghtly vomyt. And if nother of these be
regarded, or to late proued, than peraduenture
he muste go to phisike, whervnto if the
sycke be compelled, I can gyue hym none
other commaundement, but euen the same,
whiche I haue oftentymes spoken, that he
commytte hym self
                  •
                to a sober and lerned
phisition, or to a well experte, rather than
to one that is of high exquisite lernynge, and
to hym that powreth in no medicines, but of
very constrainte, ye and those medicines that
be symple and not compowned and mingled
with many thynges, and as moche as maye
be ministreth the thynges of our owne countrey
growyng, and not thynges farre fette.
And if suche a phisition counsell you to take
a laske, than see ye remembre that whiche
Paule teacheth: whiche is that ye do it not
ofte, lefte through often prouokyng, nature
forgette the office of clensing of the body of
her owne motion.
            ¶As concernynge meates, whiche be holsome,
and whiche vnholsomme, and howe
euery kynde of meates helpeth or hurteth,
excepte a man declare it to the vttermost, it
were better speake nothynge therof: And
therfore I wolde haue the authors redde,

as Celsus, whiche entreateth shortly of the
kyndes of meates. And Paulus which handleth
at large in .xxiiii. chapters the natures
and vertues of meates: or els Galenus
whiche by hym selfe is sufficient for al, pretermyttynge
nothynge in the bokes of nourysshementes.
And so wolde I nowe haue
made an ende of feadynge, if there had not
chaunced to come to my mynd certaine thinges
worthy to be noted. And fyrste I wyll
admonysshe you of egges. There is noo
meate (sayth Plini) lyke egges that nourissheth
in syckenes, and lyethe not heuy, and
that is in stede of wyne and meate bothe.
            And Auicene affirmeth, that the yolkes of
egges of a henne, of a partrige, or of a phesaunte
do passe all meates for theym that
haue theyr bloude diminished or their harte
faynted. Alexander Aphrodisius thynkethe
that it conteyneth in it selfe the qualites of
all the elementes, and to conclude there is
in an egge a certayne shewe of the worlde,
Bothe bycause it is made of the foure elementes,
and agayne bycause it is gathered
rounde in spere fascion, And hathe a lyuely
power. Egges fryed manye doo forbydde:
amonge the whiche are Paulus and Galenus.
And dothe not alowe the foode of herbes.

And many other do forbyd the same, at
thoughe Marcus Cato praiseth brassicam
aboue the mone. He that eateth dayly his
fylle of ptisana, his nutrimente Galenus
thynketh can by none other meates be hyndred.
And the same thynge wolde I saye
(sayth he) by beanes: if they fylled not with
wynde. Of the vse of milke both in meates
and also in medicines, Paule dothe entreate
verye goodly. Alexander saythe, mylke is
lyghte in digestynge, and nouryssheth well.
For that may lyghtly go into bloudde, that
is made of bloudde, and in a maner hit is
bloud made whyte.
            ¶Of manye thynges I haue shewed you
a few, but yet he that desireth to haue helth,
ought, saythe Paule, to knowe howe great
power wyne hathe. And the same saythe, if
wyne frete any man, he muste drynke colde
water. And the nexte daye drynke the iuise
of wormewode, and walke vpon it, he must
rubbe his body and wasshe it, and than refresshe
hym selfe with lyttell meate. Wynes
that were lately must, and also wynes that
be to olde, must be auoyded, sayth Galenus.
For these heate to moche, and the other nothynge
at all. That fedynge sayth Paule,
that kepeth a man bare and sklender, is moche

surer for the helth, thanne that whiche
maketh one fat. But for as moche as lyttell
meate gyueth nother strength nor stedynes
vnto the bodye, therfore he after addethe
sayinge. Suche meates as are of a meane
nature, are the chiefe nourysshementes of
all. For they ingender bloudde of a meane
substaunce. And as suche are mooste meteste
and conuenyent for our bodyes, soo be they
that brynge forth yll humours most noyful,
and therfore muste they alwayes be auo
                  •
               
               ded.
This saythe Paule. And he teachethe
more ouer, that rye breadde nourysshethe
more than all other, and that weaten bread
is of harde dygestyon and wyndy, and that
barly breade is of lyttell strengthe. He that
wyll knowe the vttermooste of fedynge, let
hym rede this Paule and Galenus as I
sayde. we in this countrey neuer vsed annointynges,
in Italy they haue vsed them, but
nowe they be al mooste leste. And Galene
commendethe rubbynges of the body aboue
all thynges, inculcatynge oftentymes and
many thynges therof, and specially in his
bokes of preseruynge helthe. And the same
doth Asclepiades hyghly auance, and Hipocrates
also very greatly, whose saying this
is, whiche was after hym repeted of many.

Throughe rubbynge, if it be vehement, the
body is made harde, if it be softe and easye,
the body is made softe, if it be moche, it diminisheth,
if it be meane, it fylleth.
            ¶In our days that high lerned man Erasmus
Roterodamus, vsynge thus dayly and
specially in the mornynge at his vprysynge,
thinketh therby that he preserueth his helth,
the weakenes of his body (whiche is verye
great) not withstandynge. And hathe warned
me diligently, that aboue all other thinges
I and all other studentes shulde vse the
same. I folowe the counsell of my frende,
and fynde ease therin. Some 
                  •
               orbidde wasshynges
and all maner bathes, and they say,
that they be vnholsom for all such as be recouered
from this disease. I thynke bycause
they mollifie the sinowes, and lose them, and
therfore they wyll not that water shoulde
touch thē, & yet they do not (sauing for that)
improue sweatynges. water hurteth the synowes
though it be warme sayth Alexāder,
not bycause it is warme, but bycause hit is
moyst. Paule commending warme washyng
sayth thus: It taketh away werynes, it shaketh
downe fulnes, it heateth, it mitigateth,
it mollifieth, it disperseth, it prouoketh slepe,
and maketh all the body fatte. And is very

commodious and agreable both to man and
woman yonge and olde, so sayth Paule. Not
withstandynge the Italianes nowe a dayes
washe not but very seldome, wherof I doo
not meruayll, seinge in tymes past they vsed
it dayly as wrytynge testifieth, and also the
tokens of the bates remaynynge at Rome,
whiche were buylded lyke vnto cities.
            ¶In exercises Galene teacheth, that mesure
muste be kepte and obserued, sayinge,
Immoderatnes I reproue euery where. He
lykewyse sayth, As exercise before meate is
the chiefest thynge to preserue hel
                  •
               h, so is al
maner motion after meate most noyful. For
the meate is scatered out of the bely before
it be digested, and therfore gadreth manye
grosse & rawe humours in the veines, wherof
al maner diseses are wonte to be ingendred.
Paule auyseth vs, so longe to exercise
our selfe, vntyll the body begynne to swel &
waxereed, our motions strong, equal, and
easye, and the swette seme to be myxed with
vapour: than fyrste to reste, whanne any of
these begynne to chaunge. They monysshe
also to gyue reste and quietnesse vnto that
membre, whiche was lately restored to helthe.
And Hipocrates sayth: The remedye
of the foote is reste. Wherof Alexāder gathereth

that, that which is heled again must
nedes haue rest. For motion (sayth he) causeth
flowynges of the superfluous matter,
whiche maye reyse and styre vp inflamatiō.
The worst thynge that can be to hym that
hath akynge knees, is to ryde, sayth Celsus.
He also thynketh it not good for theym that
be gowty. The old men exercised them selfe
also in voyce, that they moughte synge and
also rede more 
                  •
               lerely.
            ¶I sayd I wold entreate of these thynges,
as occasyon gaue, not moche regardynge
any order, but as euery thyng, worthy to be
noted, shuld com to mynd. And therfore let
no man loke for any greatte thynge here, if
there be any that wolde knowe, I haue shewed
in what authors what thynges he shall
fynde. But 
                  •
               oo here commeth an other to
mynde, he that wyll preserue his helth, must
take hede (saythe Galene) to .ii. thynges
specially, one is, that the meate be agreinge
and mete for hym: an other is, that there
folowe good brookynge, and clensynge of
those superfl
                  •
               ities, that are lefte of the
meate. It is recyted by Paule, that the olde
men thought it was sufficient to defende and
preser
                  •
               e helth, if the burden of the bely and
bladder were dayly vnloded well and without

faulte, accordynge to the portion of the
meate and drinke receyued. Galene as concernynge
the vse of Venus, hathe lefte nothynge
vntouched, affirmynge that acte to
be an ennemy vnto the helthe of all theym
that are drye of complexion, and specially
of them that are also colde. For Venus
(sayth he) is vnhurtefull onely vnto theym
that be hote and moyste, and be aboundante
of sede. And ageyne he saythe: They that
haue theyr bodies well tempered and without
fault, ought not vtterly to absteyn from
Venus, as they that be cold and dry ought.
Also Paule sayth, drye copulations hurteth
all men, and mooste of all if colde be ioyned
to dryeth, soo that they onely, whiche be
hote and moyste, may vse it without ieoperdye.
As labours are profytable vnto helth,
so are also copulations if they be vsed with
mesure. This one thyng ought al to knowe,
that all they that haue had the frenche pockes
ought with great care, for loue of their
sinowes to auoyde carnal copulation. Paule
indgeth it well doone to exercyse chyldren,
that through the labour of body and mynd,
they maye be brydeled and restrayned from
the violence of bodyly pleasure. Hipocrates
compareth that act vnto the falling sycknes.

Alexander Magnus was wont to say, that
copulation and slepe were two the greattest
tokens of mortalite.
            ¶The holsomes also of the ayre muste be
loked vppon, which is a good post of helth.
That ayre, sayth Paule, whiche is infected
with euyll vapours, puffynge out pestilente
blastes, or is nygh vnto a synke or draught,
or is mu
                  •
               ty, or is kepte in a valey, compassed
roūd about with hilles, hurteth al ages.
And the best ayre is most holsome. For vnto
a temper at body a seperate aire 
                  •
                profytable,
sayth he, and a distempred is for hym
that hath a contrary temperature. Sycknes
is nothyng els, sayth Galene, sauyng a motion
without nature. Than he saythe: The
phisitions vnderstande hym to be hole, all
whose membres be accordynge to the cour
                  •
               
of nature: and contrary wyse thanne to be
sycke, if any parte go out frome his nature.
It is forbydden by the doctrine of the phisitions,
that no man drynke streyghte vppon
chafynge. They saye also, that all sodayne
chaunges are daungerous. This is also admytted
for trouthe, that contynuall idelnes
is most contrary to good helth. And contrary
wyse, Meane exercyse is great aide and
succour. Galen sayth, depe reste of the body

is the greattest euyll that can be for the preseruyng
of the helth, as moderate labour is
the greatteste good. As perteynyng to slepe,
whan it ought to be taken and howe moche
Paule teacheth abundantly, and also what
commodities folowe, whan it is well taken
in tyme. With noone slepe there is none that
holdeth. For suche as be of a sad nature, or
be troubld with thought and care, the phisitions
ingeth very good to cal for som maner
pastimes and mirth, to fynde out by som
meanes, wherby the harte maye be chered,
and the sadnes of mynde eased. Pensyfenes
sayth Paule, must be dryuen away with the
swetenes of soundes.
            ¶He that is in good helthe (sayth Celsus)
and at his owne libertie, nedeth to care nother
for medicines nor oyntmentes. Whiche
thynge as I do allowe, and wolde not them
that be of good lykyng and helth to be boūd
greatly to any maner rule of lyuynge: soo
thynke I it nedefull for them, that haue ben
sycke, or haue syckely bodyes, or do folowe
suche kynde of lyuynge, that they canne not
wel defend the bodyly helth, to haue a rule
of lyuyng, to order them selfe by. For Galene
monysheth, that a lawe and rule of lyuynge
is in no wyse superfluous. For diete,

sayth he, is a verye medicine.
            ¶These thynges that I haue here wryten,
moste noble prince, I repute mooste profytable
to this pourpose, both by myne owne
and others experience, and also by the teachynge
of theym that were hyghly lerned.
The whiche thynges I haue wrytten vnto
your excellence, not bycause ye shulde youre
selfe make a profe of them (from the nede
wherof I beseche our sauiour Christ to saue
and kepe your magnificence) but that they
maye be redy, if any of your courte chaunce
to haue nede of them. And of suche thynges
as I haue wryten, ye shall vse the iugement
of Stromer, as I sayde before. For your
other phisition Gregory Coppus hath sene
those thynges alredy, and dyd helpe me in
some of them, but that was incidently, whan
from him I sped me to Moguncia, for busines
that I had there. But if it had so fortuned
that I myghte haue ben in your courte
with him (For than ye were away in Germanye)
I shuld haue intreated more warely of
all these thynges, and sette forth my booke
more perfectly. But how so euer it be now,
I praye your excellence to take hit welle i
                  •
               
worthe. And I presente hit vnto you for a
gyfte and token of this newe yere, whiche

I praye god may be lucky and prosperous
vnto you, And as fortunate as your owne
harte wyll desyre, without disdayne or enuye
of any persone. Thus I commende me
vnto you, mooste noble, mooste worthye,
most benigne, and excellent prelate,
whom almyghty god long kepe
in good helthe and prosperitie.
Amen. Wryten
at Moguncia
with myn own
hande.
            ¶Thus endeth this boke De morbo gallico, compiled by Vlrich Hutten knyghte.
         
      
   