
      
         
            
            A Ioyful Song of the Royall receiuing of the Queenes moſt excellent Maieſtie into her highneſſe Campe at Tilſburie in Eſſex: on Thurſday and Fryday the eight and ninth of Auguſt, 1588.
            To the Tune of Triumph and Ioy.
            
               
            
            
               GOod Engliſh men whoſe valiant harts,
               With courage great and manly partes,
               Doe minde to daunt the ouerthwarts,
               of any foe to England.
               Attend a while and you ſhall heare,
               What loue and kindneſſe doth appeare,
               From the princely mind of our loue deare,
               Elizabeth Quéene of England.
               To cheare her ſouldiers one and all,
               Of honour great or title ſmall,
               
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   by what name you will them call,
               
                  
                     〈…〉
                   of England.
            
            
               The time being dangerous now ye know,
               That forraigne enimies to and fro,
               For to inuade vs make a ſhow,
               and our good Queene of England.
               Her Maieſtie by graue aduiſe,
               Conſidering how the danger lyes,
               By all good meanes ſhe can deuiſe,
               for the ſafetie of all England.
               Hath pointed men of honour right,
               With all the ſpeede they could or might,
               A Campe of men there ſhould be pight,
               on Tilſburie hill in England.
            
            
               Her grace being giuen to vnderſtand,
               The mightie power of this her land,
               And the willing harts therein ſhe fand,
               from euery ſhire in England.
               The mightie troupes haue ſhewed the ſame,
               That day by day to London came,
               From ſhires and townes too long to name,
               to ſerue the Queene of England.
               Her grace to glad their harts againe,
               In princely perſon tooke the paine,
               To honour the troupes and Martiall traine,
               in Tilſburie campe in England.
            
            
               On Thurſday the eight of Auguſt laſt,
               Her Maieſtie by water paſt,
               When ſtormes of winde did blew ſo faſt,
               would feare ſome folke in England.
               And at her forte ſhe went on land,
               That neare to Tilſburie (ſtrong) doth ſtand,
               Where all things furniſht there ſhe fand,
               for the ſafe defenſe of England.
               The great ſhot then, did rage and roare,
               Replyed by a forte on the other ſhore,
               Whoſe poudred peilets what wo
                     •••
                   ye haue more,
               would feare any foe to England
            
            
               Her highneſſe then to the campe did goe,
               The order there to ſée and know:
               Which, her Lord generall did dutifully ſhow,
               in Tilſburie campe in England.
               And euerie Captaine to her came,
               And euerie Officer of fame,
               To ſhow their duetie and their name.
               to their ſoueraigne Quéene of England.
               Of tents and cabins, thouſands thrée,
               Some built with bowes and many a trée,
               And many of canuaſſe ſhe might ſée.
               in Tilſburie campe in England.
            
            
               Each Captaine had his colours braue,
               Set ouer his tent in winde to waue,
               With them their officers there they haue,
               to ſerue the Quéene of England.
               The other lodginges had their ſigne,
               For ſouldiers where to ſup and dine,
               And for to ſléepe: with orders fine,
               in Tilſburie Campe in England.
               And vittaling boothes, there plentie were,
               Where they ſold meate, bread, cheeſe and beere.
               One ſhould haue béen hangd for ſelling too dear
               in Tilſburie campe in England.
            
            
               To tell the ioy of all and ſome,
               When that her Maieſtie was come,
               Such playing on phiphes and many a drum,
               to welcome the Queene of England.
               Diſplaying of Enſignes verie braue,
               Such throwing of hats what would ye haue,
               Such cryes of ioy, God kéepe and ſaue,
               our noble Queene of England.
               And then to bid her grace good night,
               Great Ordenance ſhot with pellets pight,
               Fourteene faire peeces of great might,
               to feaze the foes of England.
            
            
               Her Maieſtie went then away,
               To the Court, where that her highneſſe lay,
               And came againe on the next day,
               to Tilſburie campe in England.
               The Captaines yerly did prepare,
               To haue their battell ſet out faire,
               Againſt her highneſſe comming there,
               to Tilſburie campe in England
               And long before her highneſſe came,
               Each point was ordered ſo in frame,
               Which ſerued to ſet forth the fame,
               of a royall campe in England.
            
            
               The gallant horſemen mounted braue,
               With ſtomackes ſtoute that courage haue,
               Whoſe countenance ſterne might well depraue
               in fight, the foe of England.
               The armde men, bowmen, and the ſhot,
               Of Muſkets and Caliuers hot,
               None of theſe wanted well I wot,
               in Tilſburie campe in England.
               Fiftie enſignes ſpred there were,
               Of ſeuerall colours fine and faire,
               Of drums and phyp
                     •
                  es, great numbers there.
               in Tilſburie campe in England.
            
            
               The battell plac'd in order due,
               mightie hoſt 
                     〈◊〉
                   tell you true,
               A famous ſight it was to view.
               that royall campe in England.
               The hoaſt thus ſet in battell ray,
               In brauer ſorte then I can ſay,
               For want of knowledge to diſplay,
               ſo goodly a campe in England.
               How the maine battel, and the winges,
               The vauntgarde, rearewarde, and ſuch things,
               The horſemen whoſe ſharpe launces ſtinges,
               in fight the foe of England.
            
            
               The Noble men, and men of fame,
               In duetie bound did ſhow the ſame,
               To waite when that her highnes came,
               our ſoueraigne Quéene of England.
               And the being come into the field,
               A martiall ſtaffe, my Lord did yéelde,
               Unto her highneſſe, being our ſhield,
               and marſhall chieſe of England.
               Then rode ſhe along the campe to ſée,
               To euerie Captaine orderly,
               Amid the rankes ſo royally,
               the marſhall thiefe of England.
            
            
               What princely wordes her grace declarde,
               What gracious thankes in euery warde,
               To euery ſouldier none ſhe ſparde,
               that ſerued any where for England.
               With princely promiſſe none ſhould lacke,
               Meate or drinke, or cloth for backe,
               Golde and ſiluer ſhould not ſlacke,
               to her marſhall men of England.
               Then might ſhe ſee the hats to flye
               And euerie ſouldier ſhouted hye,
               For our good Queene wee'l fight or dye,
               on any foe to England.
            
            
               And many a Captaine kiſt her hand
               As the paſt forth through euerie band,
               And leſt her traine farre off to ſtand,
               from her marſhall men of England.
               Two houres ſhe ſpent among them there,
               Her princely pleaſure to declare,
               Where many a one did ſay and ſweare,
               to liue and dye for England.
               And would not aſke one penny pay,
               To charge her highneſſe any way,
               But of their owne would finde a ſtay,
               to ſerue her grace for England.
            
            
               To my Lordes pauilion then ſhe went
               A ſumptuous faire and famous tent,
               Where dinner time her highneſſe ſpent,
               with martiall men of England.
               In the euening when the tide was come,
               Her highhneſſe thankt them all and ſome,
               With trumpets ſhrile and ſound of drum,
               returnd the queene of England.
               To the blockhouſe where ſhe tooke her barge,
               There diuers Captaines had their charge,
               Then ſhot the cannons off at large.
               to honour the queene of England.
            
            
               And thus her highneſſe went away,
               For whoſe long life all England pray,
               King Henries daughter, and our ſtay,
               Elizabeth quéene of England.
               What ſubiect would not ſpend his life,
               And all he hath to ſtay the ſtrife,
               Of forraigne foe that ſeekes ſo rife,
               to inuade this realme of England.
               Therefore deare countrie men I ſay,
               With hart to God let vs all pray,
               To bleſſe our Armies night and day,
               that ſerue our Queene for England.
            
            FINIS.
            
               T. I.
            
         
      
      
         
            LONDON Printed by Iohn W
                  ••••
                for Richard Iones. 1588.
         
      
   