
      
         
            
            ¶A godly Ballad declaring by the Scriptures the plagues that haue inſued whordome.
            
               
                  REfrain of youth thy vain deſire.
               ſubdue thy luſts inordinate:
               Suppreſſe ye ſparks leſt if the fire,
               to quenche them it wilbe to late.
            
            
               Thou knowſte not what a poiſō ſtrong
               thou letteſt breed within thy breſt,
               Whiche if thou keep within thee long,
               wil cauſe thee care and muche vnreſt.
            
            
               Though it ſeem ſweet in thy conceit,
               beware thou neuer nuriſh it:
               The Fiſh is by a pleſant bait,
               conſtrained to the deadly bit.
            
            
               Like as the woorm in Affrick bred.
               whoſe ſting deſtroith with venem colde:
               Is not ſo noiſome to be fled,
               as luſt that reigneth vncontrolde.
            
            
               If reaſon cannot rule thy wil.
               but vice wil reign through appetite:
               Then let thy harmes that happen ſtil,
               (through luſts) refrain thy fond delight.
            
            
               Remember eke that in Noes dayes,
               when vice through luſt was rifly growne:
               The whole world by ſuche wicked waies,
               by rage of Rain was ouerthrowne.
            
            
               The King of Egipt Pharao,
               was he not plagued of God moſte iuſt:
               Bothe he and all his houſe alſe,
               onely for he gaue place to luſt.
            
            
               So read we of Abimelech,
               the mighty King of Gerera:
               That God gaue him a greuous check,
               for luſting after Saraa.
            
            
               Luſt did deſtroy the Sodomites,
               as is in Scripture manifeſt:
               For luſt were ſlain the Sichamites,
               when Sichem Dina had oppreſt.
            
            
               Luſt did the wits ſomuche inchaunt.
               of Putipher thegipcians wife:
               That Iofeph for he would not graunt,
               her ſute ſhe brought nigh from his life.
            
            
               Bethſaba naked in bath,
               bewitched ſo King Dauids brain:
               That giltles he procured hath,
               her huſband Vry to be ſlain.
            
            
               The cheef among the Iſraelites,
               for noughty luſt and eke offence:
               Wrought by the meanes of Moabites,
               were hanged vp by Gods ſentence.
            
            
               For luſt Zimry the Iſraelite,
               as witneſſeth Gods holy woord:
               And Coſby eke the Madianite,
               periſhed bothe through Zimphas ſwoord,
            
            
               The Iſraelites through fleſhly luſt,
               towards their enmies doughters were:
               Alluerd by them falſe Gods to truſt,
               whiche all their thraldomes cauſed clere.
            
            
               Sampſon the ſonne of Monoa,
               that mighty Iudge in Iſrael:
               For luſt he had to Dalila,
               him ſelf to kil greef did compel.
            
            
               Lo, him that none coulde foil in fight,
               whoſe puiſſant arme the Lion ſlew:
               Whoſe ſtrength put thouſands vnto flight,
               by luſt one woman ouerthrew.
            
            
               Luſt in the tribe of Beniamin.
               caſt twenty thouſand down and fiue:
               So that in all for that one ſin,
               were but ſix hundred left on liue.
            
            
               If Ammons luſt had not defilde,
               his ſiſter Thamar with inceſt:
               He had not of his life been ſpoild,
               at Abſolon his brothers feaſt.
            
            
               If luſt had not impaird the name,
               of Salomon that witty King:
               He had not loſt his roiall fame,
               nor fallen to Idolls worſhiping.
            
            
               If Herod in his ſinful life,
               had not by luſt been ſore miſled:
               He had not kept his brothers wife.
               nor ſtricken of Iohn Baptiſts head.
            
            
               ¶Now what be theſe but tokens ſure,
               that God wil plage all thoſe that vſe:
               To lead their liues in luſt vnpure,
               and with out fear them ſelues abuſe▪
               
            
            
               But ſome doo think God dooth not ſee,
               to eche mannes dooing in all things,
               Becauſe ſome ſeem ful ſafe to be,
               and proſper ſtil in il liuings.
            
            
               But if ſuche wil geue ear vnto,
               Gods woord which dooth the truth vs tel:
               Shal ſoon perceiue thoſe that liue ſo,
               ſhall ſudenly go down to hel.
            
            
               Therfore to God now let vs pray,
               that he wil gide our harts a right:
               To flee from filthy luſts alway,
               and him to pleaſe with all our might.
            
            
               And alſo for our gracious Queene,
               that God long proſper her and then:
               Good dayes among vs may be ſeene,
               whiche vnto vs he graunt. Amen.
            
            Finis.
            
               A. I.
            
         
      
      
         
            ¶Imprinted at London at the long Shop adioining vnto Sainct Mildreds Churche in the Poultrie by Iohn Allde. Anno Domini 1566. Nouembris. 25.
         
      
   