
      
         
            
            
            
               ❧The offer and order giuen forth by Sir Thomas Smyth
Knight, and Thomas Smyth his ſonne, vnto ſuche as be willing to accompanye
the ſayde Thomas Smyth the ſonne, in his voyage for the inhabiting ſome
partes of the Northe of Irelande.
            
               THE Queenes Maieſties graunt made to ſyr Thomas Smith Knight, and Thomas
Smyth his ſonne in Ireland, is all that is hir maieſties by enheritance, or other right
in the country called the ARDS, & part of other coūtreys adiacent in ye Erledom of VLSTER,
ſo that they can poſſeſſe & repleniſh them with Engliſh men. The which thing
that it might the more ſurely be done, the ſayd ſir Thomas & Thomas his ſonne, haue
bounden themſelues to her highneſſe to diſtribute al the ſayd land within the ſaid countreys,
which they ſhall be able to obteyne and poſſeſſe, to ſuche as ſhall take paynes to
helpe them to poſſeſſe the ſame, to haue and hold to them and to their heires for euer.
            That is to ſay, to eche man who wil ſerue as a ſouldier on foot, one Plowland conteining
a hundreth & twenty acres Iriſh of arable land, for which the ſaid ſir Thomas
and Thomas, muſt pay to the Queenes maieſtie two pence▪ Iriſh for an Iriſh acre, after
foure and twentie foote to the pole. In conſideration of whiche rente by them to be payde vnto her Maieſtie,
the Souldier ſhall paye for the ſayde plowlande vnto ſyr Thomas Smyth and Thomas, and their heires, one
peny ſierlyng for euery Engliſhe acre of the ſayde Plowelande, after the meaſure of ſixteene foote and an halfe
to the pole, and no more. The firſt payment to begn foure yeares hence, videlicet. 1576.
            To eche man who wyll ſerue on horſebacke two plowelandes, videlicet two hundreth and fortie Acres Iriſhe,
whiche is at the leaſt fiue hundreth acres and more Engliſhe, paying for euery acre Engliſh as the footman doth.
            And the earable lande beyng deuided, eche foote man and horſeman ſhall haue alſo allotted vnto hym paſture,
medowe, wood, and ſuche lyke neceſſary, as the countrey will ſerue, as reaſonably as they haue arable ground,
ſo that they may therewith bee contented.
            The charges that is required of a footeman at his firſt ſetting foorthe, if he be furniſhed of ſufficient armour,
for a Pike, Halberd, or Caliuer, with a conuenient liuerey cloake of red colour, or carnation wyth black facing, is
tenne poundes for his vitayling for one whole yeare after his arriuall and his tranſportation: after which yeare,
there is hope to fynde prouiſion inough in the countrey, which they ſhall obteyne with good guydance.
            The charges of a horſeman well horſed and armed for a lighte horſeman with a ſtaffe and a caſe of Dags, is
twentie pounds for vittaile of hym and his horſe for one whole yeare, and for his tranſportacion. His liuery had
neede be of the colour aforeſayd and of the faſhion of the riding Dutch cloakes nowe vſed.
            And to auoyde the Flixe and ſuche daungerous diſeaſes as doth many tymes chaunce to ſouldiers by reaſon of
lying vpon the grounde and vncouered, and lykewyſe to horſſes for lacke of hales. If any ſouldier footeman wyll
giue before hande ten ſhillings, and the horſman twentie ſhillings, they ſhall be lodged vnder canuas, and vpon
beddes, vntill houſes may be prouided.
            And if any will bear
                  •
                the charges of a Souldyer, that cannot goe hymſelfe, nor ſend an other in his roome, he
ſhall haue his part of land allotted to him as wel as though he went himſelf: but then for a footman he muſt pay
in readie money .xvj. pound .xiij. s .iiij. d. This is one parte. And if any wyll haue two partes or more, then according
to this rate to pay the money. The Coronel to find the ſayd footman or men in al points, for the firſt yeare
according as the money is receiued.
            And to the intent that no man willing to aduenture in this moſt honorable & profitable voyage, may doubt hereof,
if it pleaſe him to reſorte to London into Paules Churchyarde to the ſygne of the Sunne, there hee ſhall ſee
both the Letters Patentes and the Indentures of couenauntes betwixte the Queenes Maieſtie and the ſayd ſir
Thomas Smith and Thomas Smith, and pay ſuch money as he is diſpoſed to aduenture, and receiue hys aſſuraunce
from Thomas Smith the ſonne, who taketh the aduenture and voyage vpon hym to goe in perſon, or if
the ſaid Thomas be not there, one of the receiuers of this voiage remaining there, ſhal do herein as apperteineth,
whom he hath made his deputie in this behalfe.
            Note that all ſuche kyndes of prouiſion as be neceſſary in this iourney, the treaſourer may receyue in lieu of money,
according as he ſhall haue neede of ſuche prouiſion, be already furniſhed therwith, and according to the place
where the ſayde prouiſion ſhall lye for the commodious tranſportation thereof.
            Bicauſe the tyme of our Embarking is ſhorte: And that it is neceſſarie that ſome tyme for the prouiſion and
gathering togither of all things neceſſary be had after the receipt. Therfore haue we appointed the ſaid receipt in
all places, to ende the laſt day of Februarie. Requeſting all ſuche as be reſolued to aduenture in thys enterpriſe, to
haſten in their paiments before that laſt day of Februarie. Eſpecially immediatly vpon their reſolution to ſende vp
their names in wryting, the quantitie of their aduenture, and the day or dayes, which they ſhall take within the
terme afore limitted, for the paiment of ſuche ſummes. The ſame vnder their hands to be deliuered with all ſpeede
vnto the Treaſorer or Receiuer, where they ſhal thinke good to pay their ſaid aduentures, to the ende their names
may be entred certenly. And the number once knowne, all neceſſaries by proportion prouided accordingly. As for
the day and place certaine of meeting and Embarking, bicauſe it is not neceſſary to publiſhe the ſame, the Treaſorer
or Receiuer, ſhall giue it foorth by Ticquet at the time of his receipt of the aduenture.
            
               
                  Tho Smith
                God ſaue the Queene.
         
      
   