
      
         
            
            
            LAWES AND Orders of Warre, established for the good conduct of the seruice in Jreland.
            
            
               
                  ROBERT Earle of Essex and Ewe, Earle Marshall of Englande, Vicount Hereforde and Bourgcher, Lord Ferrers of Chartley, L. Bourgcher and Louayn, and her Maiesties Lieutenant and Gouernour generall of the
                  
                  kingdome of Ireland, To all Officers of the Armie, and all Coronels, Captaines, Officers and Souldiers of Companies, and all her Maiesties Subiectes and others, whom these Lawes and Orders ensuing respectiuely and seuerally shall concerne.
            
            FOrasmuch as no good seruice can be perfourmed, or warre well managed where Military discipline is not obserued; And Military discipline cannot bee kept where the Rules or chiefe partes thereof bee not certainly set downe and generally knowen: I haue with the aduise of the Counsaile of Warre set downe these Lawes and Orders following, and doe now publish them vnder my hand, that all persons in this Armie or Kingdome within my charge, may take knowledge of the saide Lawes, and the penalties set downe for the breakers of them.
            First, Since we owe our highest duetie and greatest alleageance to him from whom all power and authoritie flowes as from the first fountaine, and must receiue our successes of him that is Lord of Hostes: I doe streightly charge and commaund all Commaunders and officers of the Army to see that Almightie GOD be duely serued, that Sermons, Morning and Euening prayer be diligently frequented, and that those that do often and wilfully absent themselues, be duely punished.
            2 Let no man speake impiously and maliciously

against the holy and blessed TRINITIE, or any of the three persons, that is to say, God the Father, God the Sonne, and God the holy Ghost, or against the knowne Articles of the Christian faith, vpon paine of death.
            3 Let no man blaspheme Gods holy Name, or vse vnlawfull othes or execrations, or commit any irreligious acte to the derogation of Gods honour, vpon paine of losse of his pay, imprisonment, and such further punishment as a Marshall Court shall thinke his offence deserues.
            4 No man shall vse any traiterous wordes against her Maiesties person or Royal authority vpon paine of death.
            5 No man whether hee be Souldier or other, English or Irish, shal haue conference or intelligence with any enemy or Rebell, that is in open action against her Maiestie, or harbour or receiue any such within the Campe, or any Towne, Fort, Castell, or Garrison, or shall sende or procure to be sent any victuall, munition or other reliefe to any enemy or Rebel in action, vpon paine of death: Except, such as shalbe auowed and warranted by me (or those that shall commaunde the Army in mine absence) to speake, conferre, or haue intelligence, or commerce with the enemy or Rebels.
            6 No man shall runne to the enemie or Rebel

that is in action, or depart the Army without license vpon paine of death.
            7 No man shall commit any murther, or kill any person or draw blood of any, or draw any sword in priuate quarrell, with intent to offer violence within the Campe or Garrison, vpon paine of death.
            8 No man shall rauish or force any woman, vpon paine of death. And adulteries or fornications shalbe punished by imprisonment, banishment from the Army, or such other penaltie as by the Marshals Court shalbe thought meete.
            9 No man shall steale or take by force any treasure, victuall or munition of her Maiesties, or take by force, or steale from any person, any money, armes, apparell, or other goods being aboue the valew of 12. pence, vpon paine of death.
            10 No man shall deliuer vp any Towne, Castel, Fort or Skonse without warrant, or depart from any Streight or passage which he is commanded to make good, or take Passeport of the Enemy or any Rebel in action, for any Troopes, or make any ignominious composition with the Enemy or Rebel in action, vpon paine of death.
            11 No man shall throw away his armes, or abandon his Ensigne, Cornet, or Gwidon, or flie away in any Battell or Skirmish, vpon paine of death.
            
               12 No man beeing set Sentinel shall sleepe, or appointed by the Officer of the Garde, or any superiour Officer that hath authoritie to place him, shal depart and forsake that place without warrant, vpon paine of death.
            13 No man shal offer any violence, or contemptuously disobey his Commaunder, or doe any acte, or speake any wordes which are like to breede any mutinie in the Armie, or impeach the obeying of the Generals or principall Officers directions vpon paine of death.
            14 No man shall outrage, or doe violence to any that comes to bring victuall to the Armie vpon paine of death.
            15 No man that caries Armes or pretends to be a Souldier, shall remaine three dayes in the Armie after it is on foote, except he be inrolled in some Company, vpon paine of death.
            16 No Souldier of the Armie shall do violence to the person, or steale, or violently take, or wilfully spoyle the goods of any Irish good subiect, vpon paine of death.
            17 No Souldier shall burne any house, or lodging, or burne or wilfully spoyle any Corne, Ship, or Boate, or Cariage, or other thing that may serue for the prouision of the Armie, without he be commaunded

so to doe by the Generall, or some principall Officer of the Armie, vpon paine of death.
            18 No man shall depart a mile out of the Army or Campe, except hee be commaunded, or lawfully warranted so to doe, vpon paine of death.
            19 No Souldier shal breake his order to follow any rowte or chase, or to seeke any pray or spoyle, except he be commaunded by such as haue authoritie, nor further then hee is commaunded, vpon paine of death.
            20 No man that hath passeport for any limited time, shall exceede the time limited for his absence, except he can proue hee was stayed by the hand of God, vpon paine of death.
            21 No Prouider, Keeper, or Officer of her Maiesties victuals or munitions, shall embesell any part thereof, or giue any false account to the Generall, with a purpose to deceiue her Maiestie, or to hinder the seruice vpon paine of death.
            22 No man shal wilfully or through grosse negligence fayle of comming to the Rendezuous assigned to him by the Generall, or other principall Officer, that shall commaund the Armie vpon paine of death.
            23 No Souldier in musters shall answere for

an other, or take two payes, or muster in a false name, to defraude her Maiestie vpon payne of death.
            24 No Captaine shall through corruption, wilfulnesse or grosse negligence, suffer his Companie to growe weake, or practise to defraude her Maiesty in his muster, vpon paine of imprisonment, losse of his place, and ignominious banishment from the Armie.
            25 No Captaine of the Armie, or Officer shal giue passeport to anie, or dismisse any Souldier once inrolled, without warrant from the Generall, or other Officer whom he shall authorise, vpon paine of losse of his place and imprisonment.
            26 No Souldier shall depart from his Captaine, or seruant frō his Master, without his licence, though he serue still in the Armie, vpon paine of a moneths imprisonment, and losse of a moneths wages.
            27 No Souldier shall play away, giue away, pawne or sell away his Armes, without he be dismissed and haue leaue of his Captaine so to doe, vpon paine of imprisonment.
            28 All Captaines shall be diligent in training their Companies, and shall be carefull in gouerning them well, and in prouiding for them, and also shall see in all Seruices that they doe the dueties of Souldiers, as they will hope for fauour and aduancement,

or escape ignominious displacing from their charges.
            29 All Captaines or other Officers, that for the time shall haue Command of Companies, shall see their Companies doe orderly Quarter as they are appointed, and to entrench or fortifie as much of the Quarter as they are appointed, and as they are commanded, vpon paine of losse of their places.
            30 No man shall spoile or take the goods of any man that dieth or is killed in Seruice, vpon paine of restoring the double valew: But the goods of such as die in the Armie, if they make any Will by Writing or Word, shall bee disposed according to the Will, if they make no Will, it shall be distributed to the hurt, sicke, and poore of the Companie whereof the Souldier was, or shall goe to the Hospitall of the Armie.
            31 No man shall enter or goe out of the Army, but by ordinarie wayes, vpon payne of imprisonment.
            32 No man shall giue any disgracefull wordes, or commit any acte to the disgrace of any person in this Armie, or any part thereof, vpon paine of imprisonment, publike disarming, and banishment from the Armie, as men for euer disabled to carrie Armes. And as I forbid all men vnder my rule to renew any old quarels, or to begin any new, so I do acquite and discharge all men that shall haue quarell

offered to them, or chalenges made to them of any disgrace, or opinion of any disaduantage, since they doe but doe the dueties of Souldiers which ought to subiect themselues to Martiall discipline, and they that prouoke them shalbe proceeded withal as breakers of all good Discipline, and enimies to the good successes of the Seruice.
            33 And because drunkennesse is the mother of many other vices and disorders in Armies, euery Souldier or Officer that shall be found drunke, shall bee committed to prison for the first offense: And if he fall into it the second time, being a priuate Souldier, hee shall besides his imprisonment forfeit two moneths pay: if he bee an Officer, he shall loose his place: The third time shall haue such farre greater punishment as a Martials Court shall set downe.
            34 Euery priuate man and Souldier vpon paine of imprisonment, shall keepe silence when the Armie is to take lodging, or when it is marching or imbatteling, so as the Officers may be heard, and the commandements executed.
            35 No Souldier seruing on Foote, shall carrie any Boy, nor no Woman shall bee suffered to follow the Armie.
            36 All Captaines, Officers and Souldiers shall doe their endeuours to detect, apprehend and bring to punishment all offenders, and shall assist the Officers of the Armie for that purpose, as they will answere

their slacknesse, and be censured at a Marshals Court.
            37 All other faults, disorders and offences that are not mentioned in these Articles shalbe punished according to the generall Customes and Lawes of Warres, and therefore I command all men to looke to their charge: and him that hath no charge to looke to his owne carriage, and to keepe himselfe within bands of duetie: for the discipline of Warre shall be strictly kept, and the Lawes thereof seuerely executed.
            
         
      
   