
      
         
            
            
            A
TRVE AND
CERTAINE REport
of the Beginning, Proceedings,
Ouerthrowes, and now present Estate of Captaine
WARD and DANSEKER, the two late
famous Pirates: from their first setting
foorth to this present time.
            
               AS ALSO
The firing of 25. Saile of the Tunis, men of
warre: Together with the death of diuers
of WARDS chiefe Captaines.
            Published by Andrew Barker Master of a Ship,
who was taken by the Confederates of Ward,
and by them some time detained
Prisoner.
            LONDON,
Printed by William Hall, and are to be sold
by Iohn Helme at his shop in S. Dunstans
Church-yard. 1609.
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
         
         
            
            
            TO HIS WORSHIPFVL, WORthy
and singular good friend Master
T. I. these faithfull commendations.
            
               SIr, a farre greater happines then I of late
haue had, either leisure to hope for, or
means to expect; I commend to your
good selfe, & the frends of our acquaintance.
Being certified by my affection,
that your gentle nature, doth commiserat
the misfortunes hath befalne me, and therein as a
friend, doth share with mee in sorrow: I shall as soone
as occasion will suffer me, make hast to London, to bee
counselled by your aduise, touching those things in
particular, that mainly concerne my estate: Nor make
I any doubt, but before the receipt hereof, you haue
heard of my mishap, from the report of some of my men
who I hope, are ariued by passage, by the way of Holland:
therefore I omit herein to trouble you with the maner of
my first taking by the Turkes, whose gouernours, I
meane Masters & Pilates, are all Englishmen, not onely
Pirates, but mearely reprobates, and whose successe at
Seas is so great, that it is most lamentable to report, how
many Ships of London, and other parts of England haue
beene taken and made prey vnto them: without the help
of which English, the Turks by no means could haue gouerned
and conducted them through their vnskilfulnes
and insufficiencie in the art of Nauigation: yet of late to
my wofull experience, I can witnes, they haue beene so
readied by the instruction of our apostate countrimen,
[I meane of Ward and others, who haue beene their
commanders] to tackle their Ships, to man and mannage
a fight, that if it doe not please God to moue the
heart of his Maiestie, and other Christian Princes, and

states, to ioyne together for their speedy suppression,
and the disiointing of their late strengthned forces,
which continually encreaseth by the Ships of England,
and Holland, which they daily surprise, It will be discomodious
to the state, and so dangerous to the common
wealth, in succeeding times, that Christendome must
expect no Trafficke at Sea: for they are alreadie grown
to the number of fifteene saile of great ships belonging
to Tunis, some bearing 40. some 30. and some 20. pecces
of ordinance, with men accordingly, as 300. 250. and
200. men at the least, in euery Ship, so that I doubt, and
the cause it selfe may breed a generall feare, that if expedition
be not hastened against them, the state may
heareafter share a part in that sorrow, which wee poore
Sea-faring men haue already suffered. I haue sent you
a note by Leanard Crowder, of diuerse ships, both English
and Dutch, that haue been taken since Ianuary last, which
although it be a businesse not much pertinent to gentlemen
of your profession; yet I doe assure my selfe, that
you are so faithfull a wel-willer to the good estate and
prosperitie of the common-wealth, of which the Merchant
and Marriners are not the least members, that in
pitie of our losses sustained, with vs you could wish, and
expect a reformation, since the infinite wealth that our
nation hath suffered ruine of, by the Turks this last yeer
it were without doubt, incredible to report, since happily
you haue heard, and I doubt not to prooue that
Londons losses hath amounted to aboue 200000. pound.
Thus hauing presented you at this time, but with a relish
and taste of that which heereafter shall bee stored to
your expectation in a more ample and fuller feast, I beseech
you receiue this with my loue, in good part.
            
               Alwaies desirous to be
commanded yours
ANDREVV BARKER.
            
         
      
      
         
            
               
               The true report of Captaine
VVARDS Piracies, done by Andrew
Barker, Mr. of a Ship, and who was
lately prisoner in Tunis.
               
                  SIr, I haue receiued your
Letter, and herein am glad
to consent to your request,
which was, (that since so
many flying fables, and
rumoring tales haue béene
spread, of the fame, or rather
indéede infamie, ouer
the whole face of Christendome,
of this notorious
and arch pirate Ward)
my selfe, who had euen knowne him to be a knaue, and
of late (yet too soone) had prooued him a théefe, whose
fortunes had béene so much decaied by his prosperitie,
and who so long had béene held his prisoner 
                     〈◊〉
                  
                  ▪
who had there séene, abroad heard, and at Sea felt, the
abilitie of his strength, the ordering of his actions, and
the vniustnes of his procéedings. I might best gratifie
my friends, and most truely satisfie the world, and their
gréedy and auidous expectation, what iniurie hee hath
done, daily doth, and still indeauoureth to doe, to rich
estats, and prouident Sea-farers, to the venturing Marchant,
and the carefull Saylor, to poore wiues and distressed
children; how like a villaine, and an apostata he

liues, and how like a reprobate in persisting, he resolues
to die.
               Which pleasure of yours, that I may the better and
more fullie accomplish, and no way to seeme ingratefull
for your benefits receiued, in neglecting my paines, I beseech
you, let it not be held vnnecessarie by you, nor superfluous
of the world, that I first indeuour, to deliuer
truely, and of mine owne knowledge, the manner of his
first going forth to Sea, and the forme that he vsed in vndertaking
these courses: so shall I the more directly, and
in order, delymate his proceedings, describe his outrages,
dilate his customs, paint out his oppressions, picture
his lusts, image his riotts, manifest his ruins, and
in the end, giue you to expect that which is already begun
of him, his endlesse infamy, and deserued confusion.
               Which desire of mine, being I know by your curtesie
condiscended vnto, and I perceiue by your letter, is
expected of others, I pray you receiue this that followeth
for truth.
               This Ward, who now hath atchieued to himselfe, the
title of Captaine, whose desperate actions hath caused
terrour to trauellors by Sea, and whose name hath
bred feare in the Marchants at home. In the last yeare
of her late Maiesties raigne, was resident, and had his
dwelling, (as by my own knowledge I can certifie) in the
West countrie at the hauen Towne of Plimouth, a fellow,
poore, base, and of no estéeme, one as tattered in

                     〈◊〉
                  , as he was ragged in conditions, the good past,
that he could boast of himselfe, might bee, that hee was
borne in a Towne called Feuersham in Kent, and there
liued as a poore fisherman, and the vertue present, that
he durst talke of was, he had abiding in Plimouth, wherfore
a while kéeping house, although I haue neuer heard
that he paid his rent, all the day you should hardly faile
but finde him in an alehouse: but bee sure to haue him
drunke at home at night. Othes were almost as ordinarie
with him as words, so that hee seldome spake a sentence,

but one was a silable, hee would sit melancholy,
speake doggedly, curse the time, repine at other mens
good fortunes, and complaine of the hard crosses attended
his owne. All the vertue that any man could perceiue
might grow out of his whole course, or reckon out of his
whole life was, that hitherto hee loued not to be noted a
quarellor: for rather then he would fight, he would be
beaten by any one, he was commonly called by the name
of Iack Ward, one that was welcome into any tap-house,
more for loue of his coyne, then loue of his company, and
all the reputation that his owne crue held of him, was
but this, that he was a mad rascall, would sweare well,
drinke stiffe, stick toot, and like a good cocke, hee would
neuer out of their damnable pit, If there were either
money in his purse, or credible chalke in his hosts hand,
being once in.
               So that continuing thus for a reasonable season, in
the same towne drinking and swearing, the two twins,
that such damnable wombes are euer in labour with,
and not without wonder of a number, by what possible
meanes he could get chinkes, so lewdly to consume his
time withall. It at last so happened, that in the beginning
of the Kings raigne, hee found meanes to bee imployed
for seruice, in a small ship of his maiesties, commō
                  ly
called by the name of the Lions Whelpe, in which imployment,
persisting as before, in his melancholy disposition,
not contented, with that good and honest meanes
was allowed him, and satisfied farre better men, to defend
themselues and the necessitie of their charge: But hauing
new reaches working in his braine, he one day selected
out a choice crew, but of such, whose dispositions
he perceiued were as vntoward as his owne, when the
poison of his heart disgorged it selfe thus.
               My mates, quoth he, whats to be done? heres a scuruy
world, and as scuruily we liue in't, we féede here vpon
the water, on the Kings salt béefe, without ere a penis
to buy vs bissell when we come a shore, heres brine,

but to reuell, suppe, and be mery, euery one at the proper
charge of his owne purse. So that this following night.
when the Captaine and Officers shall coniecture nothing.
but that we are drawing drie the pot, wee'll bee diuing
arme deepe in the Fugitiues bagges.
               With which hopefull proiect, their resolutions being
confirmed, and with the former purpose, getting a shore
to their hosts house, (which they chose to be without the
walles of Portsmouth) after some halfe a dozen of damnable
healths tane downe, they agreed amongst them,
that with full cans, for the deuising and foreseeing into
this beneficiall businesse, they fréely, and of their owne
accord would elect Ward for their Captaine, and which
dignitie accordingly (being downe on their knees) with
drinke they performed, which instalment done, and considering
with themselues how they might best prouide
themselues of a boat, which the next full Sea should set
them abord the Barke, they resolued at a sortable houre
to begin their ransacke.
               But see how it happened: A kinsman of this gentlemans,
who had intended his departure, and furnished
himselfe to this voyage for France, seeing the day before
they attempted this Piracie, this Ward consorted with a
crue of Scattergoods and swaggering Rascals, and knowing
fully of the charge that his friend had aboord, and
withall nothing such a crew of desperates, mustering about
Towne, more then in one knot had béene accustomed,
and with such vnciuill behauiour, hee began to bee
iealous they had some proiect in hand: whereupon he aduised
his friend to disbarke his mony againe, till the very
instant that the winde serued, and to lodge it in some
place of more safety, to preuent the danger hee stood in
doubt of: for, quoth he, your selfe may witnesse what a
knot of these knaues are linked together, who hauing
not some intelligence, or but at least suspecting what substance
you beare along with you, they will not sticke to

venture their bodies, I and it were to hazard their soules
for mony wherewithall to maintaine their riot.
               So that I pray you Sir, be aduised by my counsell:
Redeeme your money out of the Barke, and preuent
their purpose, lest your repentance come too late. Which
counsell of his friends, setting some suspition in the gentlemans
head, and being the rather confirmed and grounded,
through the disorders hee beheld them continue in,
and more then they were accustomed to exercise, hee resolued
himselfe to his friends aduice, and priuately (either
without knowledge or suspition) landed his money and
most estimable riches, and stored them in the red Lion,
(contenting themselues, then suspectlesse, to see what
would be the issue of these fellowes) and vntill the winde
and tide should helpe faire for their departure.
               Which defense of this gentlemans this new Captaine
Ward nothing at all suspecting, with his Command (as
he before had determined) in the dead of night, and hauing
so much experience to know when the tide and time
was best for his aduantage, hee presently came and laid
the Barke aboord, and entred his men in the hold of the
Uessell, where he found none to resist him, but only two
poore s
                     •
                  ekes, who belonged to the Barke, whom hee
straight shut vnder decke, and commanded them, not to
squeake like Rats (in danger of their liues) whereby, vpon
their disturbance, the wach vpon the first Blockhouse
might haue warning, and so with their Pot-guns disquiet
their peace. So presently waying Anchor, and setting
his sailes, to Sea goes he. Onely before his deparparture
(yet not till he found himselfe out of their reach)
he takes his farewell aloud, and very kindly bids me the
watch good night. So that being now cléere, and out of
danger of their summons, and likewise come forth, without
the Ile of Wight, like a Captaine indeed, who now
had command, he demands for the two men were lodged
in his 
                     
                        •
                     arke, and who, according to his call, were

brought to his sight, when most Commander like, hee
began to question them, as they loued their safeties, to
deliuer truly vnto him, in what place of the Barke was
the Papists treasure hid, for that was the chiefe matter
they came for, and that must bee the meanes to make
them merrie withal, when these poore wretches shaking
for feare before this terrible theefe, they replyed, that his
expectation was heerein frustrate, store of riches they
must confesse there was indeed, but vpon what reason
they knew not, it was the day before landed againe.
               At which vnsatisfied newes, and finding by search
their words to be true, the whole crue hauing this cake
of Ice for Sunne-shine golde to chaw down, and
comfort their stomacks withall. The Rogues all, began
now to be ranck mad, there was then, such Cursing, such
Swearing, such Banning: there was a pox of thee, a pox
of thee, and a plague of vs all, what shall now become of
vs? The Goldfinches wee came for, were flowen out
of their nest, little succour is to be found heere, and to go
a shore we shall be sure to be hanged there, heare wee are
fallen desperately into the pitfall, and there wee haue
brought our necks iust to the noose. Yet at last, when
their furie like an Hostler, had walked them awhile, and
the heat of their bloods was growen a little calmer, they
agreed amongst themselues, that since their pretence
was to come for somewhat, they would at last see what
was there to be found. In which search, there was presently
laid open to their Rauening eies, a couple of Venson-Pasties,
diuers Turkey-pies, Capons, Hens, and such
other choice viands, as the forerecited Gentlemen, had
stored in the barke for his own prouision, to conduct him
into France and of euerie sort whereof, them was great
store. At the sight of which, Ward raps out oathes like
p
                        •
                     llets out of a péece, that fly as swiftly as they can passe
one after another, and cals, come, lets bee merrie my

hearts, although the birds be flowen, we came far, and
we haue found nothing but the emptie nest, come, lets
be merrie, & freely fat our selues with their fodder, here
is good cheare, it was prouided for vs, and weele eat, an
ounce of sorrow will not pay a penny debt. It is bootelesse
in these daies, to lie in a dich and cry for help, since euerie
man is boūd to thrust out his hand to help himself,
and therefore my hearts let vs be frolike with this, and
liue in hope that our fortuns wil be better. At which (as
if they had forgot alreadie what they had done, and not
fering what might follow) with this encouragemēt they
fell roundly aboord, when anon Ward called to them againe,
what, say you my bloods, who would bee a
boord of the Lyons whelpe, with bare and hungrie allowance
of cold fish and naked cheese, and may as we do
thrust vp their armes to the elbow in a Venison pastie?
and with that, breaking vp a case of bottles, which were
presented full of wine to his theueships hand, heere my
mates (quoth he) heare is a health to our good fortunes,
and a pox of the Hang-man, wee know the worst, and
lets therefore hope for the best, weele be merrie to night
with wine and Uenison, and to morrow take counsell
whats best to be done.
               So that, no man taking care for any thing now, but
that euery one pleaged his partner a ful carouse, they sailed
one from the wight to the West part of England,
where neere vnto Silly they met with a French ship, laden
with marchandise, & who was bound for Irelād, the
ship being a vessel neare about thréescore and ten Tuns,
and who bare for her 
                     •••
                  ence sixe peeces of Ordinance.
This pray, had my Kight like Ward no soonner espied,
but calling his companions about him, in this forme
hee began to resolue them: my Comrads quoth hee,
you know wee haue procéeded so far, into the Théeues
path, that to returne backe we shall bee stopped with a
haltar. To trust to the mercie of the law, is as good as

for a man to chops hand vpon a Rasor and see if it will
cut. Therefore since to retire can allow vs no safety, it
will be wisdome heare to prouide for our safegard. Your
selues see, wee haue a Frenchman heere a ba
                        •
                     t of vs
and as I haue done, so I still doe, intreat the most of
you, but to keepe down vnder hatches, and that not passing
some four or fiue, may bee seene aboue, so by the
scantnes of our number seen, & the smalnes of our Ba
                     •
                  k
which I know he will take note of (I destring to kéep cō
                  apnie
with him) he shall haue no cause at al to suspect vs:
So that, when I shall finde fit opportunitie to giue him
the graple, & send to your eares the watch word (which
shall be this, now my masters for vs, we may on a sudden
board them, and being taken, in the dismay, so
hastily disharten them, that we shal immediatly be owners
of their goods, and with the helpe of their ship and
inunition, lay a fundation one the ground of which, wee
may raise our good hap: which subtiltie of his, was so
well entertained, that my Captaine had a Plaudite for
his paines, and euery mans hand preast to bee ready at
his becke.
               So then, with the hope of this plot, passing side by side
familiarly, and vnsuspected by the Frenchmen, their burden
being but small, and their number in sight so few,
and passing many houres, in courteous discourse, either
seeming glad of the others acquaintance, one the sudden
Ward, taking hold of opportunitie, he claps me the Frēchman
aboord, giues the watch word, and enters his men,
so that in a breath, was my poore Frentchman surprised,
his goods ceased one and m
                     〈…〉
                   
                  
                     ••
                  prisone, eare that
any had time to thinke how they could bee hurt. All
which discourse the two poore men who were first taken
when Ward tooke the Barke, did after their setting a
shore, and returne to Portesmouth, relate and constantly
affirme to one Iohn Rogers, owner of the Barcke, in
my hearing. So that it is without question, this was

the originall and first beginning of Wards piracy, euen so
base, and so low▪ although it is manifest, he hath aduanced
it to that height, which hath since beene the vndoing
of some, and the impouerishing of many.
               To proceed then, after as you haue heard, the French
man was taken by him, hee repaired into Causon Bay,
neare Plimouth, where with a long boate going a
shore, and flattring some others whom he met of his acquaintance,
with the newes of his successe, and expectation
to come, he their with men much strengthned his
company, and so put on to the coast of Spaine. Where about
the Southern cape, he tooke also a Fly boate laden
with excellent Merchandise, and the ship béing about a
hundred Tuns, with whom entering into the Straights,
he turned away his small Barcke with the Flemings,
and presently threupon hee tooke a Satta, and withall
which thrée ships, namely, your Frenchman, your Flieboate,
and S
                        ••
                     ta, he put on, and ariued at Argier, where
what was his entertainement, receiue this forcertaine.
               Not long before, one Captaine Iefferd had in the seruice
oft he Duke of Florence, attempted to set the Gallies belonging
to the King of Argier afire, and in which desperate
resolution, he had so farre preuailed, that they departed
not thence without performing much harme. In
displeasure of which, the king had grounded such an inward
hate against al Englishmen for Iefferds treachery,
that he solemnly vowed, that this iniurie should bee a
perfecution to any of the whole nation, that hapned in
his power, and to manifest, that his oath was not triuial
but as violent in performance, as it was forwa
                     •
                  d in promise,
in reuenge of the former attempt, hee put twelue
Englishmen, who were there in Argier to a most cruell
and lingring death, so that vpon Wards arriuall, forbidding
him to haue any succour on his shore, and Ward on
the other side hauing heard of his vowe, & not willing to

play with the Lyons paw, lest he should but faine himselfe
asleepe, without longer stay, or further suit, he with his
prises made vp for Tunis.
               
               Where with small suit to the King, in respect hee
brought Marchandise with him, beneficiall to the
state, hee had leaue, their to find safe harbouring for himselfe,
his ships and followers, where hauing made sale
of his Commodities, and presented diuerse acceptable
presēts to the King of Tunis, as also for his gifts, receiued
some outward graces of the Crossymon, which is as
much to say, the Lord Admirall of the Sea, and the man
that hath euer since, held share with Ward in all his Voyages,
Prises, and Shippings▪
                   and been his only supporter
in all his disseignes, and vpon whose promised fauour
and furtherance Ward growing bould, he was at length
a suter to the King, that he might be receiued as his subject,
or if not so, yet at all times, either in aduersity or
prosperitie, himselfe and what the Sea could yeeld him,
might be euer sanctuaried vnder his Princely protection,
and in recompence thereof, he vowed, hee would for euer
after, become a foe to all Christians, bee a persecuter to
their Trafficke, and an inpouerisher of their wealth,
onely (belike the diuell not yet hauing his full gripe one
him) he desired, his owne Countrey might be excepted
out of his taske, whom both by naturall loue and obedience,
he was bound to respect: withall that his Maiestie
would be pleased, for the better furnishing of those ships,
hee had their taken, their might bee leauied vnder his
command, a conuenient number of Turks with whom he
doubted not to returne, of Christians goods, with so worthy
a spo
                     •
                  le, that heereafter his name should bee held of
his greatnesse in more regard, and his seruice more acceptable,
which sute of his, being granted at full, and
Croseman, being an ader and furtherance in all his expeditons,
since as I said before in all his profits hee was
a full sharer. He puts forth from Tunis, and procéeded

downe to the bottome of the Straights, where he houered
not long before hee tooke a small Argosie, of the burden
of six hundred Tunnes. In the same action also, he tooke
a Ship of two hundred Tunnes, which he afterward named
The little Iohn, and armed her with foure and
twenty péeces of Ordinance. Hee then surprised also the
Mattalena, a French Ship, who came from Alexandria
with rich Commodities. In this voyage likewise was
gathered to him one Abraham Croften, and many other
worthy spirits, whose resolutions, if they had beene aimed
to honourable actions, either a sea or shore, they
might haue béene preferred and commended for seruice
to the greatest Prince liuing.
               Now concerning my knowledge in these Proceedings,
they were all of them, and each particular deliuered mée
by Graues, who tooke mee Prisoner, and euery circumstance
thereof resolued mee at full, by diuers others,
whom I had seuerall conference withall. As also that
they were aboue two hundred Englishmen, good Souldiers,
and expert Mariners, when they procéeded forward
to the Gulfe of Venice. To the which voyage incouraged
(saies Graues) we were foure well mand, and well
appointed Ships, ouer whom Captaine Ward was our
worthy Generall, who being seuered from vs by a forcible
Tempest, himselfe in his small Argosie, hauing none
but his Fly-boat with him, he met with a great Argosie
of fourtéene or fiftéene hundred Tunnes, very richlie
laden with Venetian goods, and who, by Computation,
was estéemed to be worth two millions at the least, betwixt
whom and him was such a mercilesse and incredible
fight, as a man may compare is betwéene those two
Tyrants, the remorselesse windes, and the resisting waters.
It was long, and it was cruell, it was forcible,
and therefore fearefull: but in the end our Captaine had
the Sunshine, he boorded her, subdued her, chained her
men like slaues, and ceasd on her goods, as his lawfull

                  prise, whom the whistling calme made musicke vnto,
vshering her and our Generall into Tunis, and whose
bounty with his men, did there triumph with her treasure.
               
               Which report from Graues, I receiuing not without
much wonder: and though I seemed to consent thereunto,
in my iudgement I discredited it, reputing his tale
rather a vaine glorious boast from him, to raise his
Captaines fame, and the more to amaze vs, that were
his Prisoners, then any discourse of truth that was worthy
the credit: till afterward, falling into conference with
Wards man, and who at that time was both in discontent
and dislike with his Master: of him I enquired of
the former relation, whose approbation was so much
and so much more highly aduanced, that mee thought
now, that Graues had but minced him in his discourse:
and where I ghest the spight and difference betwixt him
and Captaine Ward, should haue rather whetted his
tongue to disparage his worth, then haue stéeled it on to
describe his worthinesse, I vtterly found my expectation
frustrate: for demanding in particular of his Masters
valour, he did so farre commend his prouidence in going
on, and so farther extoll his manhood in atchieuing, that
for these last thrée yéeres, quoth he, he is growen the most
absolute, the most resolute, and the most vndauntedst
man in fight, that euer any heart did accompanie at sea.
And if his actions were as honest as his valour is honorable,
his deeds might be dignified in the Chronicles
with the worthiest. As also that in the aforesaid fight,
and taking the Argosie, whose oddes was reputed to bée
thrée to one, he did in the deadly conflict so vndauntedly
beare himselfe, as if he had, had courage to out-braue
death, and spirit to out-face danger▪ bastinadoing the
Turkes out of his Ship into theirs, and pricking others
on euen with the point of his poiniard, that, quoth he, I
could impartially say, his only resolution was cause of

the victorie, and that his forwardnesse made Cowards
venturous; whereby at last hauing seased her for his
owns, and brought her into the Bay of Tunis: and when
he had discharged and vnladen her goods, he diuided the
spoile as in share with the Turkes, to the great inriching
of the whole Country, and to the aduancing of his owne
pride.
               
               But as it is certaine, he that doth once accustome himselfe
to sinne, is alwaies sitting vpon Cockatrice egges,
that bring foorth nothing but poisonous effects: so fares
it with this Ward, and his whole company; and to approoue,
that goods ill gotten are most commonlie worse
spent, with this Treasure, which thus vniustly they had
inriched themselues withall, they accustome their liues
to all disorder, making their habit and carriage a shore,
farre more detestable, and vncomely to be talked of, or by
Christianity to be condemned and abhorred, then their
théeuing at Sea, swearing, drinking, dicing, and the vtmost
enormities that are attended on by consuming riot,
are the least of their vices, that can bee recited. Unlawfully
are their goods got, and more vngodly are they consumed,
in that they mix themselues like brute beasts
with the enemies of their Sauiour: so that he that was a
Christian in the morning, is bedfellow to a Iew at night.
Nay sinne is growen to that ranknesse amongst them,
through the fatnesse of Concupiscence and Couetousnesse,
that the Iewes hire out their off-spring to them as
we doe horses, either by the day or by the weeke: and as
wee doe at an outcry, cry, Who will giue more: so doe
these Iewes set out their children to them, asking, Who
giues aboue a Sultane shall haue this. So then since that
al men do know, it is a bad fare where nothing is bought,
and a great many of these Buiers, I will leaue their Sodomie,
and the rest of their crying sinnes (which I feare
their Atheisme hath led them into) to the Iudgement of
the Iust Reuenger, and not giue them to be talked of further

by my pen. Only for Ward, he liues there in Tunis,
in a most princely and magnificent state. His apparell
both curious and costly, his diet sumptuous, and his
followers seriously obseruing and obeying his will. Hee
hath two Cookes that dresse and prepare his diet for him,
and his taster before he eats. I doe not know any Peere
in England that beares vp his port in more dignitie, nor
hath his Attendants more obsequious vnto him. There
is no admittance of any Suter on any businesse, but their
businesse is first made knowen to one of his followers
that is neere him, which if he list not to regard, they haue
their answer from his man, that his greatnesse is not at
leisure, neither will he bee spoke withall. Nor could I
he
                     •
                  re of any affaires that were dispatched by him, in the
time of my imprisonment there, at their first comming,
but with long attendance, much sute, yea and (by your
leaue) some bribes: so that his successe hath made him
desperate and resolute, his riches haue made him proud.
And so being now at the highest, in hope pride shall haue
a fall, I procéed in this discourse.
               
                  Ward hauing thus taken this great Argosie, and (with
her and others) so inestimable riches, his minde was so
inflated with pride, and puft vp with vaine glorie, that
he now thought, nay did not spare to speake, he was sole
and onely Commander of the Seas. And indéed, like the
Sea, alwaies vnsatisfied (although, as I haue heard, and
by reason did coniecture, his Treasure was infinite) prouiding
himselfe for a fresh encounter, hee placed in this
great Ship thréescore péeces of Ordinance, and put into
her a hundred and fifty Englishmen, and two hundred
and fiftie Turkes ouer whom he made Abraham Croften
Captaine, and himselfe Generall, in his small Argosie
the Mattalena and the little Iohn, with whom lying in
the mouth of the Gulfe of Venice, there grew (vpon some
discontents) a muteny betwixt the English and the
Turkes: which Ward hauing intelligence of, hee went

aboord the Argosie with his boate, and althoug the heat
thereof, were already broke foorth, to a very forceable
blaste, he by his Temperance and perswasion, did very
worthily allay it, wherin (being people of so differēt a nature,
I meane Englishmen and Turkes) mee thought although
a Villaine, it was praise worthy in him to effect,
which discontent and heartburning appeased, hee came
a board his owne Ship againe, and lying in waite for
more bootie, it pleased God, now to preuent them a little
by a storme that arose, in which storme, the great Argosie
being much disabled with cutting so many holes
out of her sides for the planting of Ordinance and labouring
in the Sea, the violent split her selfe, and suncke
suddenly, all the men in her being drowned saue onely
foure, who the next day were taken vp floting vpon a
Raft of the ship. So that, he who but euen now thought
himself Commander and resistles at the Seas, found here
a power had Command our him, whereupon, hee now
began to feare the retchlesnes of his estate, and greatly to
complaine of the violence of his losse. Especially, for
Croston, who was equall with him in manhood, and
nothing inferiour to him in Command and warlike directions,
as also of the ruine of so many of his English, in
whom, his chiefe hope, stay, strength, and trust, was
built and consisted.
               Beside at his returne to Tunis, it was no small dismay
vnto him to heare so loudly the outcries and cursings
blown in his eares, of wiues, Fathers, and Kindred for
the losse, of so many of their friends at on blow, So that
for certaine, as Graues reported vnto me (in Wards own
opinion) he went not vp and downe but in feare of his
life, which distaste past, and doubt present, made him the
sooner haste to Sea againe, where to make it euident that
one sorrow neuer comes without an heire to succeede
him, my Captaine found that a second mischiefe did follow
this: for the Venetians, hauing sustained excéeding

great losse by his vngodly proceedings, the Segniorie of
Venice in redresse thereof, had caused to be built a great
Ship called S. Marke, of fifteene hundred Tunnes, in
manner of a Gallias, with fourescore péeces of brasse Ordinance,
and with her set foorth twenty or thirty saile
of Gallies: whose voyage and enterprise was directed a
purpose to beat him out of the Gulfe, and from houering
about their Coast. These thus at Sea happened vpon
Wards fly-boat, and forced her ashore, whose men for
safety running on Land, the Venetians pursued, slew
many of them, and two and thirty that they tooke, they
hung vp for carrion in the Iland of Corfowe: another
of his men of warre they haue taken since, so that by these
two dammages my desperate Pirate being so much dismaid,
he neuer since durst approch to the Gulfe, notwithstanding
I haue heard of diuers rich prises of the French
(which traded for Alexandria, and Cypres, and other
Ports in the bottome) which haue by him and his Complices
béene since taken, who, for that I haue not heard
their names, I will forbeare to report. Only I pray you
receiue these in good part, which from William Graues
his mouth were deliuered me, with the report of incredible
wealth that he and his men of warre haue taken since
his first refuge in Tunis.
               
               
                  Ward hauing thus had his Argosie shipwrackt, and
after that, two of his best men of warrs taken by the Venecians.
It followeth now that I in order deliuer, what
happened to him at Tunis. This last yeere was left him
onely, the halfe of two ships, the Mattelena, bearing two
and thirtie péeces of Ordinance, and of thrée hundred
Tuns, and the little Iohn spoken of before, which about
Christmas last past, he was minded to come to Sea with
all, and had furnished with victuals, munition, and all
things fitting for the furthering of his voyage. But hauing
the last two yéeres past, dealt but grosely and vnkindly
with such Englishmen, who were now left with

him, in not yéelding them their due shares, which they
expected their seruice dad deserued, they began now (taking
aduantage of his lownesse) to repine and to gather
head against him, and concluded awongst themselues,
that rather then Ward should containe them in that seruitude,
which in the time of his height and pride they
supposed they were held, they would now take a course
to proud for redresse, and which was, they would immediately
run away with the ship, (or at least, the shippe
should run away with them) and with her whole prouision,
sell her to the Maltesaies who were yet Christians,
and so become at their seruice. To which opinion with
a generall consent, they all agreed. And apointed one of
their companie Captaine and the same night before the
Turks should come a board, they did farewell to Tunis,
without taking their leaue, and went for Malta, being
in number fortie fiue English, and leauing their old Captaine,
but thirtie in company,
               Which sudden alteration and vnexpected newes, the
next day comming to Crosiman, hee sent for Ward, and
there in very sterne manner, demanded from him whether
hee were consenting to his Countremens Treason
namely, to the conueying away of the ship and goods, in y•
which the Kings maiestie his master was a party and hee
himselfe had a halfe. To whō 
                  Ward made answer that he
was no way guiltie of it, neither had he reason to be, since
his owne losse was as great as his. Well replies Crosiman,
be aduised that thou art not, neither let the honour
and wealth, that thou hast got by our support, bée
an incouragement, shall entise thée to leaue vs, and serue
Christians, but beare thy selfe euen, and to preuent thy
escape, I will haue halfe of thy part of the mattelena, for
my share of the Iohn, which thy Countrymen haue depriued
me of, then either resolue me of thy will, or resist
mee as thou thinkest good, but Ward finding it no fit
time to replie to the contrary, for feare of his head: made

answer, that both himselfe, seruice, and all his, was at
his pleasure. So that Ward, now left shiplesse, almost
frindlesse, and his state declining, since the Crosiman
hath left him, he began to leauie his wits together, what
hee were best to resolue vpon, to aduenture to Sea himselfe
he thought it not yet fitting, but determined, rather
to send others a fishing for him. In which determination,
he foorthwith buies him a ship of 80. or 90. Tuns,
and appointed one Captaine Sampson to bee the Commander,
mans her with a hundred men, of which although
the ship were his owne, not many of them were
English, but the most of them Turkes, who so ouersway
them at Sea, that the Captaine may bid what hee will,
and they will doe what they list. For this Sampson going
foorth of Tunis the eighth of Februarie last, The first
ship that he tooke was Captaine Fursman of London, a
Gentleman who in former time had béene as Samsons
sworne brother, of whom when Sampson came to take,
note of, (In this I commend his generous spirit) hee
would by no meenes haue ri
                     •
                  led him, but earnestly laboured
in all that he might, to haue frely giuen him his
ship and goods againe. To which request of his the
Turks by no meanes would bee brought to consent, but
the more he entreated, the more they denied, till at last
one among the rest, and who it should seeme, was
Life teant to Samspon, strucke violent at him, whom all
the rest as readily seconded, so that hee was compeld to
looke heauily vpon his friende, and enforced to be silent
while they ceased on the good Marchant, Master William
Fursman with the ship and goods.
               The very same day, the said Sampson in Wards ship,
gaue Chase vnto a ship of Dartmoth whereof Iohn Fursman
(who was sole brother, to William Furseman, who
they had taken not fixe houres before) was master, from
him they tooke likewise both ship and goods, and then
most cruelly, without pitty, and not regarding praiers,

turned the two brothers into their ships Boate, and
thrée leagues from land in a very growne Sea, where it
was impossible to recouer the land, but must vnfortunatly
haue perished, had not a ship of Venice happened by
chance to haue taken them vp. Oh, what inhumane
crueltie was this, in them toward two naturall
brothers, and who can expresse: the sorrow and
griefe (their cases being a like) that one had for another
one striuing to helpe the second when they saw nothing
but to perish both, hee lending one hand to helpe him,
when both would not serue to helpe himself, but leauing
them to their Comfort, and the rest to be damned who
tooke two prises more though but small Ships, and returned
to Tunis who to their Captaine Ward was welcome,
according to the prouerbe, Somewhat hath some
sauour, although he séemed wonderous discontent, that
Sampson had not brought him a tall Ship, wherein his
worships Person might to théeuing himselfe, but contenting
himselfe in the meane time, and neither lamenting
nor reproouing him for dealing so vnkindly now with his
Countrimen, got away straight, he sends Sampson to
Sea againe, who in this action thriued so succesfully,
that he takes for Ward a small Argosie, or rather a Spaniard,
of thrée hundred Tunnes, with thrée prises more
Flemings and French, which was in Iune last, whereby
with the strength that they haue brought him, he is now
preparing himselfe very forcibly to Sea, training men,
and casting Ordinance, and the Tunis men making readie
fourteene saile of great Ships for men of warre, and
as many small for the same purpose, to scoure the Coast.
Where I am glad I haue left them, to hope for their confusion.
Only I pray you receiue that which from William
Graues his mouth was deliuered me, of their incredible
wealth, as also of the spoile that our owne Nation of
England hath sustained within these two yeeres. Neither
I hope shall it be impertinet to note héerewithall,

the names of all Ships as I haue gathered by being partaker
of the like hard fortunes.
               
               A small Barke Fulmoth laden with Pilcherds.
               Two ships of London, taken by the Gallies Besart
about the Iland of Corsowe. The Merchant that
was taken in the first, was also taken in the second.
His name (I suppose) is Master Wallowbee.
               
               The next I heard of, was a ship, whereof Master
Thomas Carrull of Plimoth was owner. She was taken
by Captaine Elliet in the Bay of Cullery.
               
               The Troian of London, she was taken, and all her
men made slaues but for shooting one shot in their
owne defense.
               A ship of Portsmouth, laden with oiles from Talloun▪
                  
the master Richard Learner.
               
               The same day another small ship taken by the
same men of warre.
               A ship of Hull, Master Andrew Barkers.
               
               The Tobias of Amsterdam.
               
               These fiue Ships were taken by Crosimans Ship, a
Turke, being called Mamatrice, and an Englishman William
Graues the Master, the Gunners name Iohn Lumbey,
the Botsons name Thomas Hussey. Neither was
there any more Englishmen in this man of warre, but
Captaine Wards man, whose name was Iohn White.
Other newes I learnt not.
               The pearle of London laden with currants from
Zant, was taken by the Tunis men of warre in May.
               
                  Iohn Bullard of London master of the little
Amitie, lost goods valued to eight thousand pound.
               
                  
Foure great ships of Holland, of three hundred
and foure hundred Tunnes apeece, and were taken
all in one day.
               A French man of warre, who had in her 95.
men, and fourteene peeces of Ordinance; yet yeelded
without any one shot shooting: there were
three Caualeroes of Malta in her.
               A ship of London, which came from Anconia.
               
               
                  Rebert French of Sandwich, in a new ship laden
with allicant wines.
               A small Barke of Milbrooke in his company.
               The Bull of Amsterdam of 500. Tunnes.
               Two more in her company.
               At the same time, a small ship of Wards (or a
man of warre of Iunis, chuse you whether) of 65.
Tunnes, tooke a Holland ship of 500. worth foure
and twenty thousand pounds. My men did see her
brought into Tunis, ere they came away.
               And thus hauing deliueced as much as I can trulie
certifie of Wards proceeding, let mee bee bold to speake
somewhat of Danser; (for so is his name) and of him, as
of the former, no more then I can iustifie. And since
they be theeues in one age together, liue almost in one
fame together, Ile be bold to pricke them downe in one
ranke together.
            
            
               Of the Pirate Danser.
               THis Simon Danser, another Arch-pirate, was sometimes
belonging to Flushing, where hauing serued
the States, vpon a discontent hee went to Marseles in
France, where leauing his wife and sonne, hee came to

petuall slauery, and there remaine in the Galli
                        ••
                     . This
Boniton was one of the Ireland Pirates, whose purpose
was to goe vnto the Straits to learne newes. But you
haue heard how it prooued to his cost.
               Not long after, the Moone of Amsterdam, a Ship that
the Frenchmen bought, and set foorth from Newhauen,
a vessell of 5. 02600. Tuns, which they furnished most
nobly forth, and sent her to the Straits, who by good
hap, met with the ship of Tunis which tooke me prisoner.
Whereof Graues was Master, who in fight ouercomming
him, they carried to Marselis, for so was the newes
at Tunis, when my men were there, and were seconded
for truth vpon their comming away. So that I
make no doubt but they haue put him to death, and his
Turks with him, which were about an hundred Infidels,
are all made slaues. But the last and best newes is, that
the Spanish nauy hath been in the road of Tunis, & there
found riding fourtéene Saile of great Ships for men of
warre to go toward the bottome of the Gulfe, and twelue
or thirteene Saile of smaller, with men of warre to lie
to the westward, and about the Ilands of Sardmia maiork
and miniake, all which Ships my men which were secondly
taken in a French ship in their passage homwards
and carried backe againe to Tunis, did see thus preparing.
               So that I hope since the report holds, that the Spaniards
haue beene in that road, and burnt twenty fiue saile
of Ships, it is infallibly true, that both Ward and his assistants
are at length depriued of most of their strength,
or at least so infeebled, that they shall neuer bee able to
carrie such sway againe. Further, it is for certaine, that
the said fleet is busie in the search of Danser, and dispersed
onely in seuerall places to cut him and his forces off.
Of all which proceedings of Ward, Danser, or their Confederates,
which I haue either séene, or by other mens
knowledge heard, I haue truly giuen you to vnderstand.
               
                  
Which paines of mine, if it be either welcome to you, or
acceptable to the world, your friend is satisfied, and accounts
it well bestowed.
               Whereas it was reported in a former booke,
that the Yorke Bonauenture (of which I was master)
carried fifteene cast peeces at the time of her taking,
she had scarce fiue which shee could vse, or
were fit for seruice.
               
                  Andrew Barker.
               
            
         
      
      
         
            
               
            
         
      
   