
      
         
            
            Lawes, and Orders of VVarre, eſtabliſhed
for the good Conduct of the ſeruice of Ireland.
            
               HENRY FALKLAND:
            
            
               
                  HENRIE, Lord Vice-Count of Falkland, one of the Lords of his Majeſties Moſt Honourable Privie Councell of England,
and Lord Deputie Generall of the Realme of Ireland.
                To all Officers of the Armie, and all Collonels, Captaines, Officers, and Souldiers
of Companies, and all his Maieſties Subiects, and others, whom theſe Lawes, and Orders enſuing, reſpectiuely, and ſeuerally ſhall
concerne. Foraſmuch as no good Seruice can be performed, or Warre well managed, where Millitarie diſcipline is not obſerued, and Militarie
diſcipline cannot be kept, where the Rules or chiefe parts thereof, be not certainely ſet downe, and generally knowne; I haue ſet downe theſe
Lawes, and Orders following, and doe now publiſh them vnder my hand, that all perſons in this Armie, or kingdome, within my charge, may take
knowledge of the ſaid Lawes, and penalties ſet downe, for the breakers of them.
            1 Firſt, we owe our Higheſt dutie, and greateſt Allegeance, to him from whom all Power, and authoritie flowes, as from the firſt Fountaine, and
muſt receiue our ſucceſſes of him that is the Lord of Hoſtes, I doe ſtraightly charge, and command, all Commanders, and Officers of the Armie, to
ſee that Almightie God be ſerued, That Sermons, Morning and Euening Prayer be diligently frequented, and that thoſe that often, and wilfully
abſent themſelues, be duely puniſhed.
            2 Let no Man ſpeake impiouſly and maliciouſly againſt the Holy and bleſſed Trinitie, or any of the Three Perſons, that is to ſay, God the Father,
God the Sonne, and God the holy Ghoſt, or againſt the knowne Articles of the Chriſtian Faith vpon paine of death.
            3 Let no Man blaſpheme Gods holy Name, or vſe vnlawfull Oathes or erecrations, or committ any irreligious Art, to the derogation of Gods
honour, vpon paine of loſſe of his Pay, Impriſonment, and ſuch further puniſhment, as a Marſhall Court, ſhall thinke his Offence deſerues.
            4 No Man ſhall vſe any trayterous wordes, againſt his Maieſties Perſon, or Royall Authoritie vpon paine of death.
            5 No Man whether he be Souldier, or other, Engliſh or Iriſh, ſhall haue conference, or intelligence, with any Enemie or Rebell, that is in open
action againſt his Maieſtie, or harbours, or receiues any ſuch within the Campe, or in any Towne, Forte, Caſtle or Garriſon, or ſhall ſend, or procure
to be ſent, any Victuall, Munition, or other reliefe, to any Enemie or Rebell in action, vpon paine of death, except ſvch as ſhall be avowed, and warranted
by me, or thoſe that ſhall commaund the Armie in my abſence, to ſpeake, conferre, or haue intelligence, or conuerſe with the Enemie or Rebell.
            6 No Man ſhall runne to the Enemie, or Rebell, that is in action, or departe the Armie without licence, or from the Garriſon or Collours, vpon
paine of death.
            7 No Man ſhall committ any Murder, or kill, any perſon, or draw bloud of any, or draw any Sword in priuate quarrell, with intent to offer violence
within the Campe or Garriſon, vpon paine of death.
            8 No Man ſhall rauiſh, or force any woman, vpon paine of death, and Adulterers, and Fornicators ſhall bee puniſhed, by impriſonment, baniſhment
from the Armie, or ſuch other penaltie, as vp the Marſhall Court ſhall be thought meete.
            9 No man ſhall ſteale, or take by force, any Treaſure, Victuall, or Munition of his Maieſties: Or take by force, or ſteale from any perſon, any
Money, Armes, Apparell, or other goods, being aboue the value of twelue pence, in Marching, Campe, or Garriſon, upon paine of death.
            10 No man ſhall deliuer any Towne, Caſtle, Forte, or Sconce, without warrant, or departe from any ſtraight or paſſage, which he is commanded
to make good, or take Paſſe porte of the enemie, or any Rebell in action from any Troopes, or make any ignominious compoſition with the Enemie,
or Rebell in action, vpon paine of death.
            11 No man ſhall throw away his Armes, or abandon his Enſigne, Cornet, or Guidon, or flie away, in any Battle, or Skirmiſh, vpon paine of death.
            12 No man being ſet Sentinell ſhall ſleepe, or appointed by the Officer of the Guard, or any Superior officer, that hath authoritie to place him, ſhall
departe, and forſake that place, without warrant, vpon paine of death.
            13 No man ſhall offer any violence, or contemptuouſly diſobey his Commander, or doe any art, or ſpeake any wordes which are like to breede any
Muteny in the Armie or Garriſon, or impeach the obaring of the Generall, or principall Officers directions, vpon paine of death.
            14 No man ſhall outrage, or doe violence, to any that come & to bring Victuals to the Armie, or Garriſon, vpon paine of death.
            15 No man that carries Armes, or pretends to be a Souldier, ſhall remaine three dayes in the Armie, after it is on foote, except he be inrolled in ſome
Companie vpon paine of death.
            16 No Souldier ſhall burne any Houſe or lodging, or burne, or wilfully ſpoile, any Corne, Shipe or Boate, or carriage, or any other thing that may
ſerue for the prouiſion of the Armie, or his Garriſon, without he be commaunded ſo to doe, by the Generall, or ſome principall Officer of the Armie
vpon paine of death.
            17 No man ſhall depart a myle out of the Armie, or Campe or Garriſon, except he be commaunded, and lawfully warranted ſo to doe. vpon paine
of death.
            18 No Souldier ſhall breake his Order to follow any Route or chaſe, or to ſeeke, any prey, or ſpoyle, except he be commaunded by ſuch as haue authoritie
no further then he is commanded, vpon paine of death.
            19 No man that hath Paſſe-port for any limitted Time, ſhall exceede the time limitted for his abſence, except he can proue he was ſtayed by the hand
of God, vpon paine of death.
            20 No Prouidor, Keeper, or Officer of his Maieſties Victualls, or Munitions, ſhall embrazill any part thereof, or giue any falſe account to the Generall,
with a purpoſe to deceiue his Maieſtie, or to hinder the Seruice, vpon paine of death.
            21 No man ſhall wilfully, or through groſſe ignorance, f;a
                  •
               le in comming to the Randez-vous, or Garriſons aſſigned to him by the Generall, or other
principall Officer that ſhall commaund the Armie, vpon paine of death.
            22 No Souldiers in Maſters, ſhall anſwere for another, or take two pares, or Muſter in a falſe name, to defraude his Maieſtie, vpon paine of death
            23 No Captaine ſhall thorough corruption, wilfull, or groſſe negligence, ſuffer his Companie to grow weake, or practiſe to defraude his Maieſtie in
his Muſter, vpon paine of impriſonment, loſſe of his Place, and ignominious baniſhment from the Armie:
            24 No Captaine of the Armie, or Officer ſhall giue paſſe-port to any, or diſmiſſe any Souldier once inrolled, without warrant from the the Generall,
or other Officer, whom he ſhall authorize, vpon paine of loſſe of his Place, and impriſonment.
            25 No Souldier ſhall depart from his Captaine, or ſeruant from his Maſter without licence, though he ſerue ſtill in the Armie, vpon paine of death.
            26 Item that no Souldier doe ſell, or lay to pawne his Horſe, or Hackney, or any part of his furniture, Armes, or apparell for any reſpect, or pretence
of want whatſoeuer, vpon paine of death.
            27 Nor that any Inhabitant in Towne or Countrie, ſhall preſume to buy, or to take to pawne any part of the ſame, vpon paine both of impriſonment,
at the diſcretion of the Lord Deputie and chiefe Commander, and forfeit of double the value of any ſuch thing ſo bought or layd to pawne.
            28 Item, that all Bands of foote-men, ſhall in paſſing through the Pale, or other Countries in obedience to goe to any Garriſon, or Place of Seruice,
March tenne miles a day or thereabouts, holding the direct way to the ſame Garriſon or place of ſeruice, And that no Captaine, Officer, or Souldier,
doe vpon any pretence of want, commit any waſt, ſpoyle, or violence, or doe extort any Victuals, or Money, or Pawne in lieu of Victuals, from any good
Subiect, but ſhall content themſelues with Meate, and drinke competent, not taking any allowance for dead payes, but for the moſt number of men they
haue in their Companie for a ſupper, and a breake-faſt in one place onely, upon paine of ſuch ſharpe puniſhment as the Lord Deputie, or other Magiſtrates
thereunto authoriſed, agreeable to the nature, and qualitie of the ſame offence, ſhall thinke good to inflict, be it by death, impriſonment, or other
corporall puniſhment: But if vpon any occaſion of March thorough the Countrie the Souldier ſhall be in want, that then the Officer, with the aduice
conſent, and aſſiſtance of the Shiriffe, Subſhiriffe, Collectors, or others his Maieſties Officers in that Barony, or the next adioyning: if there be any, or
may be found, ſhall ſeeke and prouide ſuch diet and lodging for them, as ſhall be thought fit at reaſonable rates heretofore accuſtomed, for the which the
Captaine or Officer giue readie money, or for want thereof, deliuer his Ticket to be ſatisfied vpon the Captaine or Souldiers entertaynment, So as all
occaſions of offence and griefe ſhall be farre remoued from all good Subiect.
            29 Item, If any Horſeman ſhall looſe his Horſe or Hackney, or Foote-man any part of his Armour, by negligence or other lewdneſſe, whereby hee ſhall
be vnabled to diſcharge the dutie of his place, that vntil he ſhall recouer the ſame, or otherwiſe furniſh himſelfe with as good, he ſhall reſerue in the ſtate,
and condition of a Proner, or ſuſtaine further puniſhment, at the direction of the Lord Deputie, or other Officer thereunto authoriſed.
            
               
30 Item, whenſoeuer any prey, or ſpoyle, ſhall be taken from the Revels, eyther when the Armie is in the field, or by any reſiding in Garriſon vpon the
borders, that no Officer or Souldier doe attempt to imbeazill or purloine any part thereof, vpon paine of death: But ſhall endeuour themſelues to the vttermoſt
of their powers, to keepe the ſame together, to be diſpoſed at the direction of me the Lord Deputie, or any other by me thereunto authoriſed.
            31 Item, That no Captaine, Officer, or Souldier, or any other that ſhall take any Priſoner, ſhall preſume to deliuer vpon ranſome, or conceale him,
but that within foure and twentie houres, he ſhall make the ſame knowne to the Lord Deputie or chiefe Commander, and deliuer the ſame Priſoner vnder
the charge of the Prouoſt Marſhall vpon paine of death.
            32 No inhabitant in Citie, Towne or Countrie, ſhall preſume to receiue any Souldier into their ſeruice, not hauing a ſufficient authoritie, and Paſſeport,
neyther ſhall any conceale or hide any ſuch runne away, or vſe meanes, to conuey them out of the kingdome, or to any other ſecret place: But ſhall apprehend
all ſuch, and deliuer them ouer to the Prouoſt-Marſhall, vpon paine of impriſonment, and ſuch other puniſhment as ſhall be thought fit by the
Lord Deputie, or other chiefe Officer hereunto authoriſed to be inflicted.
            33 No Magiſtrate or Officer of any Citie, or Corporate Towne, ſhall preſume to impriſon or detaine the bodie of any Souldier aboue foure and
twentie houres, or to inflict any puniſhment vpon him for any offence, but ſhall deliuer all ſuch to the Prouoſt-Marſhall to bee tried by the ſpeedie
courſe of Marſhall law.
            34 All Captaines ſhall be diligent in trayning their Companies, and ſhall be carefull in gouerning them well, and in prouiding for them, and alſo
ſhall ſee in all ſeruices, that they doe the duties of Souldiers, as they will hope for fauour and aduancement, or eſcape ignominious diſplacing from their
charges.
            35 All Captaines and other Officers, that for the time ſhall haue Commaund of Companies, ſhall ſee their Companies, doe orderly quarter, as they
are appointed, and to entrench and fortifie, aſmuch of the Quarter as they are appointed, and as they are commanded, vpon paine of loſſe of their places.
            36 No man ſhall ſpoyle, or take the goods of any that dyeth, or is kill'd in ſeruice, vpon paine of reſtoring double the value: But the goods of ſuch
as die in the Armie or Garriſon, if they make any will by writing or word, ſhall be diſpoſed according to the Will, if they make no Will, it ſhall be diſtributed
to the hurt, ſicke, and poore of of the Company whereof the Souldier was, or ſhall goe to the Hoſpitall of the Armie.
            37 No man ſhall enter or goe out of the Armie, but by ordinarie wayes, vpon paine of impriſonment.
            38 No man ſhall giue any diſgracefull wordes, or commit any act to the diſgrace of any perſon in his Armie or Garriſon, or any part thereof, vpon
paine of impriſonment, publike diſarming and baniſhment from the Armie, as men for euer diſabled to carrie Armes, And as I forbid all men vnder
my rule, to renew any old quarrels, or to begin any new, So I doe acquitte and diſcharge all men that ſhall haue quarrels offered to them, or challenge
made to them of any diſgrace or opinion of any diſaduantage, ſince they doe but the duties of Souldiers, which ought to ſubiect themſelues to marſhall
diſcipline, and they that prouoke them ſhall be proceeded withall as breakers of all good diſcipline, and enemies to the good ſucceſſe of the ſeruice.
            39 And becauſe drunkeneſſe is the mother of many other vices and diſorders in Armies, euery Souldier or Officer that ſhall be found drunke ſhall be
committed to priſon for the firſt offence, and if he fall into it the ſecond time, being a priuate Souldier, he ſhall beſides his impriſonment forfeyte Two
Moneths pay, If he be an Officer, he ſhall looſe his place, The third time ſhall haue ſuch farre greater puniſhment, as the Marſhall Court ſhall ſet
downe.
            40 Euerie priuate man and Souldier, vpon paine of impriſonment ſhall keepe ſilence when the Armie is to take lodging, or when it is marching or
embatling, So as the Officers may be heard, and their Commadements executed.
            41 No Souldier ſeruing on foote, ſhall carrie any Boy, nor any Woman ſhall be ſuffered to follow the Armie, vpon paine of ſuch puniſhment, as ſhall
be inflicted by the Lord Deputie, or other Officer.
            42 All Captaines, Officers and Souldiers, ſhall doe their endeuours, to detect, apprehend, and bring to puniſhment all offendors, and ſhall aſſiſt the
Officers of the Armie for that purpoſe, as they will anſwere their ſlackeneſſe, and be cenſured at the Marſhall-Court.
            43 All other faults, diſorders, and offences that are not mentioned in theſe Articles, ſhall be puniſhed according to the generall Cuſtomes, and Lawes
of Warres: And therefore I command all Men, to looke to their charge, and him that hath no charge, to looke to his owne carriage, and to keepe
himſelfe within bounds of dutie, for the diſcipline of Warre ſhall be ſtrictly kept, and the lawes thereof, ſeuerely executed.
            44 No Victualler ſhall preſume to iſſue or ſell vnto the Souldiers, or to the Companies, vnſound, vnſauorie, or vnholſome victuals, vpon paine of impriſonment,
and ſuch other puniſhment, as by a Marſhall-Court ſhall be thought fit to be impoſed, vpon him or them that ſhall ſo offend.
            45 No Captaine, Lieutenant, or other Officer of the Armie, ſhall in the tender and preſentment of their Muſters, vſe any fraude, practiſe, or deceite
whereby the Muſter-Maſter his Commiſſaries, or Deputies may be miſled, miſtaken, or preuented, of the due vnderſtanding of the true eſtate of of that
Companie, vpon paine of the loſſe of his place, and ſuch other ignominious puniſhments, as by a Marſhall-Court, ſhall be thought meete.
            46 No Muſter-Maſter, ſhall eyther for fauour, friendſhip, loue, or hatred, or any other by reſpect whatſoeuer, impoſe a leſſe or greater checke vpon
any Captaine or Officer, then his default ſhall iuſtly merit, nor get any checke at all, where no defect or fault ſhall appeare, vpon a due view taken of
the Companie. And that no checke ſhall be impoſed by diſcretion without view, vpon paine that euerie o
                  •
               fendor that ſhall be found to tranſgreſſe in all,
or any part of this Article, ſhall forfeite the place which he holdeth, and be further ſubiect to ſuch corporall, or pecuniary puniſhment, as by the diſcretion
of a Marſhall-Court ſhall be thought conuenient.
            
               We require the Marſhall of the Armie, the Iudge-marſhall, the Captaines of Horſe and foote in his Maieſties pay, and
all other his Maieſties Officers in this Kingdome whom it may concerne, to obſerue theſe Lawes, and to ſee them put in
due execution from time to time. Publiſhed the 11. day of Iune. 1625.
            
            
               HENRIE FALKLAND.
God ſaue the King.
         
      
      
         
            Imprinted at Dublin by the Societie of STATIONERS,
Printers to the Kings Maieſtie. Anno 1625.
         
      
   