
      
         
            
            
               
                  papal blazon or coat of arms
               
               
                  tableau
               
               
                  tableau
               
               
                  royal English blazon or coat of arms
               
¶Indulgences graunted to all and euery cryſten man and whoman in what ſomeuer party of the worlde
they be entrynge in to the fraternyite of ſaynt Katheryn in the mounte of Synay.
            
               
                  S. K.
                  P. F.
                  depiction of Saint Catherine of Alexandria with sword and scourge
               
               IN the name of our lorde Iheſu Cryſte his bleſſyd mother vyrgyne Mary and ſaynt katheryne the
whiche vowed her vyrgynyte vnto our lorde Iheſu cryſt. &c̄. Be it knowe vnto al & euery cryſten
man and woman that in the deſerte of Araby the myddell parte of the infydelles is a certayne moū
               t
                  •
               yne
called the mounte of Synay hauynge in euery ſyde infydelles borderynge .viii. C. myles fro
the company of cryſten men in the whiche mountayne almyghty god appered & as Dauyd the profyte
teſtefyeth ſpake with Moyſes face to face and gaue to hym the .x. commaundementes where and
Moyſes ſawe a bu
                  •
               ſhe brennynge all in fyre & by that fyre nothynge conſumed / ſygnyfyenge the Incarnacyon
of the ſone of god to the toppe of the whiche Mountayne god by his aungelles cauled the body of
that bleſſyd vyrgyne ſaynt katheryne to be brought whereby proceſſe of tyme for a remembraunce of ſo grete
meruaylles in the honoure of the ſayd ſaynt Katheryne was buylded a deuoute monaſtery. For the
fauoure of whome alſo our holy fathers Innocentius the .viii. Iulyus the ſeconde and Leo the .x. popes
of Rome hath graunted the Indulgences folowynge for .iii. ſpecyall cauſes. Fyrſt for the mayunyenaunce
of the monkes of the ſayd place ye multytude of whome is grete there ſeruynge god vnder the rule of ſaynt
Baſyle and with grete reuerence kepynge the gloryous body of the ſayd ſaynt katheryne whiche monkes
in the myddes of the ſayd Infydell
                  •
               s lyke ſhepe amonge wolues lede theyr lyfe in extreme pouerte and tere
bothe by cauſe they dwell .viii. C. myles from any cryſten men as we ſayd before / & alſo bycauſe the countrees
lyenge .C. C. Myles rounde aboute The ſayd Monaſtery is vnfruytefull bryngynge torthe nother
corne nor wyne. Secondely the ſayd Indulgences were graunted that the ſayd monaſtery myght be the
better repayred in buyldynges and maynteyned wt bokes chalyſes & other ornamentes longynge to ye chyrche
for bycauſe it hath no ſmale ruyne & decay by ye inuaſyons & oppreſſyons nowe lately done bothe by ye
grete tyranny of the Turke and the Sowdan. Thyrdely the ſayd indulgences were graunted to the ſayd
monaſtery & hoſpytall for the charytable receyuynge of pylgrymes reſortynge to the ſame whiche pylgrymes
wtin the ſpace of. CC. myles can fynde nother houſe nor habytacyon to put theyr heedes in but onely
ye ſayd monaſtery whiche pylgrymes yf they ſholde not mekely & charytable be receyued of the ſayd monkes doubteleſſe many of them ſholde take
ſykeneſſe and other bodely inconuenyentes thrughe tedyouſnes and laboure of theyr Iourneys.
            
               ¶
                     〈…〉
                   of cauſes papall.
               
                  
                     〈…〉
                  
auctoryte of our ſay
                     •
                   
                  
                     ••
                  ly 
                     〈◊〉
                   popes 
                     〈…〉
                   that they may choſe theym a ſuffycyent confeſſoure ſeculer or reguler whiche dylygē
                  
                     •
                  ely h
                     ••
                  
                  rynge
theyr confeſſyon may aſſoyle them of all & euery one of theyr ſynnes crymes exceſſes or cauſes reſerued to the 
                     •
                  ee of Rome ones in theyr lyfe
excepte onely ſuche cauſes that be conteyned in the bulle that is redde on Sherethurſdaye.
            
            
               ¶Abſolucyon tociens quociens.
               ¶Alſo the ſayd auctoryte is graunted to the foreſayd Bretherne & Syſterne & benefactours yt they may choſe a ſuffycyent confeſſoure as is ſpecyfyed
aboue / the whiche dylygently herynge theyr confeſſyon may aſſoyle them as often tymes as it ſhall be nedefull from al theyr ſynnes or cauſes
excepte them that be reſerued to the ſee of Rome.
            
            
               ¶Full remyſſyon in the artycle of dethe.
               ¶Alſo by the ſayd auctoryte is graunted to the bretherne and ſyſterne that they may choſe them in ye artycle of dethe a ſuffycyent confeſſoure whiche
may aſſoyle them from all theyr ſynnes and cauſes howe greuous and enorme ſomeuer they be and to graunte them full pardon & remyſſyon
of all theyr ſynnes and to remytte paynes dewe for theyr ſynnes in purgatory.
               ¶The reuerent Abbot wt the couent of the ſayd monaſtery hathe wylled & by theyr letters hathe declared that the foreſayd Bretherne & ſyſterne
may be partakers for euermore in tyme to come of all maſſes prayers & other ſpyrytuall ſuffrages whiche ſhall be done by thē in ye ſayd monaſtery
            
         
         
            ¶Punyſſhment for lettynge of this commyſſyon.
            ¶Alſo our foreſayd holy father. Leo the x. nowe beynge Pope is infourmed by the recorde of credyble parſones that Dane Clement is a true mō
               ke
& a true proctoure of ye ſayd monaſtery wherfore he exorteth all maner of lordes / patryarkes / Archebyſſhops / byſſhops / Abbottes / & theyr deputyes
and all other hauynge dygnyte of Cryſtes chyrche that they wyll withſtande & punyſſhe by the Cenſures of the chyrche & other remedyes of
the lawe all appelynge ſet aſyde ſuche men that contraryeth and letteth the foreſayd Clement or ony commyſſyoners by hym for ye tyme deputyed
in publyſſhynge of the ſayd pardons takynge vnto them yf neceſſyte ſhall requyre helpe and aſſyſtence of the laytye.
            ¶Alſo it is commaunded by the auctoryte of the pope vnder the payne of excommunycacyon in doynge the contrary that all maner of abbottes
Pryours and parſones of paryſſhe chyrches ſhewe and publyſſhe to the people the ſayd Indulgences when they ſhall be requyred for the behalfe
of ye ſayd Dane Clement or of ony other by hym deputyed whiche Indulgence our foreſayd holy father Leo nowe beynge pope hathe determyned
not for to be comprehended vnder ony maner of reuokynge lymyttynge or modefyeng of other Indulgences as for the fauoure of buyldynge of
ſaynt Peters chyrche in Rome but alwaye to be excepte.
            ¶Alſo out holy father Leo the .x. nowe beynge pope requyreth al & euery one beynge parſones & mynyſters of paryſſhe chyrches yt immedyately
after the receyuynge of this preſent artycles they ſhewe & publyſſhe the ſayd Indulgences and pryuyleges to the people aſſygned vnto them with
out contradyccyon vnder the payne of excōmunycacyon. ¶Alſo the foreſayd Dane Clement beſecheth and prayeth the parſones & mynyſters of
paryſſhe chyrches for the loue of god & ſaynt Katheryne that they wyll whytſawfe to do theſe .iii. thynges folowynge. ¶Fyrſt after ſuche declaracyon
of Indulgences made by them that the almes gadered that thay wyll wytſaffe for to wryte euery man & womans name in there letter or confeſſōnall
wan that be requyryd. Secondely that they delyuer confeſſyonalles or letters teſtemonyalles for the ſayd fraternyte to all good cryſten
people gyuynge of theyr goodes as theyr deuocyon or conſcyēs gyueth them. Thyrdely that they ſhewe to the people that they may enioy theſe fore
ſayd Indulgences not onely by gyuyng
                  •
                theyr almes in redy money but alſo by gyuynge ſuche other goodes as god ſendeth them.
         
         
            ¶Commaundement vnder the ſeale of our ſouerayne lorde the kynge.
            ¶Alſo our ſouerayne lorde kynge Henry the .viii. by the grace of god kynge of Englonde & of Fraunce & lorde of Irelonde conſyderynge ye grete
trybulacyon & ſorowe of the ſayd monaſtery as the wryttynge of our holy father the pope teſtefyeth vnder leade & fourme of a breffe moued by the
way of pyte hath gracyouſly graunted the ſayd Indulgences to be publyſſhed thrughout all his royalme vnder his letter pattent & cōmendeth all
offycers & mynyſters of chyrches to ryſe vp & gather ſuche almes as ſhall be gyuen vnto them. And fauourably gyue it to ye ſayd Dane Clemēt or
his deputyes.
            God ſaue the kynge.
         
      
   