
      
         
            
            
            THE INTERPRETER Wherin three principall termes of State much miſtaken by the vulgar are clearely unfolded.
            Qui vult decipi, decipiatur.
            Anno 1622.
         
      
      
         
            
            To ſuch as understand not the Engliſh tongue perfectly.
            THat the unwiſe may learne to underſtand,
            how certaine words are uſed in our land,
            And that they may write ſenſe whilſt they remaine
            in forreigne parts, or ſhall returne againe
            (for idioms, faſhions, Manners, after here,
            as frendſhip and religion everie where)
            I haue ſome elegancies for our tongue
            obſerv'd, as they are uſed now, among
            our ableſt linguiſts, who mint for the Court
            words, fit to be proclaimd; and doe reſort
            where Lords and Ladies couple and converſe
            and trade lip learning both in proſe, and verſe.
            and by theſe few the docible may ſee,
            how rich our language is, religious wee.
            Time was a Puritan was counted ſuch
            as held ſome ceremonies were too much
            retayn'd and urged: and would no Biſhops graunt
            others to rule, who government did want.
            Time was a PROTESTANT was onely taken
            for ſuch as had the Church of Rome forſaken
            for her knowne falſhoods in the higheſt point
            But would not for each toy, true peace diſioynt.
            Time was, a PAPIST was a man who thought
            Rome could not erre, but all her canons ought
            to be Canonicall, and blindly led
            hee from the truth, for feare of error fled.
            But now theſe words, with divers others more
            
               haue other ſenſes then they had before.
            which plainely I doe labour to relate,
            As they are now accepted in our ſtate.
         
         
            A Puritan: (So nicknamed: but indeed the ſound Proteſtant.)
            A Puritan is ſuch an other thing
            As ſaies with all his heart, God ſaue the King
            And all his yſſue: and to make this good,
            will freely ſpend his money and his blood.
            And in his factious and fond mood, dare ſay
            'tis madneſs for the Palſgraue thus to ſtay
            And waite the loving leyſure of kinde Spaine
            who gets at firſt, onely to giue againe
            in curteſie; that faithleſſe Hereticks
            may taſt the faith and loue of Catholiques
            And Hope too. for a Puritan is hee
            That doth not hope theſe Holy-dayes to ſee
            And would a waſted Countrey on condition
            Scorne to receiue, although the High Commiſſion
            of England, Spaine, and Rome would haue it ſoe:
            falſe favours h
                  •
               e'd not take from a true foe.
            A Puritan is hee that rather had
            Spend all to helpe the States, hee is ſo mad
            Then ſpend one hundred thouſand pound a yeare
            to guard the Spaniſh coaſts from Pyrats feare,
            The whilſt the Catholique King might force combine
            Both Holland, Beame, & Pal
                  •
               z to undermine,
            And by his croſſe-curſe-chriſtian counterworke
            To make Rome both for Antichriſt and Turke
            
               right Catholique. So Th'empire firrſt divided
            By holy mothers pious plotts, (who ſyded
            the Eaſt, and Weſt, that ſhee might get betweene,
            and ſi
                  •
                aloft and governe like a Queene)
            The Turke did great Conſtantinople gaine
            and may winne Rome too, by the helpe of Spaine.
            A Puritan is hee that would not liue
            upon the ſinnes of other men: nor giue
            money for office in the Church or State,
            Though 'twere a Biſhopricke, hee ſo doth hate
            all Ceremonies of the Court and Church,
            which doe the coffer and the conſcience lurch
            of both the treaſures. So that (covetous) hee
            would not haue ſuch as want both, better bee.
            A Puritan is hee that thinkes, and ſaies
            hee muſt account giue of his workes and waies,
            And that whatſoever calling hee aſſumes
            it is for others good. So he preſumes
            raſhly to cenſure ſuch as wiſely can
            by taking timely bribes of every man
            in rich themſelves, knowing to that ſole end,
            God and the King did them their honours ſend.
            And that Simplicitie hath onely mounted
            by vertue; but ſuch fooles they'l not be counted.
            A Puritan is hee that twiſe a day
            doth at the leaſt to God devoutly pray:
            And twiſe a Sabbath goes to Church to heare,
            to pray, confeſſe his ſinnes, and praiſe God there
            in open ſight of all men; not content,
            God knowes his heart, except his knee be bent
            
               That men and Angells likewiſe may diſcerne,
            hee came to practiſe there, as well as learne,
            And honour God with every outward parte,
            with knee, hand, tongue, aſwell as with the heart.
            A Puritan is hee which grieves to thinke
            Religion ſhould in Fraunce, ſhipwrack and ſincke,
            whilſt wee giue ayme: And that thoſe men ſhould ſway
            the kingdom there, who made the King away
            The whilſt all ſuch as helpt to croune the father
            ſhould by the Sonne be now proſcrib'd the rather.
            A Puritan in unadviſed zeale
            Could wiſh that Huntſmen rul'd the Cōmon weale,
            And that the Kings hounds were the onely ſpies
            for they would tell truth, as the other lyes,
            He wiſheth beaſts were men, as men reſemble
            beaſts: for ſurely they vvould not diſſemble,
            But vvould tell vvhere the fault lies, and hunt home
            the ſubtile fox eyther to Spaine or Rome.
            A Puritan is hee that ſpeakes his minde
            in Parliament: not looking once behinde
            to others daunger, nor yet ſidevvaies leaning
            to promiſde honour, his direct true meaning.
            But for the lavves and truth doth fi
                  •
               mely ſtand
            By vvhich hee knovves Kings onely doe cōmand,
            And Tyrants othervviſe. Hee croſſeth not
            this man beeauſe a Courtyer, or a Scot,
            Or that becauſe a favorite, or ſoe:
            But if the States friend, none can be his foe.
            But if the States foe, bee hee what hee will
            Illuſtrious, wiſegrear, learn'd, hee counts him ill.
            
               hee neither ſides with that man nor with this
            but giues his voice juſt as the reaſon is
            And yet if Policie would worke a fraction
            to croſſe religion by a forr
                  •
               igne faction
            pretending publique good, hee'le joyne with thoſe
            who dare ſpeake truth, not onely under the Roſe
            But though the white Roſe and the Red doe heare
            and though the pricking Thiſtle too be theare.
            yea though the ſtarres, the moon & ſonne look on
            and caſt through clouds oblique aſpect
                  •
                upon
            his cleer and free intentions, hee's as bould
            and confident as the bright Marigould
            That flatterer, that favorite of the ſunne
            who doth the ſelfe ſame courſe obſerve & runne
            not caring though all flowers elſe wax ſeare,
            ſo hee the golden livorie may weare.
            But our free generous and noble ſpirit
            Doth from his auncient Engliſh ſtock inherit
            ſuch natiue worth and libertie of minde,
            as will omit no ſlavery of his kinde,
            yet hee is ready to obey whereſoere
            hee may not prejudice the truth by feare,
            nor faintly ſeeme to ſhrinke, withdraw, giue way
            whilſt other muſhrumpes doe the ſtate betray.
            Hee'
                  •
               e not a Traytor be unto the King
            not to the Lawes (for that's an other thing
            men dreame not off: who think they no way can
            bee Traytors unto many for one man)
            But his chiefe errour is to thinke that none
            
               
                  ••
               n bee a Traytor till law calls him one.
            
               And that the Law is what the ſtate decrees
            in Parliament: by which whilſt that hee ſees
            his Actions and intentions juſtified
            Hee counts himſelf a Martyr glorified
            If in this cauſe hee ſuffers; and contemnes
            All dangers in his way. Nay hee condemnes
            All ſuch as Traytors be to Church and ſtate,
            who for the loue of one all others hate,
            And for particular ends, and private aymes
            forſake their Countrey & their conſcience maymes.
            His Character abridg'd if you would haue.
            
               Hee's one that would a ſubiect, bee, no ſlaue.
            
         
         
            A Proteſtant: (ſo will the Formaliſt be called.)
            A Proteſtant is ſuch an other thing
            As makes within his heart God of the King
            And as if hee did with his crowne inherite
            A never-erring, and infallible ſpirite,
            Labours to blow him up by praiſe of witt
            And by falſe flatteries cooſen him of it.
            A Protestant is one that ſhakes the head
            And pitties much the Palſgraue was miſlead
            to meddle with Bohemia, and incenſe
            The Spaniſh wrath, gainſt which there is no fenſe
            That his Revenewes in the Paltz againe
            were well reſtor'de hee wiſhes, ſo that Spaine
            would take the honours of that houſe, and give
            
               Mentz his demaunds, letting the Paltzgraue live▪
            
            
               for ſuch a favour as his lands and life,
            not one except the father of 
                  •
               is wife,
            That King of peace and loue dares bouldly craue.
            But what is it he may d
                  •
               ſpaire to haue
            By meanes of th'Engliſh and the Scottiſh Saint
            who at their pupills ſuit doth ſtill acquaint
            The Spaniſh Patron, how the firſt of May
            
               Philip and Jacob make one holy day
            what therefore's giuen to one, the other muſt
            Bee ſharer in: for Iames is ſurnam'd Iuſt.
            And 
                  •
               o
                  •
                this yeare by holy churches count
            The Kalender reform'd hath ſingled out
            Theſe two moſt ſacred ſaincts to wayt upon
            Our Saviours feaſt of Reſurrection,
            which by the Engliſh Heathen computation
            meets with May day amongſt the 
                  •
               atholick nation,
            And may be ſuch a day as that for goodnes,
            which ſome call'd 
                  〈◊〉
                May day from peoples woodnes.
            A day of feaſting, and a day of pleaſure,
            A day of m
                  •
               riage and withall of Treaſure
            A day of Catholique unity and loue,
            which may a kinde of Reſurrection moue
            in our State union, almoſt now forgot
            being buried bo
                  •
               h by th'Engliſh and the Scot.
            Soain
                  •
                ſtrikes betwixt, and like a Lord commands,
            They ioyne their Lawes togither as their Lands.
            And ioyne they will, but in deſpite of Spaine
            making his holy day of hope but vaine.
            A Proteſtant is hee that fa
                  •
               ne would take
            occaſion from the Eaſt or Weſt to ſhake
            
               our League with the Vnited Provinces
            to which end hee hath many faire pretences.
            Our honour firſt for in the Greenland they
            And the Eaſt Indies beat our ſhips away.
            Our profit likewiſe, for in both thoſe places
            wee doe great loſſ▪ ſuſtaine, beſide diſgraces:
            And in the nar
                  •
               ow Seas where wee are maſt
                  •
               rs,
            They w
                  •
               ll preſume to be our herring taſters.
            But we ſhould ha
                  ••
                w
                  •
               ite he
                  ••
               ings wondrous plentie,
            If they would giue us two or every twenty:
            O
                  •
                ſtay our idle l
                  •
               yſure, till that none
            remayn'd, for them or us but all w
                  •
               re gone.
            And if 
                  •
               h
                  •
               y will no
                  •
                thus our humors ſerue,
            That wee (ſaith hee) ſhould l
                  •
               aue them they deſerue.
            A herring co
                  •
                wee ſee will make him quarrell,
            w
                  •
               at wou
                  •
               d the man doe thinke you for a barrell?
            Well could I wiſh theſe things w
                  •
               re all amended
            But greater buſines now is to be tended.
            Our liues, religions, liberties and lands,
            vpon this nice and tickle quarrell ſtands,
            And wee muſt for a fi
                  •
               ter tim
                  •
                attend,
            elſe Spaine will ſoone this controverſie end.
            A Protestant is hee that by degrees
            clymes every office, knowes the proper fees,
            they give and take, at entrance of the place,
            and at what rate againe they vent that grace,
            knowes in how many yeares a man may gather
            ynough to make himſ
                  •
               lfe a reverend father:
            Or from the loweſt civill ſtep ariſe
            To ſit with honour in the ſtarry skies:
            
               for hee hath gone that progreſſe, ſtep by ſtep,
            as ſnayles creepe up, where ſafely none can leap,
            for ſnales doe leave behinde their ſilver ſlyme
            and guild the way for falling as they clyme
            A Proteſtant is hee that with the ſtreame
            Still ſwims and wiſely ſhunnes every extreame
            Loues not in pointe of faith to be preciſe
            but to beleeve as Kings doe, counts it wiſe
            If Conſtantine the great will Chriſtened bee,
            this will the white Roabe weare aſwell as hee,
            And in the hallowed founteyne plunge a mayne
            his naked body, as if every ſtayne
            were now waſht off, and his inflamed zeale
            Thirſted theſe waters vvhich ſoules ſin doth heale.
            Againe if Iulian will renounce his faith
            this man will ſay iuſt, as his Soveraigne ſaith,
            If he intend Religion to betray,
            and yet will walke a cloſe and covert way
            Corrupting men by office, honour, bounty,
            you ſhall finde this man will deſerve a County,
            By double dealing and by broaking ſo
            That none ſhall thinke him ere they finde him to
            Apoſtated; for no way ſo doth worke
            to make a man an Atheiſt, Jew, or Turke
            
            as doe Corrupted manners which lets in
            a deluge of impietie and ſinne.
            Theſe backt by favour and preferment may
            haue power to make all error open way
            and every man will cenſure oppoſition
            when guilden flattry kills without ſuſpition
            
               This poyſoned viall then was powred in,
            when firſt the Church got meanes to mainteyn ſin,
            and now the meanes withdrawne or miſimploy'd
            makes all Religion and a
                  •
               l conſcience voyd,
            for man that hunts for honour, wealth, or fame,
            will be as thoſe be who diſpoſe the ſame.
            So that no readier way there can be found
            to conquer us, then to corrupt the ſound
            by Bribes; the worſt aſſault that can befall
            to bodies politique confounding all.
            Guiftes blinde the wiſe. And though the Chequer bee
            open and empty, as erſt full and free,
            yet other brybes can worke the ſame effect
            that Mammon would: the favour and reſpect
            of favourits, a nod or winke from Kings,
            imployment, office, grace, are able things.
            Beſides the honour'd ſtile of Vicount, Lord.
            Earle, Marqueſſe, Duke, can worke at every word
            ſtraunge alterations more then Circes Cup
            In ſuch as can no otherwayes get up.
            Will hee ſpeake truth directly? make him then
            a Deane, or Biſhop, they are no ſuch men,
            The wolfe hath ſeene them fi
                  •
               ſt, their throat is ſurd
            you ſhall not heare from them a factious word.
            Stands he for Law, & cuſtome of the Land?
            make him an officer, give him Command.
            Command where he may gaine, this will bewitch
            
               Demoſthenes, who labours to be ritch.
            What is hee bold and forward? ſend him out
            on ſome embaſſage; or imploy the ſtout
            
               At ſea or land ſome deſperate voyage, where
            they may be loſt: then leaue them helpleſſe there,
            undoe them thus. Before they had too mutch
            But beeing poore, the'ile nothing dare to tutch.
            This oſtraciſme will ſure abate their pride,
            And they ſhall give great thanks for it beſide.
            If hee be poore, oppreſſe him, ſhut him out
            in forlorne baniſhment, where round about
            the faithleſs world, hee may his living ſeeke,
            Then no man after him will doe the like
            If hee be faint, check him, or doe but c
                  ••
               de,
            hee'l hould his tongue▪ and his tayle cloſely hide.
            Is hee free-tongu'd? though ſerious and diſcreet,
            Proclaime him ſilent: whip him through the ſtreet:
            Thus whatſoe're is done, no bird ſhall dare
            To warne the reſt, till all bee in the ſnare.
            Is hee a Rich man? then the Fleet and fine
            will make him ſeeme (although he be not) thine.
            Briefly, whatſe're he bee, except alone
            directly honeſt, (of which few or none
            remaine alive) A Statiſt wayes can finde
            By policy to worke him to his minde.
            And thus the cōmon wealth may conquered bee,
            The Church deflowr'd, beſl
                  •
               u'd our libertie
            without all bloodſhed, under the pretence
            of peace, religion, loue, and innocence.
            A Proteſtant is an indifferent man,
            that with all faiths, or none, hold quarter can:
            So modetate and temperate his paſſion,
            as he to all times can his conſcience faſhion.
            
               Hee at the Chappell can a Biſhop heare,
            And then in Holborne a Religious Frear:
            A Maſſe nere troubles him, more then a play,
            All's one, hee comes all one from both away.
            A Proteſtant no other fault can ſpie
            In all Romes bead-roll of iniquitie.
            But that of late they doe profeſſe King killing
            which Catholique point to creadit hee's unwilling:
            onely becauſe hee gaynes by Kings far more,
            then hee can hope for by the Romiſh whore.
            Hee ſaith this onely doth the Pope proclaime
            for Antichriſt, becauſe that Greekiſh name
            doth ſignifie Againſt the Lordes annointed,
            
            As if it onely 'gainſt this doctrine pointed.
            And therefore leaving this out of their Creed,
            Hee in the reſt with them is ſoone agreed.
            And ſo the Kings part may be ſafe from feare,
            Let God himſelfe for his owne part take care.
            A Proteſtant is hee that guards the eare
            of ſoveraigne Iuſtice, ſo that truth to heare
            hee's not permitted; nor to know the danger
            he ſtands in, twixt the ſubiect and the ſtranger:
            The plots which ſtrangers haue, greefe of his own,
            which may too late be prevented, knowne.
            For thou
                  •
               h his foes be wily wolues and foxes,
            his ſubiects ſhackled aſſes, yoaked oxes,
            yet time will ſhew them not to be ſuch dawes,
            As will looke on whilſt others change the Lawes,
            and Rob the State, Religion doe deflowre
            having their Prince impriſoned in their power.
            
               As Princes haue been priſoners to their owne
            And ſo may ours too if the truth were knowne.
            The liberty of will by ſtrong affection
            may be reſtrayn'd, which is the worſt ſubjection.
            For then the underſtanding will not ſee
            But ruſheth on whatſoere the danger bee.
            A Proteſtant is hee whoſe good intention
            Deſerves an Engliſh and a Spaniſh penſion
            both for one ſervice, and obteynes it too
            By winning Spaine more then their armes could doe
            with long delayes, and looſing us & ours
            what loſt to get againe we want both powers
            And perhaps will.
            Others by treaties and diſputes may gaine
            But wee by blowes, elſe old ſayd ſawes be vaine.
            A Proteſtant is hee that hath no eye
            Beyond his private profit, but doth lye
            In wayte to be the firſt that may propound
            what hee foreſees power plotts. The ſolid ground
            Hee nere examines, bee it right or wrong
            All's one, ſince it doth to his part belong.
            For to his part belongs to ſooth and flatter
            The greateſt Man though in the fouleſt matter
            And him hee holds a Rebell that dare ſay
            
               No man against the Lawes, wee muſt obey.
            
            His Character abridg'de if you will haue
            Hee's one that's no true ſubject, but a Slaue.
         
         
            
            A Papiſt.
            A Romaniſt is ſuch an other thing
            As would with all his hart murther the King,
            That ſaith the houſe of Auſtria is appointed
            To rule all Chriſtians and for this annointed
            by Chriſts owne vicar. And they Rebells are
            who dare againſt this houſe make any warre
            Invaſiue or defenſiue Ieſuits witt
            And Indian gould, doe both attend on it,
            And all Romes Hyrarchy doe plot, pray, curſe,
            And ſpend the ſtrength of body, ſoule, and purſe
            to this ſole end, that every ſtate beſide
            may be the vaſſalls to the Auſtrian pride,
            And ſo Rome may of both the Emperies
            keep ſtill the Civill and Religious keyes.
            A Romaniſt is hee that ſowes debate
            Twixt Prince and People, and twixt every ſtate
            where hee remaines: that he by the diviſion
            may worke himſelfe ſome profite in deciſion.
            Or bring in Rome and Spayne to make all frends
            Who having footing once haue halfe their ends.
            For as the Devill ſince firſt hee got within
            mans heart, keepes ſtill thereby originall ſinne
            So thoſe whereſoe're once they intereſt gayne
            keepe all; or ſuch a party lett remaine
            behinde, aſſur'd to them as may procure
            A relapſe, when men thinke themſelues ſecure.
            Thus each diſeaſe, though cured, remaines in part
            And thus the fraile fleſh oft betrayes the heart.
            
               Now for the reſt, no Romiſh falſe opinion
            Can make a Papiſt in the Kings dominion.
            Nor abſence from the Church, for at this ſeaſon
            Hee is no Papiſt that commits not Treaſon
            Let him to Church reſort, or be recuſant
            Alls one, hee's counted a good Proteſtant.
            Nay 'tis a queſtion if Guy Faulkes were one
            But t'is reſolv'd that Papist hee was none.
            His Charact
                  •
               r abridg'd if you will haue
            Hee is Spaynes ſubiect and a Romiſh Slaue.
            
            
         
      
   