
      
         
            
            
            
               The raging Tempest ſtilled.
            
            THE HISTORIE of CHRIST his paſſage, with his Diſciples, over the Sea of Galilee, and the memorable and miraculous occurrents therein.
            Opened and explaned in weekly Lectures (and the Doctrines and Vſes fitly applied to theſe times, for the direction and comfort of all ſuch as feare Gods Iudgements) in the Cathedrall and Metropoliticall Church of CHRIST, Canterb.
            
            By THOMAS IACKSON, Doctor of Divinitie, and one of the Prebends, and Lecturer there.
            
            LONDON, Printed by IOHN HAVILAND for Godfrey Emondſon and Nicolas Vavaſour. 1623.
         
         
            
            
            DIGNISSIMIS Clariſsimiſue Viris, Domino DECANO, ac PREBENDARIIS, Eccleſiae Cathedralis, & Metropoliticae, CHRISTI Cantuar. Fratribus chariſſimis, Gratiam & Pacem in Domino.
            
            
               
                  QVanquam (Viri, Patres, Fratres, in Chriſto Reverendi) plurimùm latentis 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                   viva vox habet, & in aures diſcipuli, de Authoris ore transfuſa, adeò ſonet, (quod habet Hieronymus 
               Hieronym. epiſt. Paulino, Tom. ult. Baſil. apud I
                     •
                  . Frob. anno 1524.) ut illa, rei ſcriptae, quantum homo vivus picto homini, antecellat 
               Tull. de Orat. lib. 3.; tamen, dubitandum non eſt, quin (iuxta dictum illius 
               Clem. Alexand. Strom. lib. 1. Baſil. anno 1556.) mirificos fructus, res ſcripta afferat, & etiam quoddam praedicandi genus ſit. Quod identidem mihi conſideranti, cùm iam per triginta annos, in Eccleſia, quaſi in acie, cum vitijs pro
               
               virtutibus Concionator depugnârim; videor me, non prorſus inutile, facturum; ſi conſcientia zeli erga benigniſsimum meum Salvatorem motus, & publicae utilitatis 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                   quâdam ductus, iſta, qualia, qualia fuerint, praelo mandem, & in lucem emittam. Equibus, ſi vel minimis Domini mei conſervis, in Eccleſiae navicellâ (heû, 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                   penè opertâ!) hinc indè fluctuantibus, aliquantulum ſolatij emerſiſſe perſentiſcam; me aliquâ ex parte officio meo functum, nonignarus conijciam.
            
            
               Non deſunt Ieſuitae (deeſſent utinā) rerū publicarū flagella, & ſeditionū flabella 
               Dr. And. Cōcion. ad Convocat. anno 1592.; qui 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , in Eccleſiâ excitātes, quibꝰ poſſunt medijs, vi, dolove, veritatē indies magis, magiſ
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   (proh dolor!) conantur obſtruere. Vbi enim non eſt locꝰ tormentis, utuntur argumentis; ubi terrore non movent, errore decipiunt; ubi non compellunt minis, precibus compellant; denique aut regunt, aut rogant; & in his, ipſi ſuſque deque curſitantes exudāt
               
                  Videant Lectores, ſocietatem Ieſuitarum, (à Ieſuita)-Coſmopolitam dictam. Cornel. à Lapid. in Numb. 1. 5. pag. 774. 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  : Grae
                        •
                     . Paroem.
               . Quidinterim nos, 
               
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               
               1 Cor. 4. 1.? In utram
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   aurem otiosè dormitabimus; dum cymba Chriſti patiatur naufragium? Abſit, abſit dico; utut .n. dormire ad tempus videatur Nauclerus, nobis interim Miniſtris, remis & velis, 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , totis (quod aiunt) viribus, gnavitèr incumbendum eſt. Evigilabit ſiquidem tempeſtivè Dominus; ehodùm mare, ac ventos obiurgabit; & magna erit tranquillitas 
               Hoc auguror, hoc voveo. Amen.. Quae, quo citius oriatur, tuam Clementiam, Bone Rector Maris, precamur; ut averruncentur hinc procul ſceleratiſsimi Ieſuitae, cum iniquitatis ſuae cooperarijs, ſacerdotibus Pontificijs; à quibus (ſine Scripturâ, Theologis; ſine miraculis, Apoſtolis; ſine veritate, Catholicis; ſine pace, Sacrificis; ſine Patientia, Martyribus;
               
               ſine vera fide, Religioſis 
               Auguſt. Tom. 6. contr. Manich.;) nulla ſecuritas expectanda eſt: utpote, quorum ars, quàm mars; pax, quàm fax; mel, quàm fel; proditio, quàm expeditio; amicitia praefucata, quàm inimicitia deſpicata, longè gravius eſt extimeſcenda 
               Sylv. Girald. Topogr. Hiber..
            
               In Conciunculis interim his, quas ipſe craſſo (quod aiunt) filo contexerim, ſi vel nihil, vel per-parum occurrat, quod acriori ingenio, & ſublimiori judicio aetatis nostrae, (quae 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                   expectat,) planè arrideat 
               Poſcentes vario nimium diverſa palato. Horat. inſerm.; ne miremini obſecro. Scitote, me, rebus Dei, non phalaris humanis ſtuduiſſe; homines, non humana;
               1 Cor. 1. 17. 
               utilitatem, non elegantiam; emolumentum, non ornamentum quaeſiviſſe: quippè, qui, à Christomiſſus Euangelizare (ne
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   illud, 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  ) 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  
                
               Eruditum ſa
                     •
                  is, quod clarum eſt., apud me judicârim. Veritatem Dei, (qua non fortius deſiderat anima justa 
               Auguſt. in Iohan. tract. 26. col. 225. D.) nudè propoſui. Gloriam ſuam quaerit, qui, ſplendore verborum, gloriam crucis Chriſti obſcurat, ut non illa ſed ipſe laudetur 
               Ambroſ.: Et, Rhetoricorum pompa verborum, Daemonum cibus est 
               Hieronym. Damaſ. pag. 131. Baſil. Apud Io. Eroben. Anno 1524..
            
               Methodus, quae mea futura ſit, primo limine introſpîcienti, eſt obvia; quam, cùm 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , mihi probonitate ſua impertierit, ipſam nemo deſpiciat 
               
                  Sic non te ſpernat, qui pro nobis dignatus eſt ſper
                        ••
                     . Auguſt. tom. 2. Ep. 2
                     •
                  . coll. 100.: ſed in ſingulis, quaelegerit, ubi pariter certus est, pergat mecum; ubi pariter haeſitat, quaerat mecum; ubi errorem ſuum cognoſcit, redeat ad me; ubi meum, revocet me 
               
                  Auguſt tom. 3. de T
                        〈…〉
                     . lio. 1. cap. 3. coll. 241.. Si quid in his benè eſt, divinum agnoſcat; ſi quid malè, quod humanum eſt, ignoſcat; ſi quid placeat, habeat Deo gratias propter me; ſi quid non, ignoſcat mihi propter Deum 
               Lu
                     •
                  ovi
                     •
                  . Viv. in Auguſt de C
                     •
                  vi at. Dei, 
                     ••
                  b. 22. cap. ult. ad 
                     〈◊〉
                  , coll. 1398. 
               Si quid monendum cenſuerit, liberè (modò candidè) f
                     •
                  ciat; ſentiet enim me, in id operam navare ſedulò, ut commune Religionis negotium, dictis, ſcriptis, fact
                     ••
                  , pro
               
               virili promoveam; quae
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   Deograta Eccleſiae utilia, mihi
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   ad ſalutem neceſſaria fuerint, 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                   peragam.
            
            
               Cogitanti autem mihi, cujus tandem Patrocinio, has impolitiores oratiunculas, pro more, darem; ſubinde ſe ultro obtulit praelustris Fraternitas vestra, (viri graviſsimi:) quorum & pio affectu, & pleno conſenſu, cùm in Praelectorem inclytae nostrae Eccleſiae Cathedralis, ac Metropoliticae, electus, extremum vitae curriculum, apud vos praeclaros meos Symmiſtas egerim, & per continuos hoſce annos octo, Sacrae Scripturae locis (praeſertim Parabolicis) explicandis, inſervierim, Deoque annuente, inſervio; aequiſsimum duxi, ut tenues hos meos labores, vobis, qui praeſentiâ ſedulâ, & arrectis auribus, eoſdem viva voce prolatos, cohoneſt âſtis; quo poſſum cum affectu, quo debeo cum reſpectu, 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  .
            
            
               Accipite ergo, ſicut accepiſtis, (rogat vos avidè, qui pro vobis orat quotidiè,) 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                   hoc, levidenſe fateor, at amoris ſynceri 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  ; candidâ, quâ datur, mente ſuſcipite. Quid hinc mihi ſolatij certò venerit, quidvè libro balbutienti ſplendor is emicuerit, vobis veluti parcens 
               
                  Auguſt. Tom. 2. Ep. 110. coll. 515. B.
               , ſcriptis gravabor conijcere.
            
            
               Quinimò ſtudijs vestris gravioribus conſulens, Coronidis loco, Deum Opt. Max. intimè precabor, ita cogitationibus & conatibus vestris ſupernè benedicat, ut pace, colloquio, conſilio mutuis (ſicut fecimus) ad Dei gloriam, Eccleſiae commodum, et nostrum ſolatium, perpetuò fruamur: quo fiet, ut qui in Eccleſiâ militante, fratres convivimus unanimes, intriumphante, regnemus coheredes; ubi hymnidici Angelorū chori, & ſocietas civium ſupernorum; ubi ſemper melliflua hymnorum
               
               organa ſonant, ſuaviſsima Angelorum melodia, Cantica Canticorum mira, à ſupernis civibus decantantur 
               
                  Auguſt. Tom. 9. Manual. cap. 6. coll. 794.; Vbi gaudium plenum, & pluſquam plenum; pleno quippe corde, plena mente, plena anima, pleno toto homine gaudio illo, adhuc ſupra modum, ſupererit gaudium 
               Auguſt. ſup. Manual. c. 36. coll. 808.. Hoc, obnixè obteſtatur,
            
            
               Frater, & Orator, foelicitatis veſtrae ſtudioſiſſimus:
T. J.
            
         
         
            
            A Logicall ANALYSIS of the Text.
            
               IN the hiſtorie of Chriſt his paſſage by Sea, two principall things are to be obſerved, viz.
               1. Their ſhipping, in the 23. verſe: where note,

                     1. The perſons, who; and are made knowne by two things: and

                           1. By their number, who were and

                                 CHRIST, and
                                 
                                 His Diſciples.
                              
                           
                           2. By their order, (Chriſt went before, and h
                                 •
                               Diſciples followed him)
                        
                     
                     2. The veſſell wherein, (a ſhip.)
                  
               
               2. Their ſailing: where note,

                     1. Their danger, in verſ. 24. wherein obſerve,

                           1. A note of attention, (Behold.) and
                           
                           2. A Narration; which hath two parts:

                                 1. A declaration of the cauſe; and that is,

                                       1. 
                                             
                                                〈…〉
                                             , (a Tempeſt.) and
                                       
                                       2. 
                                             〈◊〉
                                          , by two things,

                                             1. Qualitie, (it roſe ſuddenly.) and
                                             
                                             2. Quantitie, (a great one.)
                                          
                                       
                                    
                                 
                                 2. A
                                       •
                                    a
                                       •
                                    gravation of the danger by two circumſtances,

                                       1. The ſhip was even covered with waves. and
                                       
                                       2. Chriſt himſelfe was on ſleepe.
                                    
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                     2. Their deliverance, which is

                           1. Procured in the 25. verſe
                                 •
                               where note, and

                                 1. The perſons procuring it, (His Diſciples.)
                                 2. Of whom they procure it, (Him.)
                                 3. What they doe being come to him, (they awoke him.)
                                 4. What they ſaid which being ſupplicatory hath two parts,

                                       1. Their ſuit, (Lord ſave 
                                             •
                                          s.) and
                                       
                                       2. Reaſon, (We periſh.)
                                    
                                 
                              
                           
                           2. Performed by a double reprehenſion, viz.

                                 1. He reproveth his Diſciples; and that for two ſa
                                       ••
                                    ts, and

                                       1. Their exceſſive feare, (Why are yee fearefull?) and
                                       
                                       2. Their defective faith, (O ye
                                             •
                                           of little faith!)
                                    
                                 
                                 2. He rebuketh the winds and ſea: where note,

                                       1. A preparation, (He aroſe.) and
                                       
                                       2. Reprehenſion it ſelfe, (He rebuked the winds and the ſea.)
                                    
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                     3. The effects, which were of two ſorts,

                           1. In the winds and ſea, (There was a great calme.) and
                           
                           2. In the men; and was twofold, viz.

                                 1. Admiration, (But the men marvelled.) and
                                 
                                 2. Interrogations where note

                                       1. A 
                                                〈◊〉
                                             , (What manner of man is this?) and
                                       
                                       2. A R
                                                ••
                                             ſon thereof, (For even the winds and ſea obey him.)
                                    
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
            
         
      
      
         
            
            
            THE RAGING TEMPEST STILLED.
            
               
                  MATTH. 8. 23, 24, 25, 26, 27.
                  And when he was entred into a ſhip, his diſciples followed him. &c.
                  
               
               
                  Comment.
                  
                     lit. 
                     THey that goe downe to the Sea in ſhips, and occupie their buſineſſe in great waters; theſe ſee the works of the Lord, and his wonders in the deepe: for he commandeth & raiſeth the ſtormie winde, which lifteth vp the waues thereof: they mount vpto the heauen, they goe downe againe to the depths, their ſoule is melted becauſe of trouble. They reele to and fro, and ſtagger like a drunken man, and are at their wits end: then they cry to the Lord, in their trouble, and he bringeth them out of their diſtreſſes; he maketh the ſtorme a calme, ſo that the waues thereof are ſtill. Then are they glad, becauſe they be quiet: ſo he bringeth them to their deſired hauen. 
                           Pſal. 107. 23 - 31.
                     
                  
                  
                     myſtic. 
                     
                        Navicula, Eccleſia eſt; quae mari. i. ſeculo; fluctibus, i. perſequutionibus inquietatur; Domino, per patientiam, veluti dormiente; d
                              •
                           nec orationibus Sanctorum ſuſcitatus compeſcat ſeculū, & tranquillitatem ſuis red dat. 
                        
                           T
                                 •
                              rt. l. de Baptiſmo cap. 12.
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                  LORD IESV CHRIST, who art aſcendedPrayer. on high, leadeſt captivitie captive, and giueſt gifts unto men; captivate, and bring into ſubjection, mine underſtanding, will, affections; furniſh me with gifts, and guide mine heart, tongue, and pen, that I may thinke, write, and ſpeake, ſuch things as may be for thy glory, the edification of thy Church, and the peace, and comfort of mine owne ſoule. Amen.
               
               
                  And when he was entred into a ſhip] AmongſtPreface. other cōforts & refreſhings, which trauellers have in their journeyes, & voyages in this world, this is none of the leaſt, that being wearied with tedious land-trauell, they may more eaſily paſſe by water; one maine end, of the ſea, & of great riuers, wherewith it hath pleaſed God, to interlace the habitable world, as the naturall bodie with veines of bloud. We have travelled a long and weariſome journey by land, and fetched home the prodigall from a far countrey: now if it pleaſe God, and you, we will refreſh our ſelues by water; we have beene in travell, with the Wiſe-men, who came from the Eaſt; we have beene in the High Prieſts houſe, where Peter denied his Maſter; we have beene in the Phariſies houſe, where the penitent woman waſhed Chriſts feet with teares; we have been in the Temple, where Iudas caſt downe his ſilver; we have beene in the field, both in ſeed time, in the parable of the ſower; and in harveſt, in the parable of wheat and tares; we have beene in the garden, in the parable

of the ſowing, and growing of muſtard-ſeed; we have beene upon Mount Tabor, in the ſtorie of Chriſt his transfiguration; and on Mount Calvarie, where, one of the theeves penitently confeſſed: we have beene in the wilderneſſe, in the parable of the ſhepherd ſeeking his loſt ſheepe; we have beene in the Indies, in the parable of ſeeking for hidden treaſure; yea we have, in our meditations, beene in the joyes of Heauen, and torments of Hell, in the parab
                     •
                  e of Dives, and Lazarus; we have beene almoſt every where: but, upon the ſea, in all our travels, we have not taken ſhip till now; but now by Gods grace, we will make a ſea-voyage. But, as wiſe mariners, though wind and weather be never ſo faire and calme, provide for a ſtorme; ſo I wiſh you provide your tacklings; for I aſſure you, we ſhall have a great ſtorme: but feare neither wind nor ſea, rock nor ſand; for Chriſt is our pilot; and every paſſenger, though much weather-beaten, yet ſhall in the end arrive ſafely at the wiſhed haven: only, as Paul before he tooke ſhip, kneeled downe andActs 20. 36. praied; be not wanting in your private praiers, that God would ſend us a proſperous journey.
               If it pleaſe you, I will firſt parallel this ſtorie with ſome other both poſitive & exemplary Scriptures: the former is in the Pſalmes, where the Pſalmist ſaith, They that go downe to the ſea in ſhips, & occupie their buſineſſe in great waters, theſe ſee the works of the Lord, and his wonders in the deepe; for he commandeth and raiſeth the ſtormie wind, which lifteth up the waves thereof; they mount up to the heaven, and goe downe againe to the depths; their ſoule melteth,
                  
                  becauſe of the trouble; they reele to and fro, and ſtagger like a drunken man, and are at their wits end; then they cry unto the Lord in their trouble, and he bringeth them out of their diſtreſſes; he maketh the ſtorme a calme, ſo that the waves thereof are ſtill; then are they glad becauſe they be quiet, ſo he bringeth them to their deſired haven: Oh that men would therefore praiſe the Lord for his goodneſſe, and declare his wonderfull works to the children of men 
                  Pſal. 107. 23. 5.. Oh what an excellent Comment is that, on this ſtorie! Other ſuch examples the Scriptures afford; as a like ſtorie we have in Ionah, when he flying to Tharſis from the preſence of the Lord, the Lord raiſed a wonderfull ſtorme and tempeſt, the ſea wrought and was troublous, the ſhip like to be broken, ſo as the mariners were afraid, and cried to their gods, and caſt forth their wares into the ſea; but the ſea would not be calme, till Ionah was caſt into it Ionah. 1. 4.. A like we have, in the New Teſtament, in Pauls dangerous voyage towards Rome, there riſing ſo great a tempeſt, that all hope to be ſaved was taken away, and though they caſt out the very tacklings and all, yet upon boards, & broken peeces of the ſhip, all came ſafe to land Acts 27. 14.. The letters of which ſtorie afford many excellent and uſefull inſtructions, and ſpecially to ſea-men; yea and to be laid up for future uſe of us all; for howſoeuer we have beene borne, and lived long upon the land, yet it may be, we have beene, or we know not how we may be endangered, and toſſed upon ſea, before we die. But ſpecially the myſterie doth greatly concerne us all: for preparation whereunto, be pleaſed to note, that

there are many hiſtories in the word, which either are Allegoricall in ſignification, or may be Allegorically compared and reſembled; we haue good warrant from the Scriptures for it. It is a plaine ſtorie, that Abraham had two ſons, the one by a freewoman, Sarai; the other by a bond-maid, Hagar 
                  Gen. 16. penult. & 21. 2.: yet the Apoſtle ſaith, theſe things are an Allegorie, and ſignifie the two Teſtaments 
                  Gal. 4. 22.; or Covenants of Works and Grace. Noahs Arke, wherein eight perſons were ſaved, a true ſtorie Gen. 6, 7, 8 cap.; yet S. Peter maketh it a figure of Baptiſme, wherby we are ſaved 1 Pet. 3. 21.. The children of Iſraels paſſing thorow the red ſea, a true ſtorie Exod. 14.; yet the Apoſtle maketh that alſo a figure of Baptiſme 1 Cor. 10. 2.. The children of Iſrael did drinke of the water out of a rocke, a true ſtorie Exod. 17. 6.; yet the Apoſtle ſaith, that rocke was Christ 
                  1 Cor. 10. 4.. God fed them with Manna from heaven, a true ſtorie Exod. 16. 14.; yet Chriſt ſaith, I am that bread of life, which came downe from heaven 
                  Ioh. 6. 48, 51.. Solomons mariage with Pharaohs daughter, a true ſtorie 1 King. 3. 1.; yet repreſenteth vnto vs, Chriſt his eſpouſing of the Churches of the Gentiles Pſal 45. 9, 10.. Many ſuch there might be produced, of which nature this preſent ſtorie is, (as all that I have ſeene commenting on the ſame, doe unanimouſly affirme) And therefore reſerving theI. Sea.
                   truth of the ſtorie Salva rerum geſtarum fide. Auguſt. lib. de unitate Eccleſiae, cap. 5.; by ſea here, we may underſtand this world; ſo it is compared by S. Iohn; Before the throne there was a ſea of glaſſe like Cryſtall 
                  Rev. 4. 6.: like a ſea; for as it is ſometimes calme, ſo doth it many times rage, & is in wonderfull motion & agitation, & full of rocks, ſyrtes, & ſands; by alluſion whereunto, the Apoſtle ſpeaketh of ſome toſſed to
                  
                  and fro, & carried about with winds of doctrine 
                  Eph. 4. 14.; yea and ſpeaketh of ſome, that haue made ſhipwracke 
                  1 Tim. 1. 19.: but a ſea of glaſſe; for no glaſſe ſo brittle, & ſubiect to cracks, as this world; but a ſea of Cryſtall too: Sathan is the prince of darkneſſe 
                  Eph. 6. 12., and his children are children of darkneſſe 
                  Rom. 13. 12.; and their works are works of darkneſſe 
                  Ibid.; ſuch ſubtill and politick plots and projects againſt the Church, as no eye can ſee or diſcerne them: but as a mans eye will eaſily diſcerne the leaſt ſpot, yea or mote in Cryſtall; ſo, and a thouſand times more clearely, doth God ſee and diſcerne, euen the ſecreteſt thoughts of mens hearts, all things being naked, and open before his eies, with whom we haue to doe 
                  Hebr. 4. 13.; and the eyes of Chriſt being like a flame of fire 
                  Rev. 1. 14., carrying light which way ſoeuer it pleaſeth him to look. And as the Arke of Noah, ſo this ſhip, into which Chriſt and dis diſciples2. Ship. entred, may repreſent vnto vs the Church militant, wherein Chriſt and all the faithfull do paſſe towards the haven of happineſſe; and in moſt reſemblances is wonderfull fit; as hereafter more fully.
               Thirdly, this great tempeſt upon the ſea, endangering3. Storme. the ſhip, doth liuely repreſent the great troubles and perſecutions, which the Deuill and bloudie Tyrants raiſe in the world, againſt the true Church of Chriſt; threatning, in mans iudgement, the utter ruine & deſtruction thereof; whereof David thus ſpeaketh, in one metaphor, The ſorrowes of death compaſſed me, the flouds of ungodly men make me afraid 
                  Pſal. 18. 4.: and againe, If the Lord had not been on our ſide, when men roſe up against us, the waters had
                  
                  overwhelmed us, the ſtreame had gone over our ſoule: Then the proud waters had gone over our ſoule 
                  Pſal. 124. 4.. And the Lord thus threatneth, I will bring upon them the waters of the river, even the King of Aſſyria 
                  Eſay 8. 7. Ierem. 47. 2.. And David thus prayed, Save me O God, for the waters are come into my ſoule, I am come into deepe waters, where the flouds over-flow me 
                  Pſal. 69. 1..
               Fourthly, Chriſt his being on ſleepe, in this4 Chriſt his ſleepe. ſtorme, when the ſhip was in ſuch danger, doth repreſent Chriſt his ſeeming to neglect his Church, in her perſecutions, and to leave his people in their enemies hands; about which they thus expoſtulate, Why doeſt thou abſent thy ſelfe, in this needfull time of trouble 
                  Pſalme 10. 1.? we crie, and thou heareſt not 
                  Pſal. 22. 2.: O God, how long ſhall the Adverſarie doe this diſhonour, how long ſhall the enemie blaſpheme thy name, for euer: why withdraweſt thou thine hand, eve thy right hand? plucke it out of thy boſome: ariſe O God, plead thine own cauſe 
                  Pſal. 74. 10, 11, 22.. Ariſe, O Lord to ſave me, 
                  Pſal. 3. 7. &c. And againe, more plainly in the metaphor of my text: Ariſe O God in thine anger, lift up thy ſelfe, becauſe of the rage of mine enemies, and awake for me, to the iudgement that thou haſt cōmanded, 
                  Pſal. 7. 6. &c. And again, Awake, why ſleepeſt thou? O God, ariſe, caſt us not off for ever, wherefore hideſt thou thy face, and forgetteſt our affliction and oppreſsion 
                  Pſal. 44. 23.? The like in other places, whereof more hereafter.
               The Diſciples comming unto Chriſt, and as it5 Called upon and awaked. were with out-cries awakening him, doth ſhadow out the prayers of the faithfull, who in the diſtreſſes of the Church, doe day and night call and crie to him to awake, ariſe, and defend his Church,

whereof I have even now alledged ſome examples out of the Pſalmes.
               Chriſt his ariſing, and rebuking winds and ſeas,6 Cauſing a calme. and cauſing a great calme, doth repreſent Gods entring into judgement with the enemies of his Church, apparently rebuking them, with ſudden death, or ſome great and viſible judgement, whereupon great peace commeth to Gods Church and people. So that I know no Story, which may be allegorized, by greater authority frō the Scriptures, than this. And as by authoritie of the Scriptures, ſo of the learned Fathers; witneſſe that ſhort metaphraſe of Tertullian, lib. de Baptiſmo, cap. 12. a very learned, and one of the ancienteſt Fathers, for there were but Iuſtin Martyr and Irenaeus before him; Clemens Alexandrinus was his ſynchronos, or coetaneus, viz. within two hundred yeares after Chriſt; ſo rarely qualified, humanis & divinis diſciplinis, that both Ierom and Lactantius commend him: and Cyprian uſually called for his works, thus, Da magiſtrum. Sixtus Senenſ. Navicula, Eccleſia eſt, quae mari, .i. ſeculo, fluctibus. i. perſequutionibus inquietatur, Domino per patientiam velut dormiente, donec orationibus ſanctorum ſuſcitatus, compeſcat ſeculum, & tranquillitatem ſuis reddat. I need not tranſlate it, it is but the ſumme of that you have heard before. And ſo I hope that handling it according to letter and myſterie, as if it were a reall parable, it wil prove profitable unto us. For our more orderly proceeding wherein, we will firſt obſerve the Context, and then the parts of the Text.
               For the Context. In the former part of the Chapter,1 Context.
                  
the Euangeliſt ſhewes that Chriſt had wrought divers miracles: he had cleanſed a Leper, reſtored a Centurions ſervant, cured Peters wives mother of a fever, caſt out devils out of the poſſeſſed, healed many that were ſicke, and inſtructed by word of mouth ſome that would have beene his diſciples; but all this was done upon the land. in terra: jam tranſit ad mare. Ludolph▪ ex Origen. Now he will to ſea, and there worke miracles, and really inſtruct his Apoſtles, that he may declare himſelfe to be Lord both of ſea and land.
               In Chriſt his transfretation over the ſea of Galilee
                  Analyſis. with his Diſciples, two things are principally to be noted, viz. firſt, their ſhipping, in this 23 verſ. and ſecondly, their ſailing in all the reſt. In their ſhipping, two things, viz. the perſons, and the means; who, and wherein: the perſons are knowne by their number, (He, and his Diſciples) and their order; Hee went before, and (the Diſciples followed him:) the meanes, or veſſell wherein they paſſed, (a ſhip.) In their ſailing or paſſage, three things are to be noted, viz. 1. their danger: 2. their deliverance: 3. the effect. In declaration of their danger, wee are to note the cauſe, and greatneſſe of it: the ordinary cauſe of their danger was (a tempest) which is deſcribed, firſt, by the qualitie (it aroſe ſuddenly) and ſecondly, by the quantitie, it was (great.) Secondly, the greatneſſe of their danger is declared by two circumſtances, viz. (the ſhip was even covered with waves) and ſecondly, (Chriſt was on ſleepe.) As concerning their deliverance out of this danger, two things are to bee noted, viz. firſt, the procuring; and ſecondly,

the performing thereof. In the procurement of deliverance, three things are to be noted, viz. firſt, to whom in this diſtreſſe they ſeek for deliverance, (his Diſciples came to Him:) ſecondly, what they doe being come to him, (they awaken him:) thirdly, what they ſay unto him; wherin obſerve, 1. a great Suit (Lord ſave us.) 2. A weightie Reaſon (wee periſh.) In the performance of deliverance thus procured, note a double Reprehenſion: 1. Of his diſciples: and he reproveth them for two things, viz. firſt, exceſſe of feare, (why are yee fearefull?) 2. Defect of faith (O yee of little faith.) In the ſecond, we are to note two things, viz. Preparation, (he aroſe) 2. Reprehenſion, (he rebuked the winds and ſeas.) The effect of this deliverance is two-fold, firſt in winds and ſeas, (there was agreat calme:) ſecondly, in diſciples and beholders; & that is twofold, viz. firſt admiration, (the men marvelled) and ſecondly, proclamation (who is this, that even the winds and ſeas doe obey him?) Thus I have made readie the ground, laid the foundation, propoſed a modell, laid in a readineſſe the materials; the halfe of my work is now over, but the whole profit therof to you remains. Of theſe parts therfore now orderly for our further inſtruction and edification. And firſt of their ſhipping; and therein, firſt of the Paſſengers: and of them the firſt and chiefeſt commeth orderly in the firſt place to be conſidered,Part. 1. 
                  (He.) Who is that? mentioned in the verſe immediatly before my Text, whereunto this is a relation, (Ieſus.)
               
               
                  And when Ieſus was entred.] Our Saviour went

divers times, and on ſeverall occaſions, into ſhips: ſometimes, for more conveniencie in his preaching1. For preaching. and miniſtery of the Word: So when there were great multitudes gathered together to him, he went into a ſhip, and ſate, and the whole multitude ſtood on the ſhore: And he ſpake many things to them in parables 
                  Matth. 13. 2.: And at another time; the people preſsing upon him to heare the word of God, as he ſtood by the lake of Gennezareth, he ſeeing two ſhips, entred into one of them and ſate downe, and taught the people out of the ſhip 
                  Luke 5. 1.: That, as out of the ſhip they uſed to caſt their nets, and catch fiſhes, he might by his example teach the Apoſtles how to caſt the net of the Goſpell, and catch men; as he ſaid unto them, Follow mee, and I will make you fiſhers of men 
                  Matth. 4. 19. 2: Sometimes alſo being weary with trauel, and with preaching of the 
                     For recreation.
                   Goſpell, for the refreſhing of himſelfe and his Diſciples: As they withdrew themſelves frō the multitude, he ſaying unto them, Come apart into a deſert place, and reſt a while, for there were ſo many comming and going, they had no leaſure ſo much as to eat; ſo they departed into a deſert place by ſhip privately 
                  Marke 6. 31.. So good and gracious Chriſt was, knowing the bodies of his Diſciples, not to be iron nor braſſe, but fleſh and bloud, ſubiect to faintneſſe and weariſomeneſſe, to allow them refreſhings and recreations; though, alas, it was but a poore refreſhing, and for a little while: For the people ſaw their departure, and ranne on foot thither out of all Cities, and he had compaſsion on them, and began to teach them, and healed all their ſicke 
                  Marke 6. 34. Matth. 14. 13. Luke 9. 10. 11.. Thus could hee ſcarce ever take reſt. If he ſit downe wearie on Iacobs Well to

reſt him, by and by comme
                     ••
                   a woman to 
                     •
                  raw water, and giveth him occaſion of a large diſcourſe. Though wearied with the labour of the day, yet even on the night time, Nicodemus commeth to him to be inſtructed Iohn 3. 2.. If he goe into the deſert, the people are there as ſoone as he, and he muſt teach, and heale, and feed them. If he enter into a ſhip, no ſooner on ſleepe, but his Diſciples awaken him, becauſe of a ſtorme; that as he had not whereon, ſo he could no where reſt his head Matth. 8. 20..
               Even ſuch are the occaſiōs of doing good, whichApplication. God offreth to his ſervants, who are his Stewards, Huſbandmen, and labourers, that their work goeth round with the yeare, they muſt follow it, in ſeaſon and out of ſeaſon 
                  2 Tim. 4. 2.: labour to weariſomeneſſe, and yet never be wearie of labour; but as the proverb is, lay weary to weary, and comfort themſelves with that of Saint Iohn, Bleſſed are the dead that die in the Lord, for ſo ſaith the Spirit, they reſt from their labours, and their workes follow them 
                  Revel. 14. 13..
               But it may ſeeme, there were other two more ſpecial cauſes of his entring into ſhip, & going to ſea with his Diſciples at this time; viz. Firſt, that he3. The working of the miracle. might proceed frō doctrine to miracles, which may be obſerved ſtill to be his manner; As having preached upon the mountaine, he was no ſooner come downe, but he cleanſed a Leper, healed the Centurions ſervant, cured Peters wives mother, and many that were diſeaſed; for his miracles were as the ſeale of his doctrine, as himſelfe hath ſaid, The workes that I doe, beare witneſſe of me, that the Father hath ſent me 
                  Iohn 5. 36.. And againe, If I doe not the workes
                  
                  of my Father, beleeve me not; but if I doe, though 
                        •••
                      beleeve not mee, beleeve the workes 
                  Iohn 
                        ••
                     
                     ▪ 37.. Now if wee compare this with the other Euangeliſts, it will appeare, that Chriſt had taught the people many things in parables Marke 4. 34. Luke 8. 22., and therefore went purpoſely to the ſea, that he might by miracle there (as it were) ſeale the truth of that doctrine which he had taught, and delivered; for as our Saviour asked Philip, Whence ſhall we buy bread, that theſe may eat? did it onely to prove him, for he himſelfe knew what he would doe 
                  Iohn 6. 6.: So our Saviour knew what he would doe on the ſea, and for what worke he purpoſely went thither at this time.
               The fourth and laſt, was the triall of their faith,4. Triall of his Apoſtles faith. who having been now ſome good time with him, he would make triall of their proficiencie, as God tried Abraham 
                  Gen. 22. 1.: not that God was ignorant what was in Abraham, or Chriſt ignorant, what was in his Apoſtles; but they were ignorant what was in themſelves, and preſumed they had more faith, than they had: wherefore it pleaſed our Saviour Chriſt, by bringing them into this danger on the ſea, to let them ſee the weakneſſe of their faith, and by doing ſuch a miracle ſtrengthen it, and make them in all future dangers, to reſt more ſtedfaſtly on his Almightie power, and not feare any evill, by water or land.
               In whom we may behold, and learne for our inſtruction,Doctr. what is the Lords uſuall manner of dealing with his Diſciples. No Schoole-maſter dothSimile. make that triall of his ſcholars, of their proficiencie, that God maketh of his, concerning their profiting,

and growth in Knowledge, Faith, Repentance,Confirmation. Patience, Zeale; none ſhall be long in his Schoole, but he will trie them, either by ſickneſſe of bodie, diſcomfort of ſoule, loſſes, croſſes, dangers; by water or land, falſe doctrine, evill example; one way, or other; All that live godly ſhall be ſure of their trials 
                  2 Tim. 3. 12.. The Apoſtle ſaith, That is no ſtrange thing 
                  1 Pet. 4. 12.; yea, as the Apoſtle Paul ſaith, They that are without correction, are Baſtards, and not ſonnes 
                  Heb. 12. 8.: So they that are without trials, are Baſtards, and not ſonnes; all Gods children are partakers thereof: you cannot be ignorant of the great trials of Abraham, Iſaack, Iacob, Ioſeph, Moſes, David, Iob, the Children of Iſrael in the wilderneſſe: it is our common condition, and therefore good counſell that Syracides giveth, My ſon, if thou come to ſerue the Lord, prepare thy ſoule for temptation 
                  Ecclus. 21..
               Thou canſt not be long with Chriſt on the land,Prevention. but hee will have thee into the ſhip, thou muſt to the ſtorme; and yet all for the beſt: in regard whereof, Saint Iames hath pronounced, Bleſſed is the man that endureth temptation, for when he is tried, he ſhall receive the crowne of life, which the Lord hath promiſed to them that love him 
                  Iames 1. 12.. And Saint Peter ſaith, Our faith being tried, and found more precious than gold that periſheth, ſhall be found unto praiſe, and honour, and glory, at the appearing of Ieſus Chriſt 
                  1 Pet. 1. 7..
               Oh, if the graces of God, as Knowledge, Faith,Vſe. Patience, Humilitie, Zeale, doe appeare in excellent meaſure, as they did in Abraham, Iob, David, and others, ſpecially the holy Martyrs; how greatly is it for Gods honour, and their true comfort

and happineſſe? but if theſe be very weake and feeble in us, and humane frailtie exceedingly appeare; yet how profitable is it, to know our wants? as for thoſe Apoſtles, to know how weake their faith was, that ſo they might walke in greater humilitie, and pray the more earneſtly, Lord increaſe our faith 
                  Luk. 17. 5..
               Wherefore be not afraid of the ſtorme, (if thouExhortation. beeſt ſound at the heart) it ſhall be for thy good: which made David ſo pray, Examine me, ô Lord, and prove me, try my reines and my heart 
                  Pſal 26. 2.: And againe, Search me, ô God, and know mine heart, try me, and know my thoughts, marke well if there be any way of wickedneſſe in me 
                  Pſal. 139. ult.. For howſoever David knew his integritie, yet the heart of man is deceitfull above all things, who can finde it 
                  Ierem. 17. 9.? and he deſired to know, if his faith were weake, or any wickednes lay lurking in any ſecret angle and corner of his heart; as holy Iob ſuſpected himſelfe, Though I were perfect, yet will I not know, that is, juſtifie mine owne ſoule Iob 9. 21.: and S. Paul in jealous humilitie confeſſeth, I know nothing by my ſelfe, yet am I not hereby iuſtified: he that iudgeth me is the Lord 
                  1 Cor. 4. 4.. Thus in an holy & humble jealouſie, we ſhould be glad to know if there be any weakneſſe or wickedneſſe in us. The manifeſtation whereof in his Apoſtles, was a principall motive to leade them to the ſea and into this ſtorme.
               For a concluſion of this firſt point, let it be obſerved,Comfort. & for ever remembred that my Text ſaith, Chriſt is the firſt that entred into the ſhip. He ſendeth not his diſciples to ſea, and himſelfe ſtandeth

faſt on ſhore; but He firſt entred into the ſhip. The greateſt comfort to the Church of God in generall, and every Chriſtian in particular, is, that Chriſt is preſent with them in all their troubles and dangers. God ſpake to Moſes out of the burning buſh. And this is it which he hath ſo often & graciouſly promiſed; As to Moſes, when he ſent him to ſpeake to Pharaoh, and deliver his people, Certainly I will be with thee 
                  Exod. 3. 12.: and the like to Ioſhua, As I was with Moſes, I will be with thee, all the daies of thy life, I will not faile thee, nor forſake thee 
                  Ioſh. 1. 5.: and unto Ieremie, Speake all that I have commanded thee, and feare not their faces, for behold, I am with thee, to deliuer thee 
                  Ierem. 1. 8, 19.: yea the promiſe is made to all Gods people, When thou paſſest thorow the waters, I will be with thee, and thorow the riuers, they ſhall not ouerflow thee; when thou walkeſt thorow the fire, thou ſhalt not be burnt, neither ſhall the flame kindle upon thee 
                  Eſay 43. 2.. And againe, Becauſe he hath ſet his love upon me, I will be with him in trouble; I will deliuer him and bring him to honor, Pſ. 91. penult. And Chriſt his promiſe to all his diſciples is, Loe, I am with you alwaies, even unto the end of the world 
                  Matth. 28. ult.: and, for confirmation thereof, appeared to IOHN, walking in the midſt of the ſeven golden Candleſticks 
                  Rev. 1. 13.; whoſe corporall preſence gave Peter ſuch boldneſſe and comfort, that he preſumed to walke upon the waters towards him Matth. 14. 29.: yea the aſſurance of his ſpirituall preſence gave David ſuch courage, that hee ſaid, I will not feare to goe thorow the valley of the ſhadow of death, for thou art with me, thy rod and thy ſtaffe comfort me 
                  Pſal. 23. 4..
               
                  But on the other ſide, Gods abſence and departureAbſence fearefull. is moſt grievous and fearefull (ſpecially in times of danger and diſtreſſe) as when God was angred by the golden Calfe, hee told Moſes, hee would not goe any longer before them as he had done; whereupon Moſes grew very importunate with him, that he would never carry them thence, if his preſence went not with them; and never left him till he prevailed that he would goe with them, as he was wont Exo. 33. 2. 3. 14.. It was an heavie ſight, and the forerunner of great deſtruction, that the Prophet in Viſion ſaw the glory of the God of Iſrael, gone up from the Cherub, whereupon it was, to the very threſhold of the houſe, as ready to depart 
                  Ezech. 9. 3.. Chriſt telling his diſciples that he muſt goe away, their hearts were full of ſorrow 
                  Iohn 16. 6.; yea, and though Chriſt laboured to giue them comfort, that they might take his departure well, as that it was expedient for them 
                  Iohn 16. 7.; and that he went to ſend the Comforter 
                  Ibid.; yea that he went to prepare a place for them 
                  Iohn 14. 2, 3.; and that he would come againe, and take them to himſelfe, and they ſhould be with him for ever 
                  Ibid.; yet all would not ſerve, it was an heavy ſight, to ſee their Maſter taken out of their ſight Acts 1. 9.; and Chriſt (after his reſurrection) tooke notice how the two diſciples that travelled towards Emmaus, were ſad 
                  Luk. 24. 17.. If the diſciples were thus diſtracted with feare, notwithſtanding Chriſt went into the ſhip before them, and was there in the ſtorme, though on ſleepe; how would they have beene affected, if hee had not beene there, but left them alone?
               Wherefore it behoveth all Gods people, in timesVſe.
                  
of dangers, to make very ſpeciall ſearch, and inquirie, whether Chriſt be preſent or no?
               And here me thinketh, I heare that of Gedeon
                  Obiection. commonly objected, who being ſaluted by the Angell, The Lord is with thee, thou valiant man, anſwered, Oh my Lord, if the Lord be with us, why then is all this befallen us? where be all the miracles which our fathers told us of 
                  Iudges 6. 12, 13.? If the Lord be with us, why is all this befallen us? our houſes are burnt, our goods and labours ſpoiled; yea Gods temples demoliſhed, his ſervants ſlaine; ſword, fire, and famine prevaile.
               I anſwer, God teſtifieth his preſence two waies,
                     Solution. 1. Miraculous deliverance. 
                  viz. ſometimes outwardly, in the miraculous deliverance of his ſervants out of evils: thus was God preſent with Daniel in the Lions den, ſtopping their mouthes, that they could not hurt him Dan. 6. 22.; and with the three children in the fierie furnace, not ſuffering an haire of their heads to be ſindged 
                  Dan. 3. 27.: Thus was God with his people in Egypt, red ſea, wilderneſſe, and Canaan; a thing exceedingly to be wondred at, that thrice a yeere, viz. at their ſolemne feaſts, all the males going from all parts of the Land up to Ieruſalem to worſhip, and none left at home to keepe their frontiers from invaſion, Cities and houſes from burning, and goods from ſpoiling, but only weake women and children; yet ſo long as they continued in Gods feare and obedience, he protected their lands, houſes, and goods, that no enemie invaded, or offred the leaſt violence: for ſo God had promiſed, at thoſe times, No man ſhall ſo much as deſire thy land, when thou ſhalt goe up to appeare
                  
                  before the Lord thy God 
                  Exod. 34. 24.. Oh how marvellous was God in the famous victories which hee gave his people over their enemies in the daies of Moſes, Ioſhuah, Iudges, David, Iehoſhaphat, Ezekiah, breaking the bow and arrowes, knapping their ſpeares, and burning their chariots in the fire Pſal. 46. 8.; ſhewing his puiſſance and power, making bare his right hand, in the ſight of the Heathen, reſtraining the rage of enemies, turning it to his praiſe, and making himſelfe terrible to the Kings of the earth 
                  Pſal. 76. 3, 10, vlt.. But yet, ſometimes it pleaſeth him, when his ſhip is in a dangerous ſtorme, to ſleep, and only to teſtifie his preſence another way, ſuffering their enemies to prevaile, to kill, murther, and ſpoile, and only2. By gratious ſupportation. furniſh his people, with faith, repentance, patience, humilitie, zeale, contentation, comfort, ioy, and inward peace, with other ſuch like ineſtimable graces of his Spirit, whereby his ſervants are inabled, by ſuffering, to prevaile, and get moſt glorious victories; howſoever fleſh and bloud would perſwade, God hath forſaken that people, in whoſe defenſe and preſervation he doth not appeare; yet the holy word of God teacheth us, that it is an infallible Argument of Gods powerfull preſence, that his ſervants are able to ſuffer, with patience and ioy, whatſoever it ſhall pleaſe God, to ſuffer their enemies to lay upon them. The Apoſtle ſpeaking of tribulation, diſtreſſe, perſecution, famine, nakedneſſe, perill, ſword; yea that for Gods ſake, they are killed all the day long, and counted as ſheepe for the ſlaughter, yet ſaith he, In all theſe things we are more than conquerours through him that loved us 
                  Rom. 8. 35. 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     , ſupervincimus.
                  .

Was not Chriſt with the Apoſtles, when being ſcourged, they went out of the Councel reioycing 
                  Acts 5. penult.? Was he not with Paul and Silas, ſinging Pſalmes of praiſe at midnight in the dungeon 
                  Acts 16. 25.? Was hee not with the Hebrewes, ſuffering with ioy the ſpoile of their goods 
                  Heb. 10. 34.? Was he not with thoſe Saints, of whom the world was unworthy, though being deſtitute, afflicted, tormented, wandring up and downe in wilderneſſes, mountaines, dens, & caves of the earth 
                  Heb. 11. 35.? Was he not with Ignatius, who being condemned to the beaſts, and hearing the Lions roare, he cheerfully ſaid, he was Gods corne, to be ground with teeth of wilde beaſts, that he might become pure manchet for God? Was he not with thoſe Martyrs in the Primitive Church, who eſteemed Tyrants as gnats, and their torments but as flea-bitings Tyrann
                        •
                     s, ipſumque Neronem, velut quoſdam culices. Chryſoſt. 2. Homil. de laudibus Pauli.? Was he not with them, who (as Tertullian ſaid) to be accuſed, wiſhed, and to be puniſhed for Chriſt, they accounted felicitie Tertull. adverſ. gentes, non procul ab initio.? A certaine woman running in all haſte with a childe in her armes, towards the place of execution, and being asked the cauſe of her haſte, O (ſaith ſhe) I heare a great ſort of Chriſtians are to be martyred, and I am afraid that I and my little one ſhall come too late. How did many holy Martyrs in this land, in the daies of Queene Marie, moſt willingly forſake offices, houſes, goods, parents, wives, children, libertie; moſt cheerefully receiue ſentence of death; moſt gladly goe to place of execution, and moſt comfortably kiſſe the ſtake, embrace the faggots, and clap hands in flaming fire? And whence was all this? Was it not from Chriſt, who in that great tempeſt was in

the ſhip with them? Let the bleſſed Martyr Gl
                        •
                     ver witneſſe; who having received ſentence of death, though the remembrance of the fire was ſo terrible, that he was exceedingly perplexed, & made his dulneſſe and heavineſſe knowne, which continued all that night, and the morning, till he came within the ſight of the ſtake, but then was ſuddenly filled with boldneſſe and joy, which made him call to his friend, He is come, he is come. Oh this is a glorious victory indeed, as one ſaith of the martyrdome of Saint Laurence: God did more gloriouſly triumph in his patience and conſtancie, when hee was broyled on the gridiron, than if he had ſaved his body from burning by a miracle Rupert▪
                  . Thus Chriſt hath ſhipped himſelfe firſt, and thereby aſſured vs that hee is with his Church and people in all their dangers and diſtreſſes, and will witneſſe that his preſence, either by miraculous deliverance, or moſt mercifull ſupportance, as he ſeeth it to be moſt for his glory, and their true good.
               The ſecond ſort of perſons, that were ſhipped,Part. 2. are called his [Diſciples.] Diſciple, is properly a Latine word, and doth ſignifie in Engliſh, a Scholar, or learner; from the verbe Diſco: the Greeke alſo is of the ſame ſignification 
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     , ex 
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     , diſco.
                  , and is often ſo tranſlated; as where our Saviour ſaith, Learne of mee 
                  Matth. 11. 29.
                  : And every one that hath heard and learned of the Father, commeth unto me 
                  Iohn 6. 45.. Let the woman learne in ſilence, with all ſubiection 
                  1 Tim. 2. 11.. In which, and many other places which might be alledged (but that theſe are ſufficent for inſtance) you have the word of the Text tranſlated, Learne, as it properly

ſignifieth. So that every ſcholar, or learner, is called a diſciple; and of whom hee is taught, or learneth, he is called his diſciple: So we reade of Iohns diſciples Matth. 11. 2.; and of Moſes diſciples Iohn 9. 28.; and ſo all Haereſiarches or Schiſmatickes, that are factious and Schiſmaticall, ſeeking to draw men to learne of them, and embrace their opinions, are ſaid to draw diſciples after them Acts 20. 30.. And thus all that profeſſed Ariſtotle for their Maſter, and were ſcholars in the ſchoole of the Peripatetickes. Plato, Pythagoras, Zeno, and others, are ſaid to have diſciples, that is, ſcholars, learners, and profeſſors of their doctrine and maximes 
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     , ſaepe apud Plut.
                  . The Hebrew alſo in Munſters Copie, agreeth with both theſe 
                     Talmudav. from Lamad, didicit.
                  . And as from the Greeke word, ſome ſpeciall Sciences 
                     Artes numerandi & metiendi: Aſtronomie, Arithmetick, Geographie, Keck. pracognit. Philoſoph. lib. 1. c. 2. p. 17., are, 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , called the Mathematickes, becauſe of their deepneſſe of learning, and ſharpneſſe of wit, and capacitie required in all the learners thereof: ſo from the Hebrew word commeth the Iewes Thalmud, that is, Doctrinall, a Syſthema, or compoſition of their doctrine. The ancienteſt was compoſed about 230. yeares after Chriſt, and was full of Iewiſh fables, and Rabinicall Traditions, but was afterwards refined and purged of many idle fables, traditions, and diſputes, by Moſes the ſonne of Maimon, which is in great requeſt amongſt the Iewes unto this day, and much alledged out of it, by our beſt Writers Chemnit. Exam. 1. part. 13. & Har. cap. 79 pag. 242. Shind
                        ••
                     r
                        ••
                      Penteg. in Lamad.. You ſee then what the word Diſciple ſignifieth, according to the proprietie of holy languages.
               Chriſt had two ſorts of Diſciples: Firſt, in the largeſt ſenſe, all that profeſſed the doctrine, or Goſpell

of Chriſt, were called his Diſciples, whether that profeſſion was in ſinceritie, or but in hypocriſie; ſo the Diſciples were firſt called Chriſtians in Antiochia 
                  Acts 11. 26.: And many of his Diſciples went from him, and walked no more with him 
                  Iohn 6. 66..
               Secondly, and more ſtrictly they were called his2 Diſciples, that not only learned and profeſſed the Goſpell, but were alſo called and appointed of him to preach the Goſpell to others. And they were of two ſorts: firſt, and of a lower order, the ſeventie,1 
                  ſent forth two and two, before his face, into every citie and place, whither he himſelfe would come, to preach the Goſpell, and worke miracles 
                  Luke 10. 1.. And theſe both in Scriptures, and Eccleſiaſticall ſtories, are known by the name of The ſeventy diſciples. Who theſe were, though Euſebius, Epiphanius, and others, tell us; yet in the Goſpell their names are concealed, and Chriſt bade them reioyce, that their names were written in heaven 
                  Luke 10. 20.. The other, and higher order, were the twelve Apoſtles, many times called his Diſciples,2 and made knowne by their names Matth. 10. 1. Marke 3. 15. Luke 9. 1. 5.. The learned Divines ſay; herein the truth anſwered ancient types, both of the twelve Patriarches, and ſeuentie Elders, called their Sanedrim; as ſome, the ſeventie ſoules that came with Iacob into Aegypt: Others, the twelve fountaines of water, and ſeventie Palme-trees in Elim 
                  
                     Exod. 15. vlt. Numb. 33. 9. Sic Tertul. cont. Marcionem lib. 4. ca. 24. Ierom. Epiſt. ad Fabiolam Manſio. 6.. Who thoſe Diſciples were that entred with Chriſt into the ſhip, is a queſtion, becauſe the Text doth not cleare it: it is moſt probable, that all the Apoſtles were there, for confirmation of whoſe faith, this miracle was wrought: likewiſe, that there were others, as Mariners, and, it

may be profeſſours too, for it is ſaid, the men marvelled; but not the ſeventie: I will not ſay, none of thoſe out of whom the ſeventie were choſen, for that might be; but not the ſeventie being choſen: for by chronotaxie, and harmonie of the Euangeliſts, it appeareth, that this miracle was wrought in the latter end of the firſt yeare of Chriſts Miniſtery; the chooſing and ſending of the ſeventy, was not till the third and laſt yeare of his preaching Auguſt. lib. 2. de conſenſ. Euang. cap. 23. Tollet. Cardin. in Luc. 10. 1.. And this is all the light I have received from the Scriptures and Fathers, concerning thoſe Diſciples, that entred with Chriſt into the ſhip.
               Now obſerve, I pray you, the paſſengers;
                     Obſerv. 1. As the Maſter of the houſe went to ſee the gueſts, let us wel view theſe paſſengers. and obſerve it well, that Iudas is gone aboord amongſt the diſciples; a wicked man ever, though as yet hee had not committed that tranſcendent wickedneſſe of betraying his Maſter. What more obſerved by friends that ſtay behind? Yea obſerve, Chriſt hath a ſhip wherein Iudas was not; but all paſſengers in it ſhall be ſaved; beleeving one God, one Faith, one Baptiſme, one Church, which is Holy, Catholike, and Apoſtolike, out of which there is no ſalvation 
                  No more than life, out of Noahs Arke.. Therefore, as the Lord added daily to the Church, ſuch as ſhould be ſaved 
                  Acts 2. 47.: ſo every one that hath a care and deſire of ſalvation, muſt be ſure that he be a member of that holy Church, which is inviſible; an article of our Faith:The Church, what. not but that wee ſee the bodies and profeſſions of ſuch; but ſaving grace is not ſeene, nor their election known, but in iudgement of charity, being that cōpany of the elect & faithfull only, gathered out of mankind, by the Word and Spirit, conſenting

in true faith; here living, and warring againſt the Devill, world and fleſh: and this is called in Latine Eccleſia, which yet is properly a Greeke word, and commeth from ſuch a theme as doth ſignifie to cal forth 
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     , evoco.
                  . It was an ancient cuſtome in Athens, that a company of Citizens were called ſorth by the voice of a Crier from the reſt of the multitude, to ſuch an aſſembly, wherein ſome publike ſpeech was made, or to heare relation, of ſome ſentence, or iudgement of the Senate; from whence it ſeemeth the Apoſtles tranſlated the name Eccleſia, to ſignifie ſuch a congregation as commeth not together by chance, but are called from the prophane multitude by the Crier of the Word and Spirit, to profeſſe God and true godlineſſe. I ſay againe, that it is abſolutely requiſite to ſalvation, that a man be a member of this Church, & called Company: he that is not in this world a member of the Church Militant, ſhall never in the world to come be a member of the Church Triumphant. And therefore Saint Peter chargeth men to giue all diligence, to make their calling and election ſure 
                  2 Pet. 1. 10..
               Obſerve ſecondly, that all the Diſciples wentObſerv. 2. into the ſhip where Chriſt was, even Iudas amongſt them, for whoſe ſake, as ſome of the Fathers conceive, this ſtorme did ariſe. Then is this ſocietie a ſhadow or figure of the viſible Church. By viſibleSenſe. Termini. and inviſible, I do not mean two diſtinct Churches (as our Adverſaries falſly charge us) as if a member of the viſible, were not alſo a member of the inviſible: but I diſtinguiſh the divers conſiderations of the ſame Church Field. lib. 1. c. 10.; which is viſible in reſpect

of profeſſion, and uſe of the Word and Sacraments; but inviſible, in reſpect of ſaving grace, wherein only elect doe communicate, and whoſe bodies & profeſſion is viſible; but ſaving grace, inviſible, & unknown of us, (ſaving in the judgement of charity) As all men might know Nathaniel to be an Iſraelite, but to be a true Iſraelite, in whom was no guile, that Chriſt only knew; ſo that many of the inviſible lie hid in the viſible, as Iohn 1. 47. a part in the whole; which viſible Church may be thus deſcribed: viz.
                  Deſcribed. It is a mixed company, that profeſſe that doctrine which is according to godlines, having the word of God (for matters fundamentall) purely preached, & Sacraments (for ſubſtance) ſincerely adminiſtred. And I ſay, this is a mixed company: For in ſuchSimilies. a company, may be ludas, and many unregenerate, and hypocrites, in the viſible, which are not of the inviſible Church. This Church was ſhadowed out by Noahs Arke, wherein were both cleane and uncleane beaſts
                  Gen. 7. 2.; by a floare, having a heape of corne and chaffe mingled together Matth. 3. 12.; a field, wherein wheat and tares grow together Matth. 13. 24.; a draw-net, gathering all ſorts of fiſhes, good and bad Matth. 13. 47.; a wedding, wherein are gueſts that have the wedding garment, and that want it Matth. 22. 11.; by a company, wherein are both wiſe and fooliſh virgins, the one having lampes and oyle, the others lampes onely Matth. 25. 2.; a flocke of ſheepe and goats, Matth. 25. 32. a great houſe, wherein there are veſſels of gold and ſiluer, ſo alſo of wood and earth, ſome to honour, and ſome to diſhonour 2 Tim. 2. 20.. And this viſible Church is two-fold, Vniverſall and Particular: the VniverſallDiſtinguiſhed.
                  
viſible Church, is the company of all ſuch as profeſſe the doctrine of godlineſſe, and enioy the miniſterie of the Word and Sacraments, whereſoever in the world they be. A Particular viſible Church, is a company, profeſſing as before, but receiving denomination from the Countrie, Kingdome, or Citie; as the Church of England, Scotland, Bohemia; Corinth, Galatia, Epheſus, Philippi: which is the reaſon, why particular viſible Churches are ſo affected with ioy or griefe, at one anothers proſperitie or adverſitie, becauſe (in effect) they are even the ſame, and as members of the ſame bodie, parts of the whole. Thus we have ſhipped the paſſengers. Now, as friends at parting have commonly ſome loving Charge or other; ſuffer me, before they launch forth, to give to them, and in them, to you and us all, a double warning; viz. Beware of departure from, and of diviſion among; I ſay, beware of departure, and diviſion; goe not out, fall not out.
               For the firſt, howſoever Iudas the covetous1. Departure. Departure upon two pretences, 1. Doctrine: 2. Diſcipline: upon the one the Romaniſts, upon the other the Novelliſts. wretch, and who afterwards was Traitor, be in the company, yet let none depart from the ſhip, and forſake the fellowſhip of Chriſt, and the reſt of the diſciples, for his ſake; it had been no leſſe dāgerous to the bodie of any of them, to have gone out of the ſhip into the ſea, than it is to the ſoule of any, to depart from a true viſible Church, where Chriſt and his Diſciples are. I doe not deny, but for many reſpects it may be warrantable for a man to depart from one viſible Church, to become a member of another; yea, for a time to dwel where no viſible

Church is; but to depart, becauſe of ſome corruptions, ſpecially in diſcipline, or manners, is the dangerous departure, condemned by the Scriptures, and the ancient Fathers, in Donatiſts, Novatians, Cathariſts, and ſuch like Separatiſts; of all whom S. Iohn hath pronounced, They went out from us, but they were not of us, for if they had beene of us, they would, no doubt, haue continued with us 
                  1 Iohn 2. 19.; neither ſhall ſuch departers, ever ſatisfie their blind and prepoſterous zeale. There never was, nor will be a viſible Church in this world without great blemiſhes, faults, and corruptions. Looke upon the ſtate of the Church from the beginning of the world, and you will finde it ſo; yet in all the Scriptures there is no precept (rightly underſtood) commanding to depart, nor warrantable example of any, that have ſo departed. A thing alſo, which the Fathers in their times, haue exceedingly declamed againſt. Not that we ſhould ſit downe careleſſe, and not take to heart the corruptions of Church or Common-wealth; or as if Magiſtrates and Miniſters, by word and ſword, ſhould not endeuourObiect. Sol. reformation. Indeed the Maſter ſaid to his ſervants, Let both grow together till the harveſt 
                  Matth. 13. 30.; which place the Anabaptiſts abuſe amongſt others, to proue a toleration; and S. Auguſtines opinion was ſo at the firſt (as himſelfe confeſſeth 
                     Me
                           •
                         primitus ſenten
                           •
                        i
                           •
                        . Epiſt. 48.) and gave his Reaſon, leſt profeſſed Heretikes ſhould become diſſembling Hypocrites: but Luther hath both ſhortly and ſoundly expounded the place, ſaying, It is not a ſentence of approbation, but of conſolation Non approbation
                        •
                     , ſed conſolation
                        •
                     , Luth. l
                        •
                     c. com. tit. de zelo.; that we ſhould not endevour reformation,

but a comfort, when we cannot ſo reforme, but ſtill there will be corruptions; yet for them not to forſake the fellowſhip, as the manner of ſome is Heb. 10. 25.. But theſe things I have more largely handled, and preſſed in this place hereto fore from ſome other Scriptures Serm on parab. of wheat & tares, Mat. 13. 30. pag 27 Serm
                        •
                     on 10. Virgins, Matth. 25. 1. pag. 27.; and becauſe ſuch departure is not now ſo hot, and common as it hath beene, I paſſe it over with this touch and caution in few words given.
               The ſecond charge I give, is the ſame that Ioſeph
                  2. Diviſion. gave to his brethren, Beware of diviſion, and falling out. All diviſion is dangerous, be it of Kings, Cities, or Families, as our Saviour ſaith, Every kingdome divided against it ſelfe, ſhall be brought to deſolation; and every citie or houſe, divided against it ſelfe, ſhall not ſtand 
                  Matth. 12. 25.; but no diviſion ſo dangerous as that in a ſhip, and ſpecially in a ſtorme; what doth that threaten but ſhip wrack and deſtrucction to them all? Wherefore there is nothing that Sathan more laboureth, and wherein he doth more hurt, than by cauſing of diviſions; and nothing more commanded, than peace, amitie, and unitie; Have ſalt in your ſelves, and have peace one with another 
                  Mar. 9. vlt.. The Angels at Chriſt his comming into the world, proclaimed peace Luk. 2. 14.; and Chriſt at his going out of the world, bequeathed peace, My peace I leave with you, my peace I give unto you 
                  Iohn 14 27.. The Apoſtles ſtill wiſhed Grace and Peace to thoſe Churches to which they wrote; and inioyned the Saints, If it be poſsible, and as much as lieth in them, to liue peaceably with all men 
                  Rom. 12. 18.; yea, to follow peace with all men 
                  Heb. 12. 14.; and to ſtriue to keepe the unitie of
                  
                  the Spirit, in the bond of peace 
                  Epheſ. 4. 3.. And here I cannot ſufficiently wonder at the Romaniſts, that conſidering our unite, and the great and grievous diviſions in the Synagogue of Rome; yet the Romaniſts are not aſhamed to make Unitie one of the markes (or their ſeventh note) of the true Church, and aſſume that to themſelves, and impute Diviſion to us 
                     Bellar. de notis Eccleſiae, lib. 4. 
                        
                           •
                        . 10.. Firſt, for their Diviſions, it is ſtrange (but that men of that ſide will ſay and write any thing) that Bellarmine ſhould ſay, they all joyne in obedience to their Head, and that their Councels, Popes, Decrees, and Writers doe wonderfully agree, though writing in divers tongues, places, occaſions; whereas the world hath taken notice, yea all muſt needs know, that know any thing, how Rome it ſelfe, by her owne children, hath beene ſacked, ſiedge laid to the Caſtle of Saint Angel, and the Pope taken priſoner By the Duke of Bourbon, Leader of the Emperors armie.. Is this their Canonicall obedience? How divers Popes have challenged the Popedom, and three ſtood at once. Many battels have beene fought, and thouſands ſlaine. Who was the head of their Vnity then; and when a woman was Pope? How Popes have cut off Cardinals heads: one Pope abrogate and condemne the Decrees of others So true is that of Platina in Stephan. vita, for the moſt part it hath beene the manner, that the later Popes have either infringed, or wholly taken away the decrees of the former.; yea in extreme hatred, digged up their bodies, and cutting off two of the fingers, to burie it againe; and ſometimes cut off head, and caſt the bodie into Tibur; one Councell condemning what another had decreed. What Writers euer more eagerly oppoſite, than Dominicans and Franciſcans, Prieſts and Ieſuits, yea Schoole-men themſelves, about the bookes of Canonicall Scripture themſelves?

the Virgins being without ſinne, Tranſubſtantiation, Purgatorie; yea Iuſtification, merit of workes, worſhipping of Images? yea what point of difference is there betwixt them and us, wherein ſome of their own ſide, doe not ſide with us againſt them 
                     Whites Way, Digreſſ. 24. pag. 154.? yea, as the Church of Rome is wholly departed from that ancient faith it profeſſed in the daies of the Apoſtles; ſo the moderne Church is exceedingly declined from that faith it formerly profeſſed, even ſince it came to be the ſeat of Antichriſt; which being ſo abundantly cleared by divers of our learned Divines, in their polemicall Tracts and Diſcourſes See the peace of Rome by D. Hall.
                  , and hoping that either you know, or doe not doubt of the truth hereof; I will not inſiſt upon probation of particulars, which were infinite 
                     Vid. D. White de notis Eccleſiae. Will. Synop. pag. 71. D. Whites Way, Digreſſ. 23.: and therefore if Unitie be a note of the true Church, Rome cannot be it; ſo divided, as it muſt needs one day come to ruine and deſtruction.
               For our owne diviſions, (which we doe not denie, have beene ſome, and too many, yet)1. Iuſtified, in compariſon with others. ſuch as diſprove not the true Unitie of the Church, but are juſtified, not only by the diviſions of the Romiſh Church, which are moe and greater, (and (it is like) will never be compoſed) but the diviſions, (which by Satans malice, and ſubtill abuſing of the weakneſſe of ſome,) have ever infeſted the true Church of God, even in Rome, in her beſt eſtate, Saint Paul ſaith, There were therein that cauſed diviſions and offenſes, contrary to the doctrine 
                  Rom. 16. 17.; And telleth the Corinthians there were among them, envying, ſtrife, and contention, ſome holding of Paul,
                  
                  ſome of Apollo, ſome of Cephas 
                  1 Cor. 3. 3.: Paul and Barnabas were at variance Acts 15. 39.: Paul & Peter had iarres Galath. 2. 11.: great ſtrife betwixt Eaſt and Weſt Churches, about the keeping of Eaſter, ſo as they excōmunicated each other: no leſſe broils in the Churches about Rebaptization: What Tragicall troubles did Theophilus Patriarch of Alexandria raiſe againſt Chryſoſtome, Biſhop of Conſtantinople? a chiefe adverſarie to whom was Epiphanius Biſhop of Cyprus. The event was, Chryſoſtome loſt both Biſhoprick, and life in baniſhment; many were flame in taking parts, the Cathedrall Church, and Senate-houſe in Conſtantinople burnt downe to the ground, in purſuit of reuenge 
                     Socrat. lib. 6. cap. 17. 21. Nicephorus lib. 13. cap. 17. 21. Baron. Annal. 400. num. 31.. How did the Orthodox Biſhops in the Councell of Nice fall at variance, and complaine of one another to the Emperour, ſo as Conſtantine had much adoe to compoſe the difference. In the ſecond Councell of Epheſus, ſuch eager contention, that Flavianus, the Biſhop of Conſtantinople was not only depoſed, but alſo pitifully murthered Evagr. lib. 1. cap. 10.. Too too many ſuch grievous contentions, Eccleſiaſticall ſtories witneſſe to happen in the Churches of God, in Councels, and amongſt the learned Fathers, and Biſhops, ſo lamented by Cyprian, and Baſil, as the cauſe of perſecution, and the turning away of many from embracing of the Chriſtian religion, and a great advantage to Arrius, and ſuch like Haeretikes, to ſpread the poyſon of their haereſies, farre and neere. Thus you ſee, there have beene, yea, and as long as Sathan hath leave to compaſſe the earth to and fro, and that Gods Saints be imperfect in knowledge, and weake in

affections, there will be diviſions, they have beene and are greater than amongſt our ſelves, yet not diſproving a true Church.
               Secondly, our diviſions are not of the Church,2. Not of the Church. but of ſome in the Church: our Church doth wonderfully accord, in the unitie of faith, and uniformitie of government, and therefore are falſly imputed to the Church.
               Thirdly, not in matters of faith, wherein as our3. Not matters of Faith. Church doth accord with other Reformed Churches abroad, in all fundamentall verities, there being no fundamentall diſſention, betwixt any the Reformed Churches 
                     Non eſt fundamentalis diſſentio. Whit. controv. 2. quaeſt. 5. cap. 8. pag. 322.; (as the Harmonie of Confeſſions beareth witneſſe) ſo, neither is the difference, or diſſention, amongſt ſuch in our Church, (except Popiſhly affected) about matters of ſubſtance, but of circumſtance; not about the boords or bodie of the ſhip, anchor, cable, card, or who ſhall be Pilot; but about the ſaile, and ceremonies, of blacke or white.
               Fourthly, though theſe differences have beene4. Not with extremitie purſued. too hotly and eagerly followed of ſome; yet, God be thanked, not purſued by fire or death, nor to the pronouncing of each other, Heretikes; as both anciently, (as partly you have heard, and might heare much more, if I delighted in this Argument, and would for this purpoſe ſearch the Authentike hiſtories of the Church) and lately alſo in the Romiſh Church, betwixt the Popes themſelves, and the Franciſcans, with all cruell extremitie, perſecuting the poore Dominicans.
               
               Laſtly, bleſſed be God, even in this happy calme,5. Well compoſed.
                  
our diviſions and contentions are well ſlaked and compoſed, notwithſtanding they were kindled and nouriſhed eſpecially, by the cunning of ſubtle, and ſecret Papiſts lurking amongſt us, as the remnant of the Canaanites, to be as pricks in our eies, and thornes in our ſides; but a little ſtorme would make us perfect friends, as ſome of our learned forefathers, who in time of proſperitie, were much divided, and abounded in their ſeverall ſenſes, and opinions, concerning ſuch matters, yet in the daies of Queene Marie, went ioyfully to the ſtake, and died together, for that truth which they ioyntly beleeved: it being moſt true of an ancient Father, The communion of good things oftentimes breedeth envie and hatred, but communion in miſerie, breedeth love and compaſsion.
               
               Thus I have ſhipped the paſſengers: I have givenConcluſion. them their charge. Looking upon the ſea, I ſee many ſhips, when I come to handle the veſſel wherein they paſſe. It is a needfull queſtion for theſe daies, which is that ſhip wherein Chriſt and his diſciples paſſe, and how may it be infallibly knowne from all other? When I come to that, I hope to make it cleare to all (whoſe eies the god of this world hath not blinded) that all the pinnaces of Heretikes and Schiſmatikes, and ſpecially that great Romiſh ſhip, though painted and gilded faire, and hath large ſailes, with top and top gallant, tacklings and cordage, is indeed no better than an hot man of war, a ſhip of Pyrates. It hath leaked long; and though Bellarmine hath put to all his ſtrength in pumping, and the Ieſuits, like cunning Divers, have uſed, and

doe uſe all their skill to ſtop this leake; yet ſhall they not be able: it ſhall one day ſinke, and make ſhipwrack. In the meane time, know, that the Church of England is a glorious viſible Church, a faire ſhip, wherein Chriſt and his diſciples are, and therefore (for this time) I diſcharge you, with renewing of the former charge; Take heed you depart not from her; take heed you cauſe not diviſion in her; but every man ſeeke her welfare, follow faith to the conſervation of the ſoule, and keepe the unitie of the ſpirit in the bond of peace: beware of Hereſie, beware of Schiſme: God, for his Chriſt ſake, helpe us to keepe faith and a good conſcience, to the end, and in the end. Amen.
               
               
                  Followed him] 
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     . ſequuti ſunt cum. 
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        , ſequor.
                   We have heard the number of2. Part. paſſengers, Chriſt and his diſciples; the Euangeliſt alſo noteth the manner or order of their ſhipping, viz that Chriſt went before, and his diſciples followed him. Chriſt ordinarily called the Diſciples and Apoſtles, in this forme and phraſe of ſpeech, as to Simon and Andrew being fiſhing, Follow me, and I will make you fiſhers of men 
                  Matth. 4. 19.; and in the verſe before my text, Follow me, and let the dead burie their dead 
                  Matth. 8. 22.; and to Matthew, ſitting at the receit of cuſtome, Follow me 
                  Matth. 9 9.; and to the young man, If thou wilt be perfect, goe and ſell that thou haſt, and give to the poore, and thou ſhalt have treaſure in heaven, and come and follow me 
                  Matth. 19. 21. Reaſon.
                  . The reaſon why Chriſt would ſpecially have the Apoſtles converſant with him, during the time of his Miniſterie here, was, that hearing his doctrine, ſeeing his miracles, and obſerving his manner of life, after his

departure, they might be witneſſes to the world, of that which they had heard and ſeene 1 Iohn 1. 1. Acts 4. 20. Iohn 15. vlt.: and for this cauſe, after the death of Iudas, there was care had, that ſuch an one might be choſen into his roome, as had accompanied with them, all the time, that the Lord Ieſus went in and out before them 
                  Acts 1. 21.. Therfore the Apoſtles commonly followed him from place to place, in City and Countrey, field and houſe, by water and land: though ſometimes for ſome ſpeciall cauſes, he admitted not all, but ſome few of them: as Peter, Iames, & Iohn, were only admitted to ſee the miracle of raiſing the Rulers daughter Luke 8. 51.; and his transfiguration on the Mount Matth. 17. 1.; and his agonie in the Garden Mar. 14. 33.. The words are ſufficiently cleared for their literall ſenſe.
               The letter teacheth us to give due honour andDoct. lit. reſpect to one another. The impreſſion of ſuperioritie and ſubjection, command and obedience, domination and ſervice, is not only ſtamped on1. On man. man, a ſociable creature, a little map or modell (as it were) of the great world, though never ſo barbarous; ſubjects following Kings, ſouldiers their Captaines, ſervants their Maſters, children their Parents, and wives their Huſbands; whereby that Eutaxie and decorum, which is eſtabliſhed by nature, and fortified by Morall Law, Honour thy Father and Mother, is preſerved; and ataxie and confuſion prevented: but God hath alſo ſtamped in man, the members ſubject to the2. In man. head, the bodie to the ſoule, and appetite to reaſon: yea this impreſſion is ſtamped upon the

whole face of nature; in the heavens, God hath3. On all creatures. placed a greater light to rule the day, and a leſſer to rule the night 
                  Gen. 1. 16.: yea if we aſcend higher, amongſt the Angels, there are Principalities, Thrones, Powers, and Dominions 
                  Coloſſ. 1. 16.; and Michael an Archangell 
                  Iude 9.. If we come to the earth, the very birds by inſtinct of nature, are ſubject to the Eagle, the beaſts to the Lion, and very Bees have a maſter, whom they (in their kinde) doe reverence and follow, elſe their Common-wealth could not ſubſiſt: yea, if we deſcend lower, the very Devils of Hell have Beelzebub for their Prince Matth. 12. 24.; if that kingdome were divided in it ſelfe, it could not endure 
                  Matth. 12. 25.; there muſt be precedencie, and ſubſequencie, a going before, and following after, in all creatures; ſpecially amongſt men and women, who as they are many wayes to teſtifie inferioritie, and reſpect to Gods ordinance, ſo this way ſpecially. Chriſt was their Lord and Maſter Iohn 13. 13. Confirmation by Scripture.; they his ſervants, and ſcholars: it was therefore comely, that ſo often we heare in the Goſpell, and, even in ſhipping, that Chriſt entred firſt, and his Diſciples followed him. And it is a perpetuall rule of Civilitie, which the Apoſtle hath preſcribed, that in giving honour, we ſhould prefer, or (as ſome Tranſlations have it) goe one before another 
                  Rom. 12. 10.. As men and women ſhould not be proud and ambitious; (a thing reproved by Chriſt in the Phariſies, for loving the chiefe places at meetings 
                  Matth. 23. 6.;) ſhuffling and thruſting, being dry drunken in the opinion of their owne worth; (as if none knew them but themſelves) whereby (in Gods iuſtice) they make themſelves

vile, and hated; whereas the way to honour, is to be bid ſit up higher: ſo neither ſhould any, but moſt willingly, in geſture, word and deed, acknowledge the worth and dignitie of others; and ſpecially Chriſtians, ſhould in all places carrie themſelves modeſtly and humbly, that amongſt them, all things may be done decently and in order 
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     , 1. Cor. 14. 4. ult.
                  . This is the foſterer of love Fomentum amoris. Calv., and the ſpur of vertue, and nouriſher of Arts Honos alit artes.; for what doth more prick forward, and enflame men to great and noble enterpriſes, eſpecially of learning, and chivalrie, than reſpect, honour, and glory Tu ſola, animas mertem
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      perurisgloria.? All men naturally deſire eſteeme, and regard, and to ſeeke it by vertue and goodneſſe, is very lawfull. It was no ambition or vain-glory in David, to aske, What ſhall be done to the man that killeth this Philiſtim 
                  1 Sam. 17. 26.? If there be any praiſe, thinke on thoſe things 
                  Philip. 4. 8.. For Chriſt to goe before, and diſciples to follow him, is a comely ſight. But I leave the letter.
               In the myſtery, this doth concerne us all, and inMyſterie. Senſe. what the Diſciples did bodily, wee may ſee, what we ought to doe ſpiritually: viz. If we be Chriſt his diſciples, or Chriſtians, wee muſt follow him. [To follow] is properly an Hebraiſme, and ſignifieth to ſerve, and obey, and imitate in ſuch things as concerne us; as it is ſaid, The men of Iſrael went from after David, and followed Shebah the Sonne of Bichri 
                  2 Sam. 20. 2.: and God reproving his people for Idolatrie, asketh, How canſt thou ſay, I have not followed Baalim 
                  Ierem. 2. 23.? And the Phariſies ſay one to another, concerning Chriſt, Behold, the world is gone after him 
                  Iohn 12. 19.; that is, acknowledge him for the Meſſiah,

and ſubmit themſelves to receive his doctrine, and obey his precepts, and imitate his example, as their onely teacher and patterne. And, leſt any ſhould thinke it concerned only the Apoſtles and Diſciples, in the daies of Chriſt, Chriſt generally, in the ſpirituall and myſticall ſenſe, enjoyneth it unto all; Whoſoever doth not beare his croſſe, and come after me, cannot be my diſciple 
                  Luke 14. 27.. Yea, leſt any ſhould yet thinke, that this was only enioyned to all the faithfull in thoſe daies; the Apoſtle, after Chriſt his Aſcenſion, biddeth the Epheſians, and in them all Chriſtians to the end of the world, Be yee followers of God, as deare children 
                  Epheſ. 5. 1.. If any ſhall yet aske me wherein can we follow Chriſt? Not in bodily manner,Queſt. Anſw. as the Apoſtles, and Diſciples now did; that is unpoſſible; he is gone, aſcended above theſe viſibleImpoſsible. heavens; Henceforth the world ſhall thus know Christ no more 
                  2 Cor. 5 16..
               As it is to us impoſſible, ſo was it to ſome unprofitable; it ſhall doe Iudas and many no good,Vnprofitable. that they followed him from place to place for ſiniſter reſpects, as to ſee his miracles, heare novell doctrine, as himſelfe ſaid, Verily yee ſeeke me, becauſe yee did eat of the loaves, and were filled 
                  Iohn 6. 26.. Some ſhall plead this at the laſt day, ſaying, We have eaten and drunken in thy preſence, and thou haſt taught in our ſtreets 
                  Luke 13. 26, 27.: but marke what anſwer ſhall be given them, I know you not whence you are, depart from me, yee workers of iniquitie. All cannot follow him in the Miniſtery and preaching of the Goſpell, none, but ſuch as are thereunto called: How can any preach, except he be ſent 
                  Rom. 10. 15.? Few or none can now follow

him in working miracles; as giving ſight to the blinde, ſpeech to the dumbe, hearing to the deafe, cleanſing lepers, curing diſeaſes, and raiſing the dead; for theſe were miraculous, and tended to the confirmation of his doctrine: with which power, though ſome in the Primitive Church were endowed for a while, that as they preached new doctrine, they might doe new workes; yet now that the doctrine of the Goſpell hath taken root, it needeth no ſuch watering; this gift is ceaſed. Bellarmine may well challenge it, for it is a marke of the Antichriſtian Synagogue. The Apoſtle ſaith, Antichriſt his comming ſhall be with all deceiveable ſignes and wonders 
                  2 Theſſ. 2. 9.. But now the true Miniſters of Chriſt are knowne, not becauſe they do, but becauſe they doe not miracles Hinc ver
                        •
                     s agn
                        •
                     f
                        ••
                     mus verbi miniſtres, non quia faciunt, ſed omnino quia non faciunt miracula.. And ſaith S. Auguſtine, Miracles now adaies, are either the prodigious workes of lying ſpirits, or fables and lyes of deceitfull men 
                  Portenta mendacium ſpirituum: aut mendacia fallac
                        ••
                     m hominum.. But let us goe to the cited text, and ſee what following of Chriſt the Apoſtle now requireth. What the word is, which the Euangeliſt here uſeth, you have heard, and the ſignification of it; viz. requiring a bodily motion and action 
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     , pedeſſequus.
                  ; and very rarely uſed in any figurative, or metaphoricall ſenſe: but the Apoſtle uſeth another word 
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     ., which is properly referred to imitation of vertues, as Saint Iohn biddeth us, follow that which is good 
                  3 Iohn 11.: And the Apoſtle Paul biddeth us follow faith 
                  Heb. 13. 7.: The ſignification of which word, the Apoſtle expreſſeth in the next verſe, adding 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , Walke in love, as Christ hath loved us. For the full clearing of this point, know, that man hath two feet, whereby hee commeth

to Chriſt, and followeth after him; the firſt is of faith, whereby hee beleeveth his doctrine, whereof Chriſt hath ſaid, He that commeth to me, ſhall not hunger, and he that beleeveth in me ſhall not thirſt 
                  Iohn 6. 35.: Where he ſheweth, to come, is to beleeve. And as we come, ſo we follow, which is by faith. Secondly, the practiſe of Chriſt his morall vertues; he being therein the perfect copie and Exemplar. To which purpoſe the Fathers have excellent ſayings:Fathers. He ſaith not vnto thee, Thou ſhalt not be my diſciple, except thou walke upon the ſea, or raiſe the dead, But, Learne of me, becauſe I am humble and meeke 
                  Non tibi dicit, non eris diſcipulus meus. Aug. praefat. in Pſal. 30.. And againe, the ſame Father expounding thoſe words, obſerveth, That Chriſt doth not ſay, Learne of me to make a world, and create viſible and inviſible things; But, Learne of me, I am meeke and humble 
                  
                     Non mundum fabruare, viſibilia & inviſibilia creare. Aug. de verbis Dom. ſerm. 10.. And another, Wee cannot follow Chriſt in power, magnificence, and the like; but we may follow him, in humilitie, meekneſſe, charity Non poſſumus in potentia, magnificentia: ſed in humilitate, manſuetudine. Ierom.. And another ſaith, No man is worthily called a Chriſtian, who ſo farre as he can, doth not imitate Chriſt in his manners Nemo rectè Chriſtianus, niſi qui Chriſto moribus. Cyprian.. In this it is, Chriſt biddeth vs learne of him; and the Apoſtle biddeth vs be followers of him: and another Apoſtle ſaith, Chriſt hath ſuffered for us, leaving us an example, that we ſhould follow his ſteps 
                  1 Pet. 2 21.: and a third Apoſtle ſaith, He that abideth in Chriſt, ought to walke, as Chriſt hath walked 
                  1 Iohn 2. 6.. Then looke unto your copie, if you would be truly accounted Chriſtians, looke unto Chriſt the
                  Exhortation. 
                  Author and finiſher of your faith 
                  Heb. 12. 2.. If you be true members of the Church, vow and performe as ſhee did, Draw me, and I will runne after thee 
                  Cant. 1. 3..

Behold his povertie, who being rich, for our ſakes became ſo exceeding poore Matth. 8. 20., that he had not wheron to reſt his head 
                  1 Pet. 1. 23.: and if it be required of thee for his ſake and the Goſpels, ſticke not to forſake all, and follow him in this; behold his meekneſſe, who being reviled, reviled not againe Mat. 12. 19, 20., broke not the bruiſed reed, nor quenched the ſmoaking flaxe, whoſe voice was not heard in the ſtreet. Behold his patience, taking a reed in his hand, wearing a crowne of thornes, mocked, buffetted, ſpit on, and ſaith not a word Matth. 27. 29.. Behold his charitie, praying for his cruell enemies, Father, forgive them, they know not what they doe 
                  Luke 23. 34.. Behold his contentation, thanking God for barley bread Iohn 6. 11.. Behold his diligence, preaching & working miracles, til he was weary Iohn 4. 6.; yea, and on the night time, when hee ſhould have ſlept Iohn 3. 2.. Behold his devotions, ſpending whole nights in prayer Luke 21. penult.
                  . Behold his zeale, purging the Temple, ſcourging out buyers and ſellers, and overthrowing the tables of money-changers Iohn 2. 15.. Behold his humilitie, chooſing poore fiſher-men and tole-gatherers for Apoſtles Matth. 4. 18, 19.: Wearing a poore ſeameleſſe coat Iohn 19. 23.: Fleeing when they ſought to make him King, Ioh. 6. and riding on an Aſſe into Ieruſalem 
                  Matth. 21. 5.. Behold his conſtancie, who never gave over till the worke was finiſhed Iohn 19. 30.. Oh that wee could doe thus, when Satan tempteth vs to pride, revenge, idleneſſe, diſcontent; how would it daſh temptations to ſay, Avoid Satan, I muſt follow Chriſt, and he did not ſo. Oh that wee could doe this, when, like men, we have failed in our duties, and ſinned; how would it breake the heart with

godly ſorrow, and make us ſmite on breſt and thigh, and ſay, Oh wretched man that I am, Chriſt did not ſo, and I ſhould have followed him; oh follow, follow.
               And here give me leave to encounter our Adverſaries,
                     Confutation. Gallica 
                           •
                        irata eſt Calvinum Eccleſia, nuper quo nemo docuit doctius: was ſaid and written by no childe in Divinitie. who falſly and full ſpightfully, cal us Calviniſts, and Lutherans, and Zuinglians, as if wee taught you to follow Calvin and Luther, to beleeve every point of doctrine, & to conforme your ſelves in all poins of diſcipline and government, as they have preſcribed. No, no, we leave that to the Papiſts, whoſe faith & manners are tied to the Popes ſleeve, and they depend on his mouth what to beleeve, and doe, and receive his decrees with greater reverence, pietie, and devotion, than that of Chriſt himſelfe: it being moſt true in them, that Chriſt imputed to the Phariſies, they made the Commandement of God of none effect, through their traditions, yea, teach for doctrine the commandements of men 
                  Matth. 15. 3. 9.; and do glory to be called Papiſts, acknowledging the Pope to be their Nauclerus or Pilot 
                     Tortur. Tort. p. 15.: we leave that to the Franciſcans, Dominicans, Benedictines, Ieſuits, and many other ſorts; which ſome of the beſt writers of our Adverſaries well know, as Orladius, Salmeron, D. Carr. pag. 158 Ianſenius, that have verbatim tranſcribed whole leaves; and Pighius reading Calvin upon Iuſtification by Faith, with a purpoſe to confute him, was converted by him, as Tapperus in his 2. Tom. 8. Artic. confeſſeth, who ſometimes was his fellow-pupill under Adrian the ſixt. What need I tell you what wonderfull teſtimonie Thuanus, D. Stapleton, and Panygirolla,
                  
have given him, though Doctor Carrier a ſeduced malecontent, doe ſpight him, a man not worthy to light his candle when he went to his ſtudie: More preciſely obſerving the rules of their order, and following the preſcripts of their Founders, than they doe of Chriſt. As for Maſter Calvin and Luther, whom they doe ſo extremely hate, (for that they have given an incurable wound to Popery) we know they were learned men, and ſingular inſtruments of Gods glory, ſuch as lived and died godly, (notwithſtanding that lying Cochlaeus and Bolſecus, moſt wickedly ſlandered them; and Bellarmine in his Oration prefixed to his 4. Tome, would make the world beleeve, hee and his followers are the wickedeſt men in the world) but we neither follow them, no nor Saint Paul himſelfe, further than they followed Chriſt: and ſo farre we have good warrant, for Saint Paul biddeth, Be followers of me, and looke on them which walke ſo, as you have us for an example 
                  Phil. 3. 17.. And againe, Be yee followers of me, even as I am of Chriſt 
                  1 Cor. 11. 1.. He, nor they never required more to him, nor them; we never yeelded more; we doe not make Maſter Calvin our Nauclerus. Let men be never ſo learned and holy, yet in this life wee know but in part, are ſanctified but in part; never any ſo deare to God, but have had their errors and blemiſhes; none ever wrote ſo faire, but blurred his copie; only Chriſt is the perfect copie, for doctrine and converſation 
                     Sic Baſilius vocat Chriſtu, 
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     .: and him only wee teach and perſwade you to follow. Oh, follow, follow him.
               And thus that I have directed you in what ſocietieEncouragement.
                  
to ſhip your ſelves, and ſhewed you what men are: Now be pleaſed that I encourage al ſuch as are godly minded, to this following of Chriſt, whereunto I exhort them. Which I ſhal the better doe, if I remove ſuch lets and hinderances, which the Devill, the world, and their owne corrupt reaſon, doe caſt in their way to hinder them.
               Firſt, me thinketh I heare ſome complaine, Alas,Obiect. 1. Chriſt is ſo perfect and abſolute an example, I cannot come neere him; ſo faire a copie, I am cleane out of heart to write, or once to take pen in hand.
               I anſwer, that in following, Chriſt requireth qualitie,Sol. but not equalitie 
                     Iuſtin. in Eph. 5. 1; a ſimilitude, but not proportion; a perfection indeed (as Chriſt ſaith, You ſhall be perfect, as your heavenly Father is perfect 
                  Matth. 5 ult.
                  ,) but a perfection of parts, not of degrees: what we doe, let vs doe it in truth, and ſinceritie; be loving, humble, diligent, zealous, without hypocriſie; and the Lord will accept according to that which wee have 2 Cor. 8. 12.; ſo there be an holy and honeſt endevour, with godly ſorrow, that wee come ſo farre ſhort, and, with Peter, that we follow ſo farre off Luke 22. 54.: and heartie and continuall prayer with the Church, Draw Lord, and wee will runne after thee 
                  Cant. 1. 3.: Hee knoweth what paſe wee are able to make, better than ourſelves, he will beare with our limping and halting, and accept of the will for the deed. Wherefore (ſo there be truth and ſinceritie in the inner parts Pſal. 51. 6.) let vs not be out of heart with our weakneſſe, but follow after, though we creepe with the Snaile Curſu teſtudineo, Bez. in Cant. 3.. What dulneſſe did David finde in himſelfe, when he ſaid, My ſoule cleaveth to the duſt, oh
                  
                  quicken me 
                  Pſal. 119. 25.: And I ſhall runne the waies of thy Commandements, when thou haſt enlarged mine heart 
                  Pſal. 119. 32.. How did our holy Mother Church finde her ſoule and affections fettered and ſhackled with worldly cares, carnall pleaſures, vaine delights, when ſhee prayed Chriſt to draw herCant. 1. 3.; with his Word, Spirit, Mercies, Corrections. Therefore ſtreng then the weake hands, and comfort the 
                     •
                  eeblekneesEſay 35. 3.. Whoſoever followeth with an holy endevour, ſhall be ſure to obtaine. A good Scribe will beare with his ſcholar, if againſt his will and purpoſe, he make a blot, or deformed letter; and if he eye his copie, and have a care and deſire to imitate, he will guide his hand: but no man on earth hath that loving regard to his ſcholar, that Chriſt hath to the weakneſſe of all ſuch as follow him.
               Oh, but hereby I ſhall expoſe my ſelfe to manyObiect. 2. euils, checkes, mockes, taunts, diſgraces; it may be perſecution, to the loſſe of goods, libertie, life.
               Indeed it is true, it many times fareth betterSol. here, with thoſe that follow the Devill, world, fleſh, that proteſſe any doctrine, follow the Pope and Mahomet, and live never ſo prophanely; than it doth with the holy ſervants of Chriſt, profeſſing the Goſpell in ſinceritie, and ſtriving to live accordingly: wherein Chriſt and his Apoſtles have dealt faithfully, deceiving none with vain hopes; he ſaid, his Kingdome is not of this world
                  Iohn 18. 36.; and telling him (that with an earthly mind offered his ſervice, Maſter, I will follow thee whitherſoever thou goeſt) The Foxes have holes, and birds of the aire have neſts, but the Sonne of Man hath not whereon to reſt his head
                  Matth. 8. 20.:

And called Zebedees ſonnes from the crowne to the croſſe, Are yee able to drinke of the cup, and be baptiſed with the Baptiſme, I muſt be baptiſed with
                  Matth. 20. 22.
                  ? Whoſoever will be my diſciple, muſt take vp his croſſe daily, and follow me
                  Luke 9. 23.; Yea, He that doth not forſake father and mother, wife, children, houſe and lands for my ſake, and the Goſpels, cannot be my diſciple
                  Luke 14. 26.: And therefore would have all men to ſit down, and caſt their account, what it will coſt themLuke 14. 28.: becauſe to ſet hand to Gods plough, and looke backe, maketh a man utterly vnfit for Gods Kingdome
                  Luke 9. 62.
                  : And it were better never to have knowne the waies of godlineſſe, than afterwards to depart from the holy Commandements given unto them
                  2 Pet. 2. penult.
                  . Oh no marvell that ſo many are ſo loth to goe from home, and ſo hard a taske to get them aboord. But ſee, oh ſee, the happie rewardPromiſes. of all followers in the end; Behold (ſaith Peter, in the name of all the Apoſtles, yea of all diſciples, whē ever living, that for action or affection can truly ſay with him) we have forſaken all, and followed thee, what ſhal we have therfore? Verily, I ſay unto you, ye that have followed me in the regeneration, when the Son of Man ſhal ſit in the throne of his glory, ye alſo ſhal ſit upon twelve thrones, and iudge the twelve Tribes of Iſrael: andevery one that hath forſaken houſes, brethren, ſiſters, father, mother, wife, children, or lands, for my names ſake, ſhall receive an hundred fold, and ſhall inherit everlaſting life
                  Mat. 19. penult.
                  . And againe, Yee are they that have continued with mee in my temptation: And I appoint to you a kingdome, as my Father hath appointed to me: That yee may eat and drinke at my table in my Kingdome, and ſit on thrones, iudging the twelve
                  
                  Tribes of Iſrael
                  Luk. 22. 28.. According to which promiſes, the Apoſtle ſaith, If wee ſuffer with him, wee ſhall reigne with him
                  2 Tim. 2. 12.. It is a moſt true ſaying of the Apoſtle, If in this life only we have hope in Chriſt, we are of all men moſt miſerable
                  1 Cor. 15. 19.. But in regard of theConcluſion. reward to come, ſuch as follow Chriſt to the end, are of all men moſt happie. Moſes had reſpect to this recompence of reward, and it made him leave following of Pharaoh and his Court, and chuſe to ſuffer afflictions with the people of God, rather than to enioy the pleaſures of ſinne for a ſeaſon
                  Heb. 11. 24.. This made the Apoſtles, being ſcourged, to depart out of the Councell rejoycing, that they were counted worthie to ſuffer for the name of Chriſt. This hath encouraged thouſands and millions of holy Martyrs, to ſuffer with patience and joy, all the tortures and torments, that the Devill and Tyrants could deviſe, and by no meanes be pulled from following of Chriſt.
               Oh then, on, on, follow, follow him; letExhortation. us all be Acolytes; (I neither meane it, according to Philoſophie, the Stoicks being ſo called, becauſe they alwaies followed their opinions, and did with obſtinate pertinacie, adhere to their doctrine, and counted it a ſhame to forſake the ſame; neither doe I meane it, according to ridiculous Popery, wherin Acolytes are one of their Eccleſiaſticall Orders1 Tim. 3. 8. Rhem. ibid. ſect. 7., whoſe office is to light tapers and candles; for there muſt be candles light whenſoever the Maſſe is celebrated, though at noone-day, and Sunne ſhine never ſo brightTriſag. p. 549.; and no marvell, for it is a worke of darkneſſe: but) by Acolytes, I meane according

to the word in my Text, let us follow Chriſt his doctrine, and morall converſation, and let our light ſo ſhine before men, that they may ſee our good workes, and glorifie our Father which is in heaven
                  Matth. 5. 16..
               
                  
                     Preſſed.
                   Oh follow him in troubles and temptations, and you ſhall follow him in glory, for ſo is the promiſe, They ſhall follow the Lambe whither ſoever hee goeth
                  Revel. 14. 4.. Follow him on earth, and you ſhall follow him in heaven: follow him in momentanie miſery, and you ſhall follow him in endleſſe felicitie: follow him in temporarie death, and you ſhall follow him in everlaſting life: then ſuffer with him, and you ſhall reigne with him. Now follow him that rideth upon the white horſe, and is gone forth to war
                  Revel. 19. 11., and you ſhall follow him in triumph, with Palmes in your hands
                  Revel. 7. 9., and crownes on your heads, when the Devill and all enemies, ſhall be troden under foot
                  Rom. 16. 20..
               But now give mee leave, before I conclude thisApplication. point, to lament the paucitie, the ſmall number of thoſe that follow Chriſt. The time was, whē it was ſaid, The whole world followed him
                  Ioh. 3. 26. 12. 19.: but now may we complaine, that all follow the world; as the Apoſtle long ſince did, All ſeek their own, & not thoſe things which are Ieſus Chriſts
                  Phil. 2. 21.. Good Lord, how greedily, and unweariedly, doe men and women follow, and even runne, ſome after their pleaſures, of Hawkes, Hounds, Cards, Dice; ſome their profit and gaine; ſome their honour and preferment; ſome one ſinne, ſome another: and in that purſuit, will endure any hardneſſe, any diſcouragements! but how few follow Chriſt in the way

of obedience to the Goſpell! Which S. Bernard in his time lamented, and diſcovered the folly of, in a wittie deſcanting upon a Latine word Decipiam, inficiam, interficiam, reficiam.. The world ſaith, I will deceive thee; the fleſh ſaith, I will infect thee; the Devill ſaith, I will deſtroy thee: but Chriſt ſaith, I will refreſh thee. Yet how many follow the other, and how few Chriſt. They would come to Chriſt in heaven, and are ready to ſay with Stephen at their departure, Lord Ieſu receive my ſpirit 
                  Act. 7. penult.
                  ; but will not follow Chriſt on earth Ad Chriſtum, non poſt Chriſtum; conſequi, ſed non ſequi.: they would, with Balaam, die the deaths of the righteous 
                  Num. 23. 10.; but cannot abide their lives: they wiſh the end, but not beginning Optant extrema, ſed non principia juſtorum.; or if they wil follow Chriſt on the ſhore, they will not to ſea with him; can endure in times of libertie, peace, plentie, and proſperitie, to profeſſe the Goſpell, but not in trouble and perſecution; they will bring him to the water-ſide, and if he will preach out of the ſhip, they will ſtand on ſhore and heare him Matth. 13. 2.; but if it be rough, they will not to ſea with him.
               But know you, that the marke of a true diſciple is to follow Chriſt in temptations, tribulations, perils, and perſecutions; yea it is adverſitie trieth and declareth a true diſciple; not like the Iſraelites, to reioyce & ſing, when they paſſed ſafely thorow the red ſea, but murmure when they wanted bread or water: wherefore follow him in ſickneſſe, povertie, diſgrace, impriſonment, death; follow him to the ſea, let winds and waves rage never ſo horribly; yea follow him into the ſea, if he call thee thereunto: what hurt had the children of Iſrael by following the Cloud and Arke into the midſt of the red

ſea? The Lord is with his in all their temptations and tribulations, hee will deliver them, and bring them to honour 
                  Pſal. 91. Penult.
                  . Thus the paſſengers are all ſhipped, we have obſerved both their number and their order; Chriſt went in before, and his Diſciples followed him. It now followeth to ſpeake of the Veſſell wherein they paſſed; but for this time I conclude with that Prayer our holy mother ChurchCCC. on Saint Peters day. Anno 1622. hath taught vs in the Collect for this day.
               
                  Almightie God, which by thy Sonne Ieſus Chriſt,
                  Part. 2. 
                  didſt give ſuch grace to thy holy Apoſtle Saint Peter, and commandedſt him earneſtly to feed thy flock; make we beſeech thee, all Biſhips and Paſtors diligently to preach thy holy word, and the people obediently to follow the ſame, that they may receive the crowne of everlaſting glorie, through Ieſus Chriſt our Lord. Amen.
               
                  Into a ſhip.] We have obſerved the Paſſengers, for their number and order of ſhipping. Now let us conſider the Veſſell wherein they paſſe, which is here ſaid to be a [Ship 
                  
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     
                     : ex 
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                      
                     navigo; navis, dempto, n▪ 
                     avis; both doe flie, one with wings of nature, the other of Art, velis quaſialis volare docuit. Bell. de aſcen. mentis ad Deum, grad. 8. ca. 5. and both in the intermediall Elements, aire and water; and eaſily changed one into another; the water rarified with heat, becommeth aire; and aire condenſate with cold, turneth into water: but I leave the word..] The Romiſh Peterlings ſay this was Peters ſhip: and in that they have a great myſterie 
                     Ber. tom. 2. lib. 5. cap. 6. Rhem. annot. on Luke 5. ſect. 1.; that Chriſt and his Diſciples are in their Church. Indeed that Chriſt once was in Peters ſhip, & taught out of it, and drew a great draught of fiſhes, the Text is cleare Luke 5. 3.: That alſo Chriſt and his Diſciples were in the Church of Rome, is as cleare, when Saint Paul ſaith, Their faith was famous throughout the world 
                  Rom. 1. 8., and affoorded ſo many Martyrs: and let it be granted, that this was Simon Peters ſhip, which hee had left when Chriſt called him 
                  Matth. 4. 19., but not aliened the propertie, but afterward uſed it for fiſhing Iohn 21. 3.. Yet then let the

Papiſts be pleaſed to note, that if it were Peters, it was but a fiſher boat, a 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , a navicula, rather a cock-boat, or ſmall Barke: Aſcendente in naviculam. Vulg. Mald. Band, & omnes Pontificij: no man of war, with flags, & ſtreamers, and abundance of caſt peeces, as theirs is, a Beare with 3. ribs in his mouth. Alas, the Church of God is poore, ſimple, and abiect, in compariſon of other ſocieties. Witnes God himſelfe, who hath deſcribed it thus, ſaying, Oh thou afflicted, toſſed with tempeſt, and not comforted 
                  Eſay 54. 11.; far unlike the Romiſh Church, which challengeth Vnitie, Viſibilitie, Antiquitie, Vniverſalitie, Miracles, and whatſoever may make her glorious in the world. I beſeech you, let us not contend with them in this, for the judgement of God is ſo upon them, that nothing doth more diſprove them from being the true Church of God, than what they doe moſt challenge for themſelves.
               But why would Chriſt enter into a ſhip, ſeeingQueſt. he could walke upon the ſea? was it not he that led the people of Iſrael thorow the red ſea, himſelfe walked on the ſea, and made Peter to doe ſo too? If then he would not enable his Diſciples to doe ſo, yet why did he not compell the Diſciples to enter into a ſhip, but himſelfe to walke after them upon the ſea, as at another time he did Matth. 14. 25.?
               I Anſwer, though he that made the ſea, could
                     Anſw. I. Declaration of humanitie.
                   have walked on it; yet for three cauſes ſpecially, he would now go in the ſhip. Firſt, to declare the truth of his Humanitie, which hee well fore-ſaw would be denied by Manechies, Marcionites, and other Heretiques; and therefore as at other times; ſo ſpecially

when he wrought any glorious miracle, for declaration of his Deitie, he alſo gave ſome teſtimonie of true Humanitie. As man, he did ſpit upon the ground; as God, with clay he cured him that was borne blinde 
                  Iohn 9. 6.; as man, hee wept for Lazarus his death; as God, he raiſed him that had been foure daies dead 
                  Iohn 11. 35. 43, 44.; as man, he entred into a ſhip and ſlept; as God, he ſtilled the raging of the winds and ſeas. If the Diſciples ſeeing him but once to walke upon the ſea, were troubled, ſaying, It is a ſpirit, and they cried out for feare 
                  Matth. 14. 26.: What would they have thought, if he had uſed it ordinarily? And if they were ſo terrified and affrighted, ſuppoſing they had ſeene a ſpirit, becauſe the doores being ſhut, hee ſtood in the midſt of them 
                  Luke 24. 36.: What would they have thought, if he had alwaies, ſo ſupernaturally, and miraculouſly, ſo behaved himſelfe? Wherefore to declare the truth of his Humanitie, hee would now enter into a ſhip with his Diſciples.
               Secondly, for the confirmation of their faith,2. Triall of Apoſtles. and enabling them to greater trials; firſt, he would now be with them, and but on ſleepe; but the next time he will be abſent, & ſee how they profited by this. Thus doth God proceed from leſſer to greater, ſeeing what uſe wee make of former providence, helpe, grace, and goodneſſe.
               Thirdly, that by his Example, hee might teach3. To teach the uſe of meanes. us to uſe lawfull meanes in our callings, and as wee trauell by water or land, and not tempt God, by raſhneſſe and preſumption, caſting our ſelues into needleſſe perils and dangers: the Devill placed Chriſt on a pinacle of the Temple, and bade him

caſt himſelfe downe, which hee could have done without hurt; yet to teach us how to carrie our ſelves in the like caſe, he anſwered, It is written, Thou ſhalt not tempt the Lord thy God 
                  Matth. 4. 7.. So if men have occaſion to paſſe over rivers, or ſeas: we muſt not with Peter, ſtrive to walke upon the ſea, leſt we linke and be drowned, (as he might have beene, if his Maſter had not ſaved him) but by bridges, ſhips, and ſuch ordinary waies and meanes, as God, by mans art hath appointed. So much for the ſenſe.
               The letter teacheth vs, that it is a thing lawfull,Doct. lit. and warrantable for Chriſt his Diſciples, as occaſions ſerve, to travell in boats and ſhips from place to place; yea and if there ariſe a ſtorme, and theyIlluſtration. come into danger of life, yet not to be out of heart, as if they were not in their waies, and therefore not to hope for protection, yea though they might with more toile, have gone to the ſame place on foot, and by land; for Chriſt and his Diſciples might have gone from Bethſaida to Gaderen by land, this ſea being but a lake, ſo as if they would have compaſſed the lake, they had met with no water, ſaving Iordan, over which, there were doubtles bridges, and ſafe paſſages; but Chriſt and his Diſciples, to avoid that toile, and being wearie, take ſhip, and goe by ſea, warranting the like; yea if any ſhall take ſhip, but for pleaſure and recreation, it is lawfull, as for pleaſure, to ride on horſe, or in coach; Chriſt hath ſanctified theſe things to his children.
               I am not ignorant that this doctrine is gain-ſaid,Confutation.
                  
and that wiſe men (ſpecially amongſt the Heathen) have diſliked Navigation, and declaimed againſt it, and the invention thereof; as one ſaith, Goe and commit thy life to the winds, truſting in wood, not foure inches from death I, nunc & ventis animam committe. Juven.: Horace admireth the boldneſſe of him that firſt went in ſhip 
                     Illi robur & as triplex circa pectus erat. Hor. 1. Carm. 3.: It was one of the three things that Cato repented, Travell by ſea, when by land hee might haue gone: And Antigonus gaue his ſonnes charge, that they never hazard themſelues on ſuch adventures: and the Greeke Comicke ſaith, It is better to be poore by land, than rich by ſea 
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     
                  . But theſe were Heathen men, and though ſome fearefull Chriſtians be little wiſer, thinking it ever ſafeſt to ſee raging waters from the ſhore Neptunum pr
                        •
                     
                     cul à terra.: yet wee are better taught in Gods Schoole, viz. That as all other Arts are primarily and originally from God, that firſt and moſt perfect intelligible Primum & perfectiſſimum intelligibile. Kecker. Phyſic. li. 4. c. 4. p. 1611.: ſo ſpecially this of Navigation, for God himſelfe gave expreſſe direction to Noah, how to build the Arke for the ſaving of the creatures in the Deluge, which was the firſt veſſell (for any thing we know) that ever floated on the ſea, and which reſting upon the Mountaines of Armenia, was the modell or Idaea for the building of ſhips; the Phenicians, and after the Aegyptians being the firſt that practiſed this Art 
                     Strabo. lib. 16. Plin. lib. 3. cap. 56. Kecker. Problem. nautica. T. 1. pag. 1991.; which is growne to a wonderfull perfection; ſpecially, ſince the invention of the Load-ſtone: and it is primarily from God, which by experience is growne to ſuch perfection, ſo exceeding vſefull and profitable for Man; for this is firſt a ſingular meanes of1. Invectio Commeatuum. proviſion, for how doth the ſea contend with the

earth, for plenty, variety and delicacie? how many ſundry ſorts of moſt wholeſome & delicate fiſhes for food, and moſt uſefull for their bones and oile, doth the ſea yeeld? which we could never enioy, to Gods praiſe and our comfort, but by the benefit of ſhips. Againe, God having enriched ſeverall2. Copula diſtantiū. Countries, with ſeverall commodities, and ſcarce any one that affordeth all things, even for the being, much leſſe the well being of man; but as ſome have great ſtore of Corne; others abound with Wine; others have plentie of Fruits; others ſtored with mines of Gold, Silver, Copper, Tinne, Lead, or Iron; others are for breed of Cattell Even India it ſelfe, the great ſtorehouſe of the world, wanteth many things, which wee have. Thus hath the great Creator diſpoſed theſe earthly good things.: that as in the bodie of the little world, the head cannot ſay to the foot, I haue no need of thee; ſo in the body of the great world, one Country cannot ſay to another, I have no need of thee: and though never ſo farre diſtant; yet by benefit of Navigation, the Commodities of ſeverall Nations are exchanged; merchandize with wonderfull encreaſe of wealth, is maintained; yea the knowledge of God propagated; farre remote countries, by this meanes, being made as neare neighbours, and daily paſſage from one to another, as over a woodden bridge. Laſtly,3. Compendium itineris. it is a wonderfull eaſe in journey, ſhipping maketh great burthens light, and long waies ſhort; conveying both perſons and commodities, from place to place, both with more eaſe, in ſhorter time, and with farre leſſer charge: ſo beneficiall is the Art of Navigation.
               Now to make Application. Iacob bleſſing hisApplication. Sonnes before his death, and in ſpirit foreſeeing

their placing in Canaan, as if with Ioſuah, he had ſeene the Lots caſt and falne, gave this bleſſing to his Sonne Zebulun: Zebulun ſhall dwell at the Hauen of the Sea, and he ſhall be for an Hauen of Ships 
                  Gen. 49. 13.. In this Tribe was this Sea, & Corazin, Bethſaida, Capernaum, which was ſo commodious & gainful a dwelling, that Moſes before his death bleſſing the Tribes, 
                     ••
                  ddeth Reioyce Zebulun in thy goings out 
                  Deut. 33. 18.; Firſt, in thy proſperous voiages; whereby they did ſuck of the abundance of the Seas, and of treaſures hid in the Sands 
                  Deut. 33. 19.. The people were ſo rich in Solomons daies, that in Ieruſalem, Silver was as plentifull as ſtones 1 King. 10. 27.: but by his Ships he fetched it from Ophir 
                  1 King. 9. ult.. England is a fruitfull Countrey, and as compleat in it ſelfe, as any I reade of, a verie Canaan flowing with Milke and Honie, ſpecially abounding with ſuch things as are for food and apparell, which giue the Law to all other Merchandize. Yet we want (I ſay not Tabacco) I would we wanted that Indian Gold, and Silver, and Wine, and Weed and all, rather than it ſhould be ſo abuſed through wantonneſſe and riot. But we want Spices, and thouſands of comfortable bleſſings. Our Merchants fetch them from farre in their Ships, wherein they excell all Nations 
                     Hoc certum eſt, omnibus hodie gentibus, navigandi induſtria & peritia ſuperiores eſſe Anglos. Kecker. prob. nautic. pag. 1992.. Laſtly, whereas Inhabitants in the maine Continents are ſubiect to ſudden and violent incurſions of enemies, ſo as many times when no danger is ſuſpected, Cities, and Caſtles are ſurprized, and Princes led into captivitie by their enemies: how doth Nature and Art ſecure us Iſlanders; Nature having digged ſo great and unpaſſable a Ditch (without great and long preparation)

and Art builded ſuch ſtrong, though woodden, Wals, Caſtles, and Bulwarkes? Wherefore that we may be happie ſtill, as well in Earthly, as Heavenly things; let vs pray God to maintaine Merchandize, the ſinew of our wealth, peace, and welfare; that they may cheerefully goe out and in, and with Zebulun reioyce in their trading; export ſuch things as we can ſpare, and import ſuch bleſſings as we want: And ſpecially, for his Maieſties Roiall Navie, that, that may be as a ready-well-furniſhed Wall and Caſtle of defenſe, for the propulſation of everie invading Foe. And ſo much be ſaid of the Letter.
               It is generally agreed, by the ancient Fathers,Mysticall ſenſe. and later Divines, both orthodoxall and heretical, that the Ship is a moſt excellent Embleme and Hieroglyphick, wherein is moſt lively (almoſt in all things, as may be gathered from the Scriptures, and writings of learned Divines) repreſented, the ſtate and condition of a true viſible Church in this world; The Ship (I ſay) reſembleth the Church; the Sea, the world; the ſtorme, perſecutions; Chriſt his ſleepe, his patience; the Haven, is Heaven; the Pilot is Chriſt; the Mariners, Prophets, Apoſtles, Miniſters; the Paſſengers, Chriſtians; divers roomes, divers orders and offices; the maine Maſt, Chriſts Croſſe; the Sailes, profeſſion of godlineſſe; the wind, the Spirit of God; the contrarie winds, the counterblaſts of Satan, by falſe Doctrine; the Card and Compaſſe whereby they ſaile, Gods Word; the pixis nautica, which only eieth the fixed North Pole, Faith; the Cable and cordage,

Love; the Anchor, hope; praiers, and teares, their Ordnance; Word and Sacraments, their food; Gods good pleaſure, the Rudder; and proſperitie, the Remora, which maketh the Ship ſtand ſtill, or ſaile verie ſlowly. If I ſhould now inſiſt vpon theſe things, and ſhew you both by what authoritie, from Scriptures, or Fathers, or both, I frame this Allegorie; and how fit this reſemblance is, in all the paſſages thereof, in many a Lecture, I could not diſpatch it. I haſten to things more profitable, and doe only in generall propoſe it, and referre the particulars, to your owne further meditation; and now come to reſolue the waightieſt queſtion which troubleth ſo many in theſe daies, viz. Which isQueſt. that Ship wherein Chriſt and his Diſciples are, ſeeing everie Ship ſaith he is there; which is that true viſible Church in theſe daies, wherein to live, and whereof to be a member, is moſt happy? To ſearchAnſw. all the Ships, Pinneſſes, and Cock-boats, which are or have beene upon the Sea, were an endleſſe labour, (there are or have beene ſo many Iewes, Turks, Arrians, Anabaptiſts, Familiſts,) yea and fruitleſſe; for many of them which formerly have failed faire, and troubled the eies of beholders, have ſuffered Ship-wrack, and are long ſince ſunck: only ſome few peeces of their broken Ships, doe float here and there; and others have received great leakes, and will ſinke of themſelues; which ſhew, that Chriſt is not in them. I will only ſearch two, viz. the Romiſh Ship, (which they ſay is the only Ship of Chriſt and Peter;) and the Ship of the Reformed Church (which they ſay, is but an haereticall

Cock-boat.) Have but patience, and by Gods grace, I ſhall reſolve the queſtion, in whether of theſe doe Chriſt and his Diſciples paſſe, that ſo we may ſhip our ſelves with them. For the Church of Rome, there is nothing better pleaſeth them than this Allegorie; they ſay theirs is Peters Ship, and therefore expreſſe it upon the Wals, and in Tabletures, in portraiture of a beautifull, and goodly Ship, vnder ſailes 
                     Splendidi
                           •
                         picturis hanc naviculam exornare ſolent. Chem. Harm. cap. 64.; the Pope at the Sterne; Cardinals, and Biſhops, and Shavelings, the Mariners, and plying their tacklings; and the poore Proteſtants, as Hereticks, caſt over board, and ſwimming a while for life; but in the end drowned. And therefore they ſend out their Emiſſaries, Ieſuits, Prieſts, to draw all Diſciples to board there. But let me tell you, I have ſearched that Ship, and finde it a faire one to looke on, and furniſhed with Maſts, Yards, Cables, Cordage, large Sailes, and mightie Ordnance, a number of caſt Pieces: but Chriſt is not there, nor his Diſciples: if Inquiſition can finde them out, they muſt over board. They will ſuffer Iewes, Atheiſts, and all ſort of wicked livers, but not Chriſts diſciples. This ſhall ſuffer wracke. And therefore we call to all Paſſengers therein, Come out from amongst them
                  Revel. 18. 4..
               And for this purpoſe I alledge the Teſtimonie of one of their owne, (whom I doe not name for honour, being ſuch a wretched, and faithleſſe Hypocrite and Renegade; but becauſe ſuch as are Popiſhly affected, it may be, will regard his ſaying,) thus therfore hath he painted in paper the Romiſh Church: 
                     Marcus Antonius de Dominis, in a Sermon preached in Italian in Mercers Chappell, pag. 33, 34. It is a good Veſſell, well built, not

rotten, nor fallen in peeces; but indeed, the Pilot, who ſitteth at the ſterne, hath throwne aſide the ordinarie Compaſſe, and left the vſe of the approved Sea Map, and out of his owne capricious conceit, deviſed a new Card, and contrived a new found Compaſſe of his owne, whoſe Needle hath no aſpect towards the Pole, or touch at all of the Load-ſtone, ſutable hereunto; he hath, out of his owne head, framed certaine Cardinal winds, which ſerve only for his Card, and propounding only one Port, his owne greatneſſe, and temporall pompe, hath in his deviſed Compaſſe, quartered out his owne counterfet winds, which muſt blow for that haven; but he ring-leads them all to wracke. And will you heare what teſtimonie he hath given of the Reformed Churches ſhip, in the ſame Sermon: The Reformed Churches (ſaith he) have caſt out that ſtrange intruding Pilot, and yeelded up their ſhip to be governed by their owne true Steereſman, ſuch as God himſelfe hath ordained, and ſo uſing the infallible Card of the holy Scriptures, and the true Compaſſe, quartered out into the foure ancient Cardinall winds, of the foure firſt Generall Councels, and ſeconded with the under winds of the Holy Fathers, they make an happy Voyage, and without wandring arrive at the appointed Haven of Salvation Serm. ſup. pag. 36.. If he had beleeved this with his heart, which in the name of God, he preached with his mouth, he had beene an happy man; but dealing falſly with God, God hath juſtly diſcovered him. Let them take him, we renounce him as an hypocrite, and nullifidian, and regard not what

he hath ſaid or written. I will only produce the Teſtimonie of a Pope, viz. Pius the fifth, who offred to Q. Elizabeth, to approve as good the whole publike ſervice and forme of Religion in our Church, with Sacraments and Bible, and that hee would change nothing, ſo her Majeſtie would receive it from him, as Pope and Vicar of Chriſt; which becauſe ſhee refuſed to doe, he preſently excommunicated her. Let Popiſhly affected, note that, how well pleaſed the Pope would be with all, ſo hee might have the government. For this are we ſuchVide Triſagio. lib. 3. cap. 18. pag. 593. D. Carr. let. pag. 45. edit. 1613. Heretikes. I will ioyne iſſue with a man of greater worth, dignitie, and eſteeme amongſt them, than Spalato was, or now will be, viz. Bellarmine himſelfe, who taketh upon him by certaine infallible notes, (to the number of foure) to declare which is the true ſhip or Church, wherein Chriſt & his diſciples are. It would aske a great time to examine them all, it hath been worthily done by famous & learned men already D. Whit. D. Reynold.. I will only ſelect one or twaine: and firſt be it knowne vnto you, that whereas there are only two infallible marks & notes, of a true viſible church, viz. the ſincere preaching of the word; and the adminiſtration of the Sacraments: theſe are none of Bellarmines notes, he doth with all his learning oppoſe them as no true notes: I muſt therefore ioyne in ſome others of his owne coyning, granting ſuch to be, as indeed are not, that yet it may appeare, even thoſe doe more concerne our Church, than theirs: which though it might be made good, in examination of them all, yet I will only chuſe two, becauſe I will not confound the

memories of the weake; and ſuch two, as are moſt viſible, that ſo the common people may ſee which is the true Church indeed.
               The former of theſe (but the eighth in Bellarmines number) is holines of doctrine Sanctitas doctrinae. Bell. Tom. 2. lib. 4. cap. 11.; & he addeth, there is no ſect of Pagans, Philoſophers, Iewes, Turks, or Heretikes but teach errors; but the Church of Rome teacheth no errour, no turpitude, nothing contrary to reaſon; and therefore that is the only true Church. I would to God Bellarmine meant as he ſaith, that by this note of holy doctrine, it might be, without partialitie, tryed which is the true Church: for the Scriptures containing the moſt holy doctrine, it would follow, that what Church doth preach and profeſſe that doctrine purely, by this note muſt needs be the true Church of God. But I doe wonder, that Bellarmine ſhould dare to offer ſuch a note; whereas they teach for doctrine their owne Traditions & Ceremonies, give authoritie to the Pope to diſpenſe with the Law of God; yea robbe Chriſt of all his offices, (as might be ſhewed by induction of particulars) give men liberty to finne, by their Auricular Confeſſion, Indulgences, and Pardons, and eaſie deliverance out of Purgatory. Is that an holy doctrine, which teacheth, that the mariage of Miniſters, is the worſt ſort of Fornication? That it is better to maintaine a Concubine, than a Wife? That alloweth ſwearing and blaſpheming; ſo as Saupanlinus but for reproving a man for ſwearing, was ſuſpected to be a Lutheran, and thereupon examined, condemned, and burned 
                     Tox Martyr. p. 904.? Is that an holy doctrine, which

                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  
                  
                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  
                  
teacheth no more than a very Reprobate may beleeve and practiſe 
                     Mr. Perk. Reform. Cathol.? Is that an holy doctrine, which teacheth killing, and poyſoning of Kings and Princes? Is that an holy Religion, which doth canonize for Saints, Thomas Becket, Garnet, and ſuch like notorious Rebels? That teacheth lying, equivocation, mentall reſervation, breaking of oathes? Is that an holy doctrine, which teacheth the breach of all the morall Commandements? In a word, the Romiſh doctrine, is a moſt prophane, carnall, and obſcene doctrine, and moſt pleaſing to carnall, wicked, and unregenerate men, a maine cauſe why it hath ſo many profeſſors; all the holineſſe of it, is but in Apiſh and mimicall geſtures, bowing of knee, lifting vp of eyes, and hands, abſtaining from ſome meats, weeping, knocking, croſſing, whipping, which are preſcribed? So that as a worthy Diuine amongſt us hath truly ſaid, a great part of Popery is very Magicke Perkins T. 1. pag. 40. Col. 2. in C., and nothing elſe but a politike Atheiſme; being Divines without Scripture; Religious, but without Faith Sine Scriptura Theologi, ſine vera fide Religioſi.; in the name of the Lord, putting to death, ſuch as die, for the name of the Lord. To conclude, ſeeing the doctrine of Popery, is a renuing and reviving of all ancient Hereſies; a doctrine of liberty, and all licentious living; teaching and allowing moſt filthy poſitions, and practiſes; the Romiſh Church, is not the true Church of God, or ſhip, wherein Chriſt and his diſciples paſſe; becauſe they have not holy doctrine. The ſecond (but tenth note in Bellarmines account2. and number) is, Sanctitie and bolineſſe of life 
                  Sanctitas vitae. Bellar. T. 2. lib. 4. 
                        •
                     ap. 13.; the very naming of which note, would make any man

of grace and modeſtie, bluſh, that Bellarmine ſo well knowing, what are the lives and converſations of men and women in that Church, ſhould not be aſhamed of this, and is ſufficiently confuted by their owne ieſt, of the Duke of Vrbins Painter, who being hired by a Cardinall to picture the Images of Peter and Paul, the Cardinall told him, he had painted them too high-coloured in the face; the Painter replied, that when they were alive, they looked pale, with preaching and faſting; but now they were ſo red, with bluſhing at the wickedneſſe of their ſucceſſors. I will not deny but Rome was an holy Church, when S. Paul did write his Epiſtle to it, and during the continuance of 63 Biſhops, till Boniface the firſt, Pope, ſet up by Phocas, who had killed the Emperour Mauritius, and his wife, and children. Many of which ſaid Biſhops, were Martyrs for Chriſt and his Goſpell, which they now perſecute; and ſanctitas vitae is gone. Way to the Church, pag. 217. ex Balt. Caſtill. lib. de Aulico.
                   I need not reprove the Lay-mens lives, wherein ſome live civilly and morally, yea in ſuperſtition and blinde devotion, ſevere, and not ſparing the body. But if they would have the world beleeve Romaniſts are ſo holy, they muſt not wipe & expunge, but burne Bernards Sermons, Platina, Baronius Annals, Ianſenius, &c. who have made it known to all the world, that Popes themſelves have beene convicted of Atheiſme, Sorcerie, Hereſie, Blaſphemie, Sodomie, Inceſt, Whoredome, Adultery, Simonie: as for* Dr. Will. ſinop. controv. 2. quaeſt. 3. pag. 83. Triſagion. lib. 3. cap. 39. pag. 767. Covetouſneſſe, Pride, Drunkenneſſe, ordinarie faults ``. Only let us marke, that as they deceive the ſimple, with glorious titles, of Catholike, and

holy mother Church, and honour the Pope, with the like, of Chriſt his Vicar, and Peters Succeſſour; ſo doe they ſtrangely gull the world, in changing the Popes names. The firſt was Sergius, who, becauſe his owne name Bocca di Porco, or Swinesmouth, was not conſonant to his dignitie, hee was called Sergius; and ſo ever ſince, if any be an abſolute Atheiſt, he is called Pius; if a bloudie Tyrant, Clemens; if a Coward, Leo; if a Ruſticke, Vrbanus; if an harmefull man, Innocens; if a drowſie ſluggard, Gregorie; if an earthly minded man, Coeleſtinus; if curſed of God, and man, Benedict. Thus they take great paines to gild and decke their Pilot, who ſitteth at the ſterne: by which meanes they draw not a few paſſengers into their veſſell, and having put a faire Coape upon the Pope, and made him, in his name, an holy, bleſſed, and good man; then they ſtand for ſanctitas vitae, to be a note of the Church; and might have done ſo with fairer pretence, if they had alſo changed Pope Ioan the harlots name, and have called her Caſta, or Matrona. &c. Was not Pope Ioan a fit Head for ſuch an holy Church, which having plaid the whore, fell in travell, in the midſt of proceſſion? Was not the Cardinall of Crema, a fit Legat from ſuch an holy Church, who in a Councell at London, inveighing againſt the marriage of Prieſts, and with theſe words, It was a ſhamefull thing, to riſe from the ſides of an whore, to make Chriſts bodie; was the ſame night following taken in bed, with a notable whore? Yea they muſt be ſure alſo to burne all the Rolles and Records in England, the ſuppreſſion of

their Abbeyes and Nunries here, bringing to light ſuch abominations, as are not onely a ſhame to ſpeake, but rehearſall whereof, would infect the aire: yea they muſt be ſure to burne the booke of Revelation too, for that telleth us, and wee finde true by experience, that Rome is an habitation of Devils, and a cage of all uncleane birds Revel. 18. 2., a ſinke of ſin and confluent of all uncleanneſſe and iniquitie. I will conclude with the teſtimonies of two men; the firſt, one of their owne, a famous Predicant in Turin in Savoy, who comming to ſpeake of Sancta Eccleſia, he was ſo far from making it a note of the Church with Bellarmine, that fearing hee ſhould rather prove the Calviniſts to be the true Church by that, he thought good rather againſt all points of ſchollerſhip, and ſpecially in the tongues, to derive ſanctam from ſancio, ſancivi. Sic Panegirolla, ut in Car. Lett. pag. 118. The other a worthie Doctor of our Church, having ſpent many yeeres amongſt the throng of Papiſts in Lancaſhire, profeſſeth, that fowleſt diſorders were ever in thoſe parts where the people were moſt Pope-holy, being generally buried in ſinne, ſwearing, vncleanneſſe, drunkenneſſe, moſt diſſolute, fierce and inhumane behaviour, ring-leaders in riotous companies, drunken meetings, ſeditious aſſemblies, in profaning the Sabbath, quarrels, braules, and all Heatheniſh cuſtomes Doctor Whites way to the Church, pag. 210.. But I purpoſely forbeare to rake, in this filthie puddle, which I would have paſſed by, if they had not beene ſo ſhameleſſe to make holineſſe of life, a note of the Church. Let vsConcluſion. bleſſe God, that in our Church and other Reformed

Churches, we have for a Pilot and Maſter, one of the Trinitie Houſe; we have the holy Scriptures and Sacraments, purely and ſincerely preached, and adminiſtred. According to the foure firſt generall Councels, and whatſoever the Fathers, living within the firſt five hundred yeeres after Chriſt, unanimouſly taught as needfull to ſalvation, we beleeve and profeſſe 
                     Kings Workes in his Premonition. page 302.. And though we have too many ſins amongſt us, yet by the Word and Sword of Civill and Eccleſiaſticall Magiſtrates, they are ſo rebuked and reformed, that if we ſtood to the triall of theſe two notes, it would be found that our Church is the holy Church of God, the true ſhip wherein Chriſt and his Diſciples are, and the Church of Rome an Antichriſtian, Hereticall, Apoſtaticall and prophane Synagogue Maſter Perkins on the Creed, in T. 1. p. 305. coll. 2. in. A., a man of warre, and ſhip of Pirats: and therefore all men muſt take heed of paſſing in her.
            
            
               
                  VERSE. 24.
                  And behold, there aroſe a great tempeſt in the Sea, in ſo much that the ſhip was covered with the waves: but he was on ſleepe.
               
               THe paſſengers being all ſhipped, now we proceedDiviſion. to the hoyſſing of the ſailes, and launching forth into the deepe, and the whole ſtorie of their voyage; wherein three things are to be conſidered, viz. Firſt, the great perill & jeopardie they

were in. Secondly, their deliverance out of it. Thirdly, The effects thereof. Their perill and danger is reported in this 24. verſe, where we have, Firſt a note of attention, [Behold] Secondly, the Narration therof it ſelfe, which hath two parts, viz.
               
               Firſt, a Declaration of the cauſe of their danger,Sub-diviſion. and ſecondly an aggravation of the danger it ſelfe. In the Declaration, the cauſe of danger is firſt in one word expreſſed, [a Tempeſt] ſecondly, deſcribed by two things, viz. Firſt, the qualitie, it was ſudden; [it aroſe] ſecondly, the quantitie, [it was great.] The danger is aggravated by two circumſtances; the firſt concerneth the cauſe of their danger, the tempeſt was ſo great, [that even the ſhip was covered with waves;] the ſecond, concerned the meanes of their ſafetie and ſecuritie [Chriſt was on ſleepe] which in their conceit, did not a little aggravate their perill. Of theſe in order.
               And firſt, for the firſt part, viz. The note of regard 
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     , ecce.
                  . Such is the goodnes of God in the deſire of our good, by cauſing attētion to his word cōtaining all our good, that there is ſcarcely any memorable and tranſcendently excellent ſaying, or worke, but by ſome helps of attention & regard, or other, we are provoked well to conſider it. Theſe helpes, that I may range them in order, and yet but touch them, are of two ſorts, viz. either from ſuch as did ſpeak, or from ſuch as did write the word. The Prophets, Chriſt & his Apoſtles, in preaching to the people, how have they called on men to heare, harken, and conſider what they ſaid unto them! Helpes from writing (and ſpecially ſome of theſe, to ſuch as are

able to reade the originall copies, wherein ſome of them only continue) are of two ſorts, viz. in words, or in forme: words are principally two, the one initiall, or in the beginning, which is the word in my Text, [Behold;] or finall, and at the end, which is the word [Selah] at the end of many ſentences, in the Pſalmes and Habakkuk onely, and retained in tranſlations. About which word, learned men have much diſputed, and laid downe ſeverall opinions, with rehearſall whereof, I will not now trouble you. I take it to be derived from ſuch a word as ſignifieth to lift up 
                     Selah. Sic Lorin. in Pſal. 3. 3. pag. 56. coll. 2.; and the Septuagint, Symmachus, and Theodotion, interpret it, Diapſalma, the change of the tune or ſong; for by changing the tune, & extraordinarily lifting up the voice, in ſinging ſuch a ſtreine, they did ſignifie ſuch were moſt remarkable ſentences. I told you, that alſo there are helpes of attention, from the forme of writing, I meane in the Hebrew copies, (for Interpreters take no notice hereof) but are moſt obſervable of all ſuch as are learned, and they are three-fold, viz. in regard of letters, prickes, or blankes. Letters are of two ſorts, viz. either in regard of location, or of proportion. In regard of location; a very ſtrange & remarkable (if not myſticall) thing it is, that mem clauſum, which is ever finall, ſhould onely in one word in all the Bible be found ſo written, in the midſt 
                     Eſay 9. 7. vide Pet Galat. lib. 4. ca. 19. de ar
                        •
                     anis, in Lem
                        •
                     rbeh. ad multiplicandum.. Secondly, for proportion; whereas the Hebrewes were moſt curious in their Orthographie; yet in ſome places, ſome letters are of extraordinary ſize, and hold no proportion with the reſt of the word or ſentence. As where Iacob reproved

his ſonnes, Simeon and Levi, for their cruell murthering of the Sichemites; they anſwered him with bigge words, Should he deale with our ſiſter, as with an Harlot 
                  Gen. 34. ult.
                  ? And in the word Zonah, the firſt letter is of an extraordinary proportion: and where it is ſaid, That Abraham mourned for Sarah his wife 
                  Gen. 23. 2.. Caph in [Bachah] is of a very little ſize: and as in letters, ſo alſo in prickes, (whereof I lately gave ſome inſtance in this place) ſome words having ſuch prickes as are neither▪ Grammatical, Rhetoricall, nor Muſicall; and ſometimes in blanckes, breaking off, and making a pawſe in the midſt of a ſentence, and a great ſpace left emptie, and onely an o in it, as where it is ſaid, Cain talked with his brother 
                  Gen. 4. 8. 35. 22. Deut. 2. 8.; and theſe things are preſerved in all their copies, and therefore could be no error in the Printer. But the moſt common word of attention and regard, thorowout the whole Scriptures, of old and new Teſtament, is this initiall word, or Adverbe of demonſtration, [Behold] which is ſpecially uſed in three caſes. Firſt, when ſome ſtrange thing1 is preſented to the eye; as when Ieſus came forth wearing a crowne of thornes, and a purple roabe, Pilat ſaid to the people, Behold the man 
                  Iohn 19. 5.: the ſtrangeſt thing that ever was preſented to the eye of man, never the like before nor ſince, the Sonne of God, who weareth the crowne of eternall glory, crowned with thornes.
               Secondly, it is uſed, when both ſome thing is to2 be ſeene with the bodily eye, and the minde is to contemplate, and conſider ſomething repreſented, by that viſible ſpectacle, as when Chriſt rode into

the Citie of Ieruſalem, the Prophet calleth, Behold thy King commeth mecke, and ſitting on an Aſſe 
                  Matth. 21. 5. Zach. 9. 9.. Oh ſee him ride with thine eyes, oh conſider his meekneſſe with thy minde!
               Thirdly, when men are bid (Behold) when yet3. nothing can be ſeene with bodily eye, and then it ſignifieth, regard and conſider. So the Prophet ſaith, Behold a Virgin ſhall conceive, and beare a ſonne 
                  Eſay 7. 14., that was many yeeres after fulfilled according to the letter, therfore the people in thoſe dayes could but conſider it. So here, we are bid, Behold, there aroſe a tempest, that tempeſt is many hundred yeers agoe calmed, we cannot ſee it with our bodily eyes, but whereſoever this ſtorie is preached, the people ſhall be called upon to muſe, and meditate, hearken, and conſider the ſame.
               The Vſe of all that hath beene ſaid, is to moveVſe. us with conſideration of our dulneſſe, who need ſo many, and ſuch great helps, to provoke us to the conſideration of heavenly things, Gods word, and works. Oh, for earthly things, as dignitie, wealth,Aggravation honour, preferment, our profits, or pleaſures, wee are watchful, and carefull enough, as quick-ſighted as Eagles to ſee things a farre off, and exceeding attentive to whomſoever ſhall talke of theſe things. Yea, many doe even weare away themſelues with continuall care, thought, and meditation; or if at any time we fall into a ſlumber about theſe matters, yet the leaſt whiſpering will make us to ſtart up, ſtand upon both legs, looke round about us, and over every bodies head, yea ride, and runne, and what not? but for the greateſt works of God, or

myſteries of godlineſſe, wee have no eyes in our heads, to ſee them, no eares to heare them, no mindes to conſider them, but pleaſe our ſelves in our ſpirituall ſluggiſhneſſe, and drowſineſſe, like the ſluggard in the Proverbs, folding our armes, and ſaying, Yet a little more ſleepe, a little more ſlumber, that the Holy Ghoſt (in love of our ſalvation) doth call upon us, and ſtir us up to attend, Behold, behold. So much for the note of attention.
               In the narration, we have firſt the cauſe of their great danger, in one word expreſſed,
               
                  A tempeſt] 
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     , Concutio, quatio.
                   The word in the Originall, ſignifieth2. Part. a ſhaking or quaking, with which words the Greeke Authors doe commonly expreſſe an earthquake 
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                      
                     Ariſt.
                  , which Varinus alſo deſcribeth in the word of my Text 
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     .; yea we have it twice in one verſe, Whoſe voice ſhooke the earth, Hebr. 12. 26. 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  ; and Chriſt ſaith, There ſhall be earthquakes, Matth. 24. 7. 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  . Which alſo our Latine Tranſlators follow, Motus magnus. Mont. valg. Concuſsio magna, Bez. which being cauſed by a ſudden and vehement wind, (as we ſhall heare) is well tranſlated a ſtorme, wherein the ſhip was ſo ſhaken, tumbled, and toſt, as if there had been ſome mighty earth-quake. The Hebrew word, which Munſter hath here, is Sagnar, the word which is in Ionah, where it is ſaid, The Lord ſent out a great wind into the Sea, and there was a mighty tempeſt, ſo that the ſhip was like to be broken 
                  Ionah 1. 4.. So much for the ſenſe of the word.
               But as the Iewes ſaid of Chriſt concerning the death of Lazarus, Could not be that opened the eyes
                  
                  of the blinde, have cauſed, that even this man had not died 
                  Iohn 11. 37.? So I ſay; He that ſtilled the tempeſt, and raging of the Sea, could not he have cauſed, it had not beene at all? Yes verily. Let us then ſearch outReaſons. for what cauſes, it was his pleaſure, that this great tempeſt ſhould ariſe. Some of the Fathers tell us, it was for Iudas his ſake, as the great ſtorme aroſe for Ionas his ſake 
                     Sic Ambroſ. ſerm. 11. Beda. 1. For Judas ſin.. But at this time Iudas had not betrayed his Maſter. Doubtleſſe he was a covetous wretch, which gave Sathan the advantage to tempt him to that ſinne: but I ſuppoſe, as yet, Sathan had not ſo much as put it into his heart Iohn 13. 2.. But becauſe it is the Fathers, I will not reject nor confute it. Only by the way, & in a word, make this uſe of it. Let us ſo much as we can, keepe out of the ſocietie of wicked men, as the Apoſtle biddeth, Have no fellowſhip with the unfruitfull works of darkneſſe 
                  Epheſ. 5. 11.. For as a Father ſaith, Where ſinne is, there will be a ſtorme 
                  Vbi peccatum, ibi procella. Chryſ. ad pop. Antioch.. The Scriptures are plaine to teach us, that even for the ſin of ſome one man (the puniſhment whereof was neglected) a whole familie, tribe, and people have beene puniſhed. As the making and worſhipping of the Golden Calfe, though it was not the ſinne of all, yet it endangered all; and God told Moſes, he would conſume them all 
                  Exod. 32. 10.. For Achans ſinne, how did the people fall before their enemies Ioſh. 7. 12.? Which made all Iſrael ſo afraid, when the two Tribes and an halfe had erected an Altar, (as they conceived, to offer ſacrifice on, contrary to the commandement of God) and ſent meſſengers to tell them, that if they did rebell againſt the Lord that day, to morrow he would be wroth with all
                  
                  the Congregation of Iſrael 
                  Ioſh. 22. 28. villanie committed by ſome of the Inhabitants of Gibeah, in abuſing the Levites concubine, the heavy vengeance of God came not only upon the perſons themſelves, but upon the whole Citie, wherein ſuch wickedneſſe was committed; yea upon the whole Tribe, becauſe they delivered not up thoſe wicked men to be puniſhed, but ſeemed to defend them: yea not upon the Tribe alone, which ſeeme juſtly to be condemned as acceſſarie; but alſo on all ſuch as came not up to warre, and helped not to take vengeance for that wicked fact; as upon all the Inhabitants of Iabeſh Gilead 
                  Iudg. 19. 25. 20. 13. 21. 4.. And doe you not remember how for Sauls cruell fact in killing the Gibeonites, there was a great famine in the Land for three yeeres together 2 Sam. 21. 1, 2, 3.? So good a thing it is, if we can prevent it, that Iudas be not in Ship, Houſe, or Towne, where we ſaile or dwell; as S. Iohn fled out of the Bath, where he ſaw the wicked Heretike was: or at the leaſt, Miniſters, Magiſtrates, people, and all muſt endevour, that ſinne be puniſhed, and ſo taken away, elſe the guilt and puniſhment may lie on all.
               But I ſuppoſe, there were other two principall2. Triall. Reaſons, for which Chriſt was pleaſed, that this great tempeſt ſhould ariſe, viz. Firſt for triall of his Diſciples faith, which is ſpecially tried in times of danger, diſtreſſe, and perplexitie, yea though he knew it to be weake, yet themſelves did not ſo, and it was very profitable for them to know, how weake their faith was.
               Laſtly, that by this miraculous deliverance, he3. Confirmation.
                  
might confirme their faith, and teach them in all future dangers and perplexities, to cleave unto him, and truſt in him: which teacheth us, that former experience of Gods providence, power, and goodneſſe, in miniſtring to our wants, and delivering us out of evils, ſhould ſtrengthen our faith in aſſurance of the like, if it ſhall pleaſe God to bring us into them; as we ſee David made that uſe of his deliverance from the paw of the Lien and Beare, that, that God would alſo deliver him out of the hand of the Philiſtim 
                  1 Sam. 17. 37.. And ſo much for the Reaſons.
               Now for further inſtruction: obſerve, that asLiterall obſervation. there is a manifold, ſingular, bodily, or earthly vſe of the Sea or Navigation; ſo is there alſo ſingular Divine and heavenly uſe to be made, and ſpecially, for contemplation. There is no creature viſible, wherein in fairer capitall letters we may reade, the goodneſſe, greatneſſe, power and Majeſtie of God, than in the Sea, that huge and uncontroulable creature, and ſpecially in a ſtorme, to ſee the waves how they rowle, and rage, and to heare them even many miles off, how they roare in beating one againſt another, and againſt the ſhore; ſo true that is of David, They that goe downe to the Sea in ſhips, and occupie their buſineſſe in great waters: Theſe ſee the workes of the Lord, and his wonders in the deepe 
                  Pſal. 107. 23.. If God challenge ſuch glory, from the wings and feathers of Peacocks and Oſtriches, the wilde Goats, Hindes, Aſſe, Vnicorne, Hawke, Eagle, Horſe, Behemoth and Leviathan, Iob 39. 40, 41. Chap. Oh how great is his glory from creation and government of the Sea?
               
                  Therefore God himſelfe often urgeth his DominionCōfirmation. over the Sea, that unruly and boyſterous Element, for declaration of his great Majeſtie, as unto Iob; Who ſhut up the ſea with doores: who ſet barres, and ſaid, Hitherto ſhalt thou come, and no further, and here ſhalt thou ſtay thy proud waves 
                  Iob 38. 8. 11.? And againe, Feare yee not me, ſaith the Lord, will yee not tremble at my preſence, which have placed the ſand for the bound of the ſea, by a perpetuall decree, that it cannot paſſe it, and though the waves thereof toſſe themſelves, yet can they not prevaile; though they roare, yet can they not paſſe over it 
                  Ierem. 5. 22.? Who ever ſaw tempeſt on ſea, whoſe heart was not ſmitten with feare, and reverence of the Majeſtie of that God, who hath made, and doth governe it? And againe, Thus ſaith the Lord, who divideth the ſea, when the waves thereof roare, the Lord of hoaſts is his name 
                  Ierem. 31. 35.. As God himſelfe doth urge it, ſo holy David ſpecially, was very frequent in the meditation thereof; He gathereth the waters of the ſea together, as on an heap, & layeth up the deep as in ſtore houſes: Let al the earth feare the Lord, let al the inhabitāts of the world ſtand in awe of him 
                  Pſal. 33. 7.. And againe, It is God, that ſtilleth the raging of the ſea, and the noiſe of its waves 
                  Pſal. 65. 7.: And again, He turned the ſea into drie land, he ruleth by his power for ever 
                  Pſal. 66. 6.: And again, I will meditate of all thy works, and talke of thy doings, thou art the God that doeſt wonders: the waters ſaw thee, O God, the waters ſaw thee, & were afraid, the depths alſo were troubled 
                  Pſal. 77. 12.: And againe, God is greatly to be feared in the aſſembly of the Saints, and to be had in reverence of all them that are round about him, O Lord God of hoaſts, who is a ſtrong Lord
                  
                  like unto thee, thou ruleſt the raging of the ſea, and ſtilleſt the waves thereof, when they ariſe 
                  Pſal. 89. 7, 8, 9.: The flouds, O God, have lift up their voice, the flouds have lift up their waves, but the Lord on high is mightier than the noiſe of many waters, yea than the mightie waves of the ſea, Pſal. 93. penult. Many ſuch like there are in the booke of the Pſalmes, whereof theſe are but a taſte.
               But now if we come to our ſelves; who but hathApplication. ſeene, or heard of a tempeſt on the ſea? But who ſo religious and devout, as thence to take occaſion, to meditate, or talke of the greatneſſe, power, and Maieſtie of God? Oh the Atheiſme, I ſay againe, the Atheiſme, which lurketh in our hearts, and then doth ſpecially breake out, and bewray it ſelfe, when there are extraordinary winds, ſtormes, and tempeſts, by ſea and land, with thunder, lightning, haile, raine! but ſpecially, if therein we ſuſtaine hurt and loſſe, in our houſes, lands, cattell, goods; then as if God were on ſleepe, and minded no ſuch thing, they will ſay, there is conjuring, and witches are abroad, or elſe fall to curſing and banning, and blaſpheming; almoſt as mad, as Herodotus reporteth Zerxes the Perſian Monarch to have beene, who having received a great loſſe, by the tempeſtuous rage of Helleſpont, he cauſed abundance of fetters and manacles to be caſt into it, as if he would make it his priſoner, and binde it with linkes of iron at his pleaſure. And another no wiſer than he, who becauſe the River Ginde had drowned him a white horſe, threatned the River to divide it into ſo many ſtreames, that a woman great with childe ſhould

goe over it drie-ſhod Doct. King on Jonas Lecture 4. page 55.. Alas, alas, men may be more tempeſtuous, raging and mad, than the ſea, but the ſea will know none, but him that made it. What manner of man is this, that both winds and ſeas obey him? Pharaoh King of Aegypt asked proudly, Who is the Lord? and the ſea might aske, Who is Pharaoh? It did acknowledge the Rod of God, in Moſes his hand, and gave way, but drowned Pharaoh and his Hoaſt. Oh looke we up unto God; for from him, all winds and weather, by ſea and land, thunders and lightnings, haile-ſtones and ſtormie tempeſts, all are at his aſſignement, be they for a bleſſing or a curſe: and therefore let all fleſh give glory unto God, and feare that Majeſtie which ſhineth herein. And ſo much for the Letter.
               
                  A Tempeſt] It is very frequent in the Scriptures,Myſtic. ſenſe. to repreſent the perſecutions of Gods Church, by ſtormes and tempeſts. David in ſuch a ſtorme, thus prayeth; Save me, O God, for the waters are come in even unto my ſoule, I am come into deepe waters, where the flouds overflow me 
                  Pſal. 69. 1, 2.: And againe, The flouds of ungodly men made me afraid 
                  Pſal. 18. 4.: and thus deſcribeth the perſecutions of Gods Church; If the Lord had not beene on our ſide, when men roſe up againſt us, then they had ſwallowed us up quicke, then the waters had overwhelmed us, the ſtreame had gone over our ſoule, even the deepe waters of the proud, had gone over our ſoule 
                  Pſal. 124. 3.. So God threatning perſecution by the King of Aſſyriah, the Prophet delivereth it in this forme; Becauſe the people refuſed the waters of Shiloh, which runne ſoftly: Behold, the Lord will bring upon them the waters of the river, ſtrong and many,
                  
                  even the King of Aſſyria, and all his glory, he ſhall come up over all his channels, and goe over all his bankes 
                  Eſay 8. 7.. And verily never did ſea in a ſtorme or tempeſt, ſoAptneſſe. rage, and roare, and foame, as the enemies of Gods Church and people doe; as the Prophet Eſay ſaith, The wicked are like the raging ſea, which caſteth up mire and dirt 
                  Eſay 57. penult.
                  . Oh how outragious, mercileſſe, cruell, and bloudie, were Pharaoh, Moabites, Amonites, Idumaeans, Canaanites, Philiſtims, Antiochus, Herod, Nero, Domitian, Diocleſian, Iulian, and thoſe Kings and Princes, who have the marke of the beaſt in their hands and fore-heads, and abuſe their power to perſecute the Saints of God? None ſo cruell, bloudie, barbarous, yea inhumane, as perſecutors. More mercie to be found of the ſea in a ſtorme or tempeſt, than of perſecutors in their rage, when they can prevaile. Never any tyrants deviſed ſuch exquiſite tortures, and torments againſt Rebels, as perſecutors have againſt the Church of God. You ſee the myſticall ſenſe, and how fit it is. Now marke and receive your leſſon for inſtruction.
               Where Chriſt and his Goſpell are truly preachedDoct. myſtic. and profeſſed, there commonly follow great ſtormes and tempeſts of anger, troubles and perſecutions. Before Chriſt was borne, there was a Generall peace, and all the world was quietly taxed Luke 2. 1.; but no ſooner was he borne, and the Wiſe men enquired, Where is he that is borne King of the Iewes, but Herod was troubled, and all Ieruſalem in an vprore 
                  Matth. 2. 3.; and many little children were ſlaine 
                  Matth. 2. 16..
               The ſea was calme enough, till Chriſt and hisCōfirmation.
                  
Diſciples came upon it; but then, behold a tempeſt. Good Lord, what ſtirres were there upon Chriſt his preachings? Some ſaid he was a good man, and ſome ſaid no, but he deceived the people 
                  Iohn 7. 12, 43.: ſome ſaid, he did all things well; others ſaid no, but hee caſt out Devils by the power of Beelzebub prince of Devils 
                  Matth. 12. 24.. Good Lord, the tumults and uprores, that grew in Athens, Corinth, Epheſus, Antioch, Lyſtra, Iconium, and other Cities, where the Apoſtles came, and preached the Goſpell! But after God raiſed up his ſervant Luther, to preach the Goſpell; oh what thundring and lightning from Rome! How did the Popes Bulls roare, and his Excommunications flie? What a tempeſt in Germanie, France, England, and almoſt in the whole Chriſtian world? What eager Diſputations in Univerſities? What part-takings, ſome of the Princes with him, ſome againſt him. It is ſo ſtill: in every Kingdome, Citie, Towne, or Pariſh, where the Goſpell is ſincerely preached and profeſſed, there will be diviſions, and ſtirres, and troubles; ſome zealous followers, others malicious oppoſers; labouring to ſtop the paſſage of the Goſpell, and to pervert the ſtraight wayes of the Lord 
                  Acts 13. 10.: and ſome neither cold, nor hot 
                  Rev. 3. 16.. It cannot be otherwiſe; God hath put enmitie betweene the woman, and the ſerpent, and their ſeed 
                  Gen. 3. 15.: and Chriſt hath ſaid, Thinke not that I am come to ſend peace on earth, I came not to ſend peace but a ſword; I am come to ſet a man at variance againſt his father, and the daughter againſt her mother 
                  Matth. 10. 34.. And againe, I am come to ſend fire on the earth 
                  Luc. 12. 43.. You ſee, our Saviour compareth the Goſpell

to fire, the world is compared to water: waterSimilies. is quiet; but if fire come, what a contention is there? He hath againe compared the Goſpell to a fanne: the heape lieth quietly till the fanne come; but then doth the chaffe flie. The world is like unſlaked lime, but now and then a ſmall cracke; but if the water of the word be powred upon it, then it heateth, and ſmoketh, and ſparkleth, and flieth, as if it would ſet all on fire. The word is like light, and Chriſt compared to the Sunne: in the darkneſſe, though things differ never ſo much in colour, yet they ſeeme all alike; but when light commeth, then the varietie of colours is ſoone deſcried. In the time of ignorance, men may thinke they accord in unitie of Iudgement and Affection; but when the light of the word commeth, the thoughts of many hearts are opened, and then the diverſitie of humours, and varietie of affections and diſpoſitions appeareth.
               The very wicked doe ſee this truth, and abuſe itPrevention. to a wrong end laying all the blame on the Goſpel, and the preaching of it. What more common in theſe daies, than to heare men ſay, whilſt all were obedient to the Pope and Church of Rome, what great peace? what warres but againſt the Turke the common enemy? But ſince the preaching of the Goſpell, what ſects, warres, tumults, what diviſions, what killing, murthering, maſſacring, and burning of one another, giving advantage to the common enemy, to incroach, and in the end to prevaile greatly? What more common than to heare country people complaine, So long as we had

nothing but Service, or Reading, we lived very lovingly, peaceably, and neighbourly, every man medling but with his owne buſineſſe; but ſince we have had ſo much preaching, there is nothing but ſiding and partaking, all good fellowſhip is loſt; nothing but ſtrife and contention, and quarrelling of neighbour againſt neighbour, yea many times diviſion in the ſame houſe, and father and ſonne, yea huſband and wife divided, and varying in opinion? It is like enough that the moſt of this is true; but, what is properly the cauſe, is the Queſtion. Is it Chriſt, and his Goſpell, and the preaching of it? So too many conceive, and are not aſhamed to ſay, and wiſh they had leſſe of it, and they thinke they ſhould have peaceable and golden times; and then take occaſion to open their blacke mouthes, and raile upon it, and the Preachers, and profeſſors of it, accuſing them for factious, humorous, turbulent, ſeditious: as Ahab to Eliah, It was he that troubled all Iſrael, 1 King. 18. 17. and Tertullus accuſed Paul for a peſtilent fellow and mover of ſedition, Acts 24. 5. Good Lord, how clamorous are Atheiſts, and Papiſts in this kinde! But let me tell you, Chriſt is the prince of peace 
                  Eſay 9. 6, 7.; his word, the Goſpell of peace 
                  Eph. 6. 17.; his Miniſters, the preachers of peace 
                  Eſay 52. 7.; his Diſciples, men of peace, ſo far as is poſsible, ſeeking to have peace with all men 
                  Rom. 12. 18., and ſtriving to keepe the unitie of the ſpirit in the bond of peace 
                  Eph. 4. 3.. Wherefore theſe are no cauſes, but by accident, no more than Chriſt, and his Diſciples, in this ſhip, were the cauſe of this ſtorme in the Sea▪ 
                  Alas, ſaith David, what have the righteous done 
                  Pſal. 11. 3.?

Chriſt muſt die, but his Iudge ſaid, he found no cauſe worthy of death in him 
                  Luc. 23. 22.. You know what an uprore was in Epheſus, raiſed by Demetrius and the Silver ſmiths againſt Paul, what a confuſion there was, ſome crying one thing, and ſome another, and Gaius, Ariſtarchus, and Alexander like to be murthered: but what ſaith the Towne-Clarke; We are in danger to be called in queſtion for this daies uprore, for there is no cauſe of ſuch a concourſe 
                  Acts 19. penult.: no cauſe indeed, given by Paul and his companions. Will you then know and ſee, whence are thoſe ſtormes and tempeſts, that doe ſo commonly follow the preaching and profeſſion of the Goſpell? I pray you looke to the letter of your ſtorie, what cauſed this tempeſt? The Winds and Seas. Chriſt rebuked them, and then there was a great calme; he found no fault with any in the ſhip. Even ſo there are twoThe true cauſes of troubles and perſecutions. 1. Sathan. cauſes of theſe troubles, viz.
               
               The firſt is Sathan, the Prince that ruleth in the aire, who ſo ſoone as the Goſpell beginneth to be preached, which is the power of God to ſalvation, he preſently bloweth, and puf
                     •
                  eth, and raiſeth mighty winds of falſe doctrine, and hereſie; he ſtirreth up falſe Brethren, Sophiſters, and Tyrants, by policie and power, fraud and force, and every way that he can, to hinder the courſe of the Goſpell, and overthrow the Church; it is He, that by Gods permiſſion raiſeth theſe winds; as he did, for the overthrow of Iobs houſe Iob 1. 19..
               The ſecond is the Sea, i. the corrupt and unregenerate2 Corruption of nature. nature of man, which cannot abide the word; but if Sathan blow upon it, it will rage like

the Sea: as our Saviour ſaith, He that doth evill, commeth not to the light, to have his works made manifeſt, but hateth it 
                  Iohn 3. 20.. The man or woman that have any ſinne reigning in them (though for ſome ſiniſter reſpects, they may ſhew a faire countenance, yet) doe hate the word, and if occaſion ſerve, will ſtorme, and rage, and procure all the trouble they can; for it is as a fire, they cannot endure it, as we reade in the booke of the Revelation, that fire went out of the mouthes of the two witneſſes, and tormented them that dwelt on the earth 
                  Rev. 11. 6, 10.. That fire, is the word of God, which being ſincerely and powerfully preached by the two witneſſes, i. the Miniſters of Chriſt, doth torment and vex the Inhabitants of the earth; i. unregenerate, earthly, carnall, and worldlyminded men; and this maketh them procure all the trouble they can, and ſo to rejoyce, and ſend gifts one to another, when they are dead. Oh let Sathan, and mans corrupt nature be blamed for theſe ſtormes and tempeſts!
               To conclude, Chriſt and his Diſciples areConcluſion. ſhipped, and under ſaile, and behold a tempeſt, even as great a tempeſt as ever was ſo generally knowne in the Chriſtian Sea. The Lord awake, and rebuke the winds and waves that make it, preſerve, and make us thankfull for our calme, which affordeth ſo ſafe harbour, to ſo many Saints, as flie hither for ſuccour. S. Ierome hath truly ſaid, There are tempeſts of the minde as well as of the Sea Tempeſtates & mentis & maris. Ierom.. I have ſpoken of the tempeſt of the Sea, (according to the letter of my Text) and alſo of the generall tempeſt of the Church, through perſecutions of

Tyrants, in the laſt Lecture. Give me leave now to ſpeake of the tempeſt of the minde; of the inward billowes, ſurges, and waves of a troubled ſoule, wherewith a mans particular Veſſel or Cockboat is even covered with waves of fearefull diſtreſſe, and is like even every moment, to ſinke, and be caſt away. Wherein for more orderly and profitable proceeding, I will firſt ſpeake of the tempeſt that the wicked have, and then of the tempeſt that the godly are many times tried withall. For the firſt.
               Howſoever the wicked and ungodly may ſeemeThe tempeſt of the wicked. moſt merry, and joyfull, and as if their conſciences were marvellous quiet, peaceable, and calme, yet the Holy Ghoſt aſſureth us, their ſoules are ever in a tempeſt, their very tranquillitie is a tempeſt Tranquillitas, tempeſtas eſt. Jerom. ad Heliodor.: There is no peace to the wicked, ſaith my God, but they are like the troubled Sea, which cannot reſt, whoſe waters cast up mire and dirt 
                  Eſay 57. ult.: and Salomon ſaith, Their laughter is but from the lips, the heart is ſorrowfull 
                  Prov. 14. 13.. Howſoever they may ſhew faire weather without, they have grievous ſtormes and tempeſts within, though ſometimes and on ſome occaſions, their conſciences do rage more horribly, that at others.
               Shall I make this cleare, by a few Examples?Examples. When God had ſummoned, arraigned, examined, convicted, and ſentenced Cain for the murther of his brother, oh behold a tempeſt, My puniſhment is greater than I can beare, thou h
                        •
                     ſt driven me out this day from the face of the earth, and from thy face ſhall I be hid, and I ſhall be a fugitive, and vagabond in the earth, and it ſhall come to paſſe, that every one
                  
                  that findeth me, ſhall kill me 
                  Gen. 4. 13.. When Sathan in the habit of Samuel, had told Saul, that the morrow after, he and his ſonnes ſhould die, and the Hoſt of Iſrael ſhould be delivered into the hand of the Philiſtims, oh behold a ſtorme, He fell along on the earth, and was ſore afraid, and there was no ſtrength in him 
                  1 Sam. 28. 19.. When Belſhazzar in the midſt of his feaſt, ſaw the palme of an hand, write on the plaiſter of the wall, oh behold a ſtorme; His countenance was changed, and his thoughts ſo troubled him, that the ioints of his loynes were looſed, and his knees ſmote one againſt another 
                  Dan. 5. 5, 6.. When Iudas had betrayed his Maſter, and ſaw he was condemned, oh behold a great tempeſt 
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     ., yea as ever did ariſe in the ſoule of a wretched man: and as Mariners in a great tempeſt (as in the ſtories of Ionah and Paul wee may perceive) ſticke not to runne up and downe, and caſt out goods and tacklings; ſo he ranne into the Temple, and caſt out his ſinnes by confeſſion, and threw his money in the Temple, and all to calme his tempeſtuous ſoule, but it would not be, and being perſwaded, that death would eaſe him, he deſired to die; yea he cared not what death, ſo hee did die, and rather than not die, he would die a dogs death, and be his owne executioner, hee went and hanged himſelfe Matth. 27. 5..
               Cardinall Creſcentius the Popes Vicegerent at the Councell of Trent, and a notable enemie to true Religion and the profeſſors thereof, on a time writing long letters to Rome, full of all deviliſh policie, and plotting all manner of miſchiefe, againſt the Proteſtants, and the cauſe of Religion, had a ſtrong

conceit, that the Devill, in the likeneſſe of a huge dog, walked in his chamber, and couched under his table, which raiſed ſuch a fearefull tempeſt in his ſoule, that neither Phyſicians nor friends could calme, but he died in a moſt comfortleſſe manner. Oh, Tyrants, and learned men, abuſing theirEpiphonema. power and policie, may raiſe up ſtrange tempeſts, in other mens bodies, goods, and eſtate; but withall they raiſe up ſuch ſtormes and tempeſts in their owne ſoules, as are intolerable, incurable; according to that of Salomon, The ſpirit of a man will beare out his infirmities: i. if a mans conſcience be quiet, and comfortable in God, he will beare with patience, and cheerefulneſſe, manifold paines, and diſeaſes, tortures and torments in his bodie, and all outward croſſes, as we have moſt memorable examples, in many holy, and glorious Martyrs; but a wounded ſpirit who can beare? A ſpirit, or conſcience full of horror and anguiſh, through guilt of ſinne, and apprehenſion of divine indignation, who can beare that? It is the Hell on Earth (as you have ſeene in the former examples, and many moe ſuch might be produced) cureleſſe, and remediieſſe, for nothing can calme them, but Chriſt who rebuketh winds and ſeas, and him they have not, without whom all other meanes doe faile.
               There is no ſickneſſe, but Phyſicke hath ſomeAmplificatiō. medicine for it; no ſore but Chirurgerie hath a ſalve for it; no reſtraint ſo great, but freedome and inlargement may be procured, by friends or money; no diſgrace ſo great, but time will eat it out; no plague ſo hot, but a man may flie from it: but

as there is no ſtrappado, racke, wheele, or moſt exquiſite torment, comparable to this: ſo no helpe for it, (I meane in the wicked, that flie from God) no phyſicke can purge; no cordiall can comfort; no coraſive can eat it out; no lenative, aſſwage it. Friendſhip, intreatie, gifts, may deliver a man out of priſon, and captivitie; but who can unlocke the priſon doores of a guilty conſcience? or knock off the bolts of horrour, and diſtreſſe of minde? Men may flie from plague, but cannot from this, becauſe he ever carrieth it in him: he may flie from field to citie; from citie to his owne houſe; from houſe to chamber; from chamber to cloſet; from cloſet to his bed Fugit ab agro ad civitatem. Auguſt. in Pſal. 45.; but where-ever he becommeth, Erynnis conſcientiae. Melanct. the Helliſh Hags, and Infernall Furies of evill conſcience, doe vex and torment him. Though their Aſſiſtants were an Armie of millions of men; their friends the great Princes of the world; their dominions as large as the Sunne ſhineth on; their meat, Manna; their apparell as coſtly as Aarons embrodered coat; their palaces as ſtately as Nabuchadnezzars; their muſicke like that at the ſetting up of Nabuchadonozars Idol; yet nothing can calme this tempeſt, but when they die, they are caſt into Hell, where they ſhall be tormented for ever.
               Oh, labour then, for the peace, quietneſſe, andVſe. calmeneſſe of your conſcience, the greateſt jewell in the world, a continuall feaſt, and braſen wall againſt all oppoſitions.
               Oh, beware of ſinne, the cauſe of ſtormes and tempeſts, yea (as Salomon ſaith) If ſinners entice
                  
                  thee, conſent not; be not deceived. Thou ſhalt heare them inſult againſt this exhortation, and ſay; Tuſh, I have thus and ſo ſinned; and yet have I as chearefull, light, and merrie an heart, as any man in the world; I eat, and drinke, and ſleepe, as well as ever I did; I am not troubled with melancholike thoughts and paſſions: I never had experience of ſuch ſtormes and tempeſts as they ſpeake of. Indeed, great is the ſecuritie of ſome men, whoſe conſciences are ſeared, as with a glowing iron; and who are given over to a reprobate ſenſe, to ſin with greedineſſe; long cuſtome in ſinne, having taken away the ſenſe of ſinne: but conſcience, though it ſleepe, it cannot die; it may hold peace, but it cannot forget; this is Gods truth. The wicked have no true peace; and, firſt or laſt, tribulation and anguiſh ſhall ſeaze upon them; where ſinne is, there will be a tempeſt Vbi peccatum, ibi procella.; which whenſoever it riſeth, they ſhall never ſee end, yea eternitie it ſelfe, ſhall not overlive it; it ſhall live when they die, and make them live, that faine would die, that ſo they may die eternally Mors ſine morte; finis ſine fine: mors ſemper vivit, finis ſemper incipit. Greg.: in which endleſſe tempeſt I leave the wicked.
               I come now to ſpeake to the comfort of Gods2. Tempeſts of the godly. Obſerv.
                   children, who have experience of great and grievous ſtormes, and tempeſts, in their ſoules and conſciences, and what only wayes are to be uſed, for the calming of them. Obſerve then, that as Chriſt being entred into the Sea, there aroſe a great tempeſt; ſo into what ſoule ſoever Chriſt entreth by Faith to inhabit, there will firſt or laſt ariſe a tempeſt, which will be the more grievous, if Chriſt be

on ſleepe, it will cauſe great calling and crying indeed.
               Herein behold the example of Iob, A man that
                  Confirmatiō. 
                  feared God, and eſchewed evill: Good Lord, in what great and grievous ſtormes and tempeſts was he toſſed, and like to be ſwallowed up! I meane not in regard of his body, and eſtate, but chiefly in regard of his ſoule, when he ſo complained, that God did ſet him as a But to ſhoot at; that the terrors of God did ſet themſelves in array against him, Iob 6. 4. that hee did write bitter things againſt
                  Iob 13. 26. 
                  him; made him poſſeſſe the ſinnes of his youth; would not ſuffer him to ſwallow his ſpittle 
                  Iob 7. 19.; and If I ſay my bed ſhall comfort me, and my couch ſhall eaſe my complaint, then thou skareſt me with dreames, and terrifieſt me with viſions; thou appointeſt weariſome nights to me; when I lie downe, I ſay, when ſhall I ariſe, and the night be gone? and I am full of toſsings to and fro vnto the dawning of the day; ſo as my ſoule chuſeth ſtrangling, and death rather than life 
                  Iob 7. 13. 3. 4.; yea in weakneſſe, he curſed the day, and all the ſervices of his birth 
                  Iob 3. 1.; and was ſo weary of the tempeſt, and not able to endure it any longer, hee made his ſuit to the Pilot to cut aſunder the Cable, and let the ſhip runne againſt the rocks, ſaying, Oh that I might have my requeſt, and that God would grant me the thing that I long for, even that it would pleaſe God to deſtroy me, let his hand looſe, and cut me off 
                  Iob 6. 8.! Oh here was a tempeſt indeed! ſo as if God had not kept him, he would have leaped over boord into the Sea, rather than have endured it. In what a tempeſt was David, when he ſaid, His ſpirit was
                  
                  in perplexitie, and his ſoule amazed 
                  Pſal. 143. 4.; and that from his youth he had ſuffered the terrors of God with a troubled minde 
                  Pſal. 88. 25.; and as if he could afford to leape over boord too, hath much adoe to perſwade his ſoule to patience, ſaying, Why art thou caſt downe, oh my ſoule, and why art thou ſo diſquieted within me 
                  Pſal. 42. 5, ult.? Ionah his bodie was not ſo toſſed in the tempeſt, as his ſoule in the tempeſt of Gods anger, when he ſaid, All thy billowes, and thy waves paſſed over me, then I ſaid, I am caſt out of thy ſight 
                  Ionah 2. 3.. In what a tempeſt were the lewes, when they came in ſuch conſternation to Peter, and the Apoſtles, asking, Men and brethren, what ſhall we doe to be ſaved 
                  Acts 2. 37.? Yea Chriſt himſelfe was in a greater tempeſt in his ſoule on the Croſſe, than now his bodie was on the Sea, when he ſo cried out, My God, my God, why haſt thou forſaken mee 
                  Matth. 27. 46.? S. Paul was often in perils on the Sea 2 Cor. 11. 26.; but nothing did ſo much ſhake him, as his inward terrors 2 Cor. 7. 5.; the inward tempeſts of his ſoule made him cry out, Oh wretched man that I am, who ſhall deliver me 
                  Rom. 7. penult.? So true is this doctrine, and by theſe few examples (inſtead of many) fully confirmed, that into whoſe ſoule ſoever Chriſt doth once enter to live and dwell by faith 
                  Epheſ. 3. 17., they ſhall be ſure of ſtormes and tempeſts; whereof theſe two principall reaſons may be rendred, viz.
               
               Firſt, the extreme, and unappeaſable malice of1. Reaſon. Sathans malice. Sathan, who ſo long as he doth reigne in the ſoule and conſcience, and is obeyed in his luſts, there is great peace Luc. 11. 21.: but if Chriſt a ſtronger than hee come, and diſpoſſeſſe him, he will rage, and will

make that ſoule to ſhake and tremble that entertaineth Chriſt; he will beſiege it, and roare with his Cannons of temptations, that howſoever ſuch a ſoule may have ſweet peace with God, yet it ſhall have perpetuall warre with Sathan, who will doe all the miſchiefe hee can. If the woman be withViſion. childe, and nigh in her travell, and bring forth; the great red Dragon will ſtand ready to devoure the childe; and if he cannot prevaile, he will caſt great water-flouds after her Rev. 12. 2, 4, 15.. Though the Viſion moſt properly concerne Chriſt, yet is it moſt true in his members; no ſooner is any childe of God conceived in the wombe of the Church, by the immortall ſeed of Gods word 
                  1 Pet. 1. 23., and that he is formed Gal. 4. 19., and brought forth, but Sathan the great red Dragon will ſeek to kill and deſtroy it; as Chriſt ſaith, He is a murtherer from the beginning 
                  Iohn 8. 44.: and as the Apoſtle ſaith, Hee goeth about like a roaring Lion, ſeeking whom to deuoure 
                  1 Pet. 5. 8.; and if herein hee be reſtrained, yet will he caſt out great flouds of temptations, lies, ſlanders, feares, doubts, perplexities, hee will not faile to raiſe a grievous tempeſt.
               The ſecond Reaſon is the corruption of our nature,2. Reaſon. The corruption of our nature. for though the Regeneration & Sanctification of Gods children be moſt true, yet is it imperfect, (in regard of degrees) and the beſt of God children are partly ſpirit, and partly fleſh; and that throughout all the inward powers and faculties, and outward parts and members; as in the dawningSimilies. of the day, when it is neither altogether light, nor darke; and in luke-warme water, it is neither altogether cold nor hot: ſo there is ſome ignorance

in their minds; ſome hardneſſe in their hearts; ſome frowardneſſe in their wills; ſinne though it reigne not Rom. 6. 12., yet it dwelleth in them Rom. 7. 20., to defile and ſtaine their beſt workes, and ſtir vp ſtormes and tempeſts, in their Soules and Conſciences.
               Here then, firſt, is a ſweet comfort to Gods1 Vſe. Children, who have experience of the truth of this Doctrine, in their owne Soules: me thinketh I heare them thus lament; The time hath beene, when I could have beene merrie and glad, and had abundance of joy and comfort in God, it was my greateſt delight to heare, reade, and pray; I was able to be a comfort and ſtay to others: but now my Soule is heavie and penſive, ſad and ſorrowfull. I thinke on nothing but my ſinnes but thoſe, though many yeeres agoe committed, I doe as perfectly remember with the circumſtances thereof, as if they were but yeſterday; I can thinke of nothing but Gods anger, and the puniſhments of the Reprobate; neither have I any delight in godly exerciſes; or if I doe performe them, I finde no comfort in them, but returne from Church as void of comfort, as I went thither; riſe up from praier with as heavie an heart, as I kneeled downe. I am even oppreſſed with feares, doubts, and diſtruſts, that I have not truly repented, that I doe not truly beleeve, that I am not ſanctified, that I am not Gods Childe, that he loveth me not, that my ſinnes are not forgiven; and that I have but ſerved him in Hypocriſie. Oh behold, what waves, ſurges, and billowes of diſcomfort may cover a poore Soule!
               But let all ſuch be of good comfort: for firſt,1 Comfort.
                  
this is no other, than that all Gods Children firſt or laſt, more or leſſe, have experience of. Thou thinkeſt none ever were in ſuch cōdition: thou art deceived.
               Secondly, it is an argument of good eſtate: for2 Comfort. ſo long as Satan poſſeſſeth the Palace, all is in peace Luk. 11. 21.; ſo long as a man is wholy vnregenerate, all is in quiet. Rebekah, by the ſtriving of the Twins in her Wombe, knew ſhe was with child Gen. 25. 22.; the barren feele no ſuch matter. The Children of God know that there is Spirit within them as well as fleſh, becauſe theſe doe ſo luſt & ſtrive one againſt another. There cannot be a greater argument, that a man or woman are altogether carnall, and unregenerate, and earthly, than that they have no experience of this ſpirituall warfare & conflict, but rather glorie, that they never doubted of Gods love, remiſſion of ſinnes, and ſalvation, but were ever aſſured of thoſe things, not doubting but if any be ſaved, they ſhall. Oh, it is moſt wonderfull, to heare the vild and ſtrange preſumption of men and women, who yet are moſt ſinfull, and wicked in their lives and converſations; and thereby proclaime, that there is no true knowledge, feare, nor love of God in them. Oh, this is a fearefull condition indeed, & a flat argument of a reprobate ſenſe, of a benummed, yea a ſeared, and cauterized Conſcience: therefore tremble to thinke of this, but reioice in the other.
               Thirdly, this ſtorme will over, it never endureth3 Comfort. longer than this life, ſeldome (if ever) ſo long. Heavineſſe may endure for a night, but joy will come in the morning 
                  Pſ. 3
                        •
                     . 5.. Chriſt hath ſaid, ye ſhall weepe and lament, but the world ſhall rejoice: and ye ſhall be ſorrowfull,
                  
                  but your ſorrow ſhall be turned into joy, and your joy ſhall no man take from you 
                  Iohn 16. 20, 22.. How many thouſands of Gods Children who have beene in their times toſſed with waves, and billowes, of diſcomfort, and diſtreſſe, who have now found eternall reſt to their Soules Ierem. 6. 16., and praiſe God day and night who lead them thorow fire and water, into ſuch a wealthy place.
               Laſtly, know, that Chriſt is in thy Soule, in all4. this thy dolefull eſtate and condition, he will not leave thee, nor forſake thee, no more than he did this Ship in the Tempeſt: he may be as on ſleepe, and make as if he heard not, and regarded not, the more to try thy faith and patience; but he is a ſure and a faithfull friend, never neerer than when he ſeemeth furtheſt off; never will doe a man more good, than when he ſeemeth leaſt to regard him; in his good time he will rebuke Satan, and thy rebellious Luſts, and ſend a moſt gracious calme; That thou maieſt ſay with David, now returne to thy reſt, oh my Soule, the Lord hath well rewarded thee 
                  Pſ. 116. 7.. Yea, thou ſhalt be compaſſed about with Songs of deliverance.
               Oh but how might we procure this happieQueſt. calme?
               I anſwer, that many times, it is the evill temperAnſw. and diſpoſition of the body, as melancholy, that cauſeth ſuch troubles and ſtormes in the Soule; and in ſuch caſe, the Phyſitian is to be aduiſed with, and his counſell & direction followed. But which way ſoever it doe ariſe; the context will teach you, there are three waies and meanes for the quieting

and calming of the troubled ſoule, viz.
               
               Firſt, their owne prayers. You ſee in this tempeſt1 the Diſciples goe to Chriſt, and pray to him. So hath God commanded, Call on me in the day of thy trouble, and I will heare thee 
                  Pſ. 50. 15.: Is any afflicted? let him pray, Iam. 5. 15. Thus did David, in his diſtreſſe, give himſelfe to prayer; and got him to his Lord right humbly Pſ. 30. 8.; and prayed, My God, my God, looke upon me 
                  Pſ. 22. 1.: So did Chriſt, My God, my God, why haſt thou forſaken me 
                  Math. 27. 46.? and put up his ſupplication with ſtrong crying and teares 
                  Heb. 5. 7.: So did Ionah, Out of the belly of hell I cried unto thee 
                  Ionah 2. 2..
               Neither let any of Gods children be diſcouraged,Prevention. though they cannot expreſſe their wants, or 1. deſire ſupply of grace, as they would, or as they heare others: The Apoſtles did but pray, Lord ſave us, we periſh; and Chriſt heard them, and rebuked the winds and ſeas: The Publican did but pray, Lord be mercifull to me a ſinner, and went home iuſtified 
                  Luk. 18. 14.: The penitēt theefe on the croſſe did but pray, Lord remember me when thou commeſt into thy kingdome; And Chriſt promiſed, that night he ſhould be with him in Paradiſe 
                  Luk. 23. 42.. If thou canſt but ſay, feelingly, fervently, Lord ſave mee, Lord have mercy on mee, Lord give me peace of conſcience, Lord quiet my mind, Lord rebuke Satan, Lord helpe mine unbeleefe, Lord aſſure my ſoule of thy love: euen ſuch are moſt powerfull prayers with God.
               Neither yet let them be diſcouraged, becauſe they2. are not preſently heard, but many and many times they have prayed, and receive no anſwer: Remember, it was Davids caſe, I crie all the day long, and
                  
                  thou heareſt not 
                  Pſ. 22. 2.. It was the woman of Canaans caſe, who received many diſcouragements from Chriſt, and his Diſciples; yet ſtill continuing her praier, in the end received a gracious anſwer, O woman, great is thy faith: be it unto thee even as thou wilt 
                  Math. 15. 28.. Let us not preſcribe God his time, or meanes, when, or how; but ſtill, with Iacob, wreſtle Gen. 32. 24., and reſolve he ſhall ſtill heare of us till he doe helpe us, and aſſuredly, he hath a good time, when he will ſpeake peace to our Soules. The ſtorme ſhall not continue for ever; in the meane time he will be ſure to keepe from drowning.
               Secondly, note, that in this ſtorme ſome one doth2. not goe of himſelfe, neither doe they make one or two, as Peter or Iohn, their Deputies, or Committies, to goe and awaken Chriſt, and to pray him ſave them; but the Text ſaith [the Diſciples went to him.] So the ſecond way of comfort which God hath appointed, that ſinners ſinke not into deſpaire, is confeſſion of our caſe and condition, and to crave the helpe and comfort of others praiers and good counſels, and above all the comfort of the Miniſters abſolution, in the name of Chriſt, pronouncing remiſſion to everie true penitent. Oh there is nothing more dangerous to the Soule, or that Satan more laboureth, than that a ſinner ſhould keepe his counſell, and by no meanes make his griefe or diſconſolate eſtate knowne; for verily even in making it knowne, the Tempeſt is halfe calmed. Howſoever then the Papiſts, (& namely a ſometime rotten member of this body 
                     Carr. Lett. Cap. 2. Sect. 42.) to make us and our profeſſion odious to the world, declaime

againſt us as enemies to praying, faſting, virginitie, good workes, confeſſion, yea that the people in our Church are deprived of a great comfort, that though their Soules be never ſo oppreſſed, and diſquieted through ſinne, they have none to goe and confeſſe unto, that hath the ſeale of ſecreſie: We give all the world to underſtand, that we neither write or ſpeake againſt any of the former workes of pietie and godlineſſe, but againſt their corruptions; not againſt praier, but performance of it in a ſtrange Tongue; for cuſtome, not of conſcience; according to the number of Beads, not ſenſe of want. Wee ſpeake not againſt faſting, but the Phariſaicall abuſe of it; not againſt true Virginitie, but the fained ſhew of it, when as the bodie is defiled with monſtrous pollutions; not againſt neceſſarie povertie, but voluntary choiſe of it, in opinion of more pleaſing God; not againſt good works, but the proud conceit of meriting by them; not againſt confeſſion, but againſt the abuſes and corruptions thereof, which are ſuch as no Papiſt in the world can juſtifie by Scriptures, Fathers, or Reaſon: as namely, that it is enjoined of1 abſolute neceſſitie, and only of mortall ſinnes; and2 whatſoever ſuch are not confeſſed, are not forgiven:3 That it muſt only be in the eares of his owne4 Prieſt; and is of it ſelfe an act meritorious. Theſe5 foule corruptions being pared away, we have Confeſſion in right uſe amongſt us. As we begin our publike Service with confeſſion of our ſinnes, and have remiſſion of ſinnes by Gods Miniſter pronounced to all ſuch as truly repent, and vnfainedly

beleeve the Goſpell. So if any be troubled in Soule, and cannot rightly apply the meanes of comfort, on death-bead, or at other times, our Church in the ſecond exhortation before the Communion, exhorteth ſuch to repaire to ſome godly and diſcreet Miniſter, from whoſe praier, counſell, and advice, they may receive comfort, and the conſcience may be quieted; hath preſcribed a forme of abſolution; and in the Canons of our Church Canon 113., are enjoined, upon paine of irregularitie, all lawfull ſecreſie. And this is a ſingular meanes which God and our Church hath preſcribed, for the quieting and calming of ſtormie and tempeſtuous Soules; and which cannot be godly uſed, without much comfort.
               The third and laſt way for calming of theſe inward3 tempeſts in the minds of Gods Children, is the voice and ſpeech of Chriſt, he rebuked the winds and Seas; and ſo ſtill doth ſpeake to the troubled Soule. Yea whatſoever benefits, or friends, or delights, or pleaſures, any man have, yet none, nor all theſe, can ſoundly comfort the diſtreſſed Soule, but the word of Chriſt. Therefore ſaith Ieremie, Thy Word is the joy and rejoicing of mine heart 
                  Ierem. 25. 16.. And David ſaith, The Statutes of the Lord are right, and rejoice the heart 
                  Pſ. 19. 8.. And againe, I had periſhed in my trouble, if thy Lawes had not comforted me 
                  Pſ. 119. 92.. And againe, This is my comfort in mine affliction, for thy Word hath quickned me 
                  Pſ. 119. 5
                        •
                     .. And therefore praieth, Cauſe thou me to heare the voice of joy and gladneſſe, that the bones which thou haſt broken may rejoice 
                  Pſ. 51. 8.. Much more might be ſaid to this purpoſe, but this

may ſuffice, and therefore if ever thou wilt have the ſtorme and tempeſt in thy Soule ſtilled and calmed, thou muſt diligently hearken to the Word of God read and preached.
               But me thinketh I heare ſome object againſt this,1 Obiect. and ſay: Oh I was never troubled till I began to hearken to the Word, till I got a Bible and delighted in reading, and tooke delight to heare Sermons: I thinke it was the hearing of the Word, raiſed the Tempeſt.
               I anſwer, that the Sword of the Spirit, which is the
                  Sol. 
                  Word of God 
                  Eph. 6. 17., hath two edges 
                  Heb. 4. 12. Revel. 1. 16.; it hurteth with the one, and healeth with the other; it cutteth with the one, and cureth with the other; it humbleth, and exalteth; it terrifieth, and aſſureth; it afflicteth, and rejoiceth the heart: Wherefore if it have wounded thee, ſtick to it, it will heale thee; if it have raiſed a ſtorme, it will alſo calme and ſtill it.
               Oh, but I have read it much, and heard it often,2 Obiect. and yet ſtill I am as much troubled, and as comfortleſſe as ever I was.
               I ſay with David, Oh tarie the Lords leaſure, beSol. ſtrong, and he will comfort thine heart Pſ. 27. ult.
                  . Our mother Church having loſt Chriſt, ſought him in bed, and found him not; in ſtreets, and found him not; met with many diſcouragements, but found not him whom her Soule loved: yet in the end ſhe found him, and laid hold on him Cant. 3. 1, 2, 3.. Never any ſought conſtantly comfort from Word and Sacraments, but in the end found it. Wherefore ſay with David, I will hearken what the Lord God will ſay: for he will ſpeake peace to his people, and to his Saints 
                  Pſ. 85. 8..
               
                  The Wind and Seas, which cauſe thy ſtorme andConcluſion. tempeſt, are within thee, bring them to Gods houſe, firſt or laſt, the Lord will with his Word rebuke them, and thou ſhalt have a calme, and praiſe God for thy peace. And ſo much for the cauſe of their perill, viz. a Tempeſt, both according to the letter and myſtery; and that both generally, in the Church where Chriſt his Goſpel is profeſſed; and particularly, in the Soule, where the ſame is beleeved. Now let vs proceed to the deſcription of this Tempeſt.
               Wherein the firſt thing to be conſidered, is the1. The Qualitie. quality of it, It was ſudden, in this word [There aroſe] or (according to the originall) It was made 
                  
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     : facta eſt concuſſio.
                  : it did not ariſe, or was made by little or little, but on the ſudden, there came ſuch a guſt, and the ſea did ſo rage, that in an inſtant, the ſhip was even covered with waves. Whereof ſomething is firſt to be ſaid according to the letter, and then the myſtery. According to the letter, let us conſider the Author, and the meanes, who, and how, this Tempeſt was made. For the firſt.
               It is out of all doubt, he made this Tempeſt that1 Lit obſerv. ſtilled it Non ex ſe orta eſt tempeſtas, ſed Chriſti imperio. Gloſſ. O
                        •
                     din.. The Scriptures plainly ſhew, that God1 Author. is the Author of ſtormes and tempeſts, by ſea and land. So ſaith David, They that goe downe into the ſea in ſhips, and occupie their buſineſſe in great waters, theſe ſee the workes of the [Lord] and [hu] wonders in the deepe 
                  Pſal. 107. 24.. And againe; At the brightneſſe of his preſence, the thicke clouds paſſed, haile-ſtones and coales of fire, the Lord thundred out of heaven, and the higheſt gave his voice, haile-ſtones and coales of fire, he ſent out his arrowes and ſcattered them, he ſhot out his
                  
                  lightnings and diſcomfited them; then the channels of water were ſeene, and the foundations of the world were diſcovered: at thy rebuke, O Lord, at the blaſt of the breath of thy noſtrils 
                  Pſa. 18. 13, 14, 15 See how lively the Prophet deſcribeth a Tempeſt, and aſcribeth the glorie thereof unto God. And againe; It is the glorious God that cauſeth the thunder, the voice of the Lord is a powerfull voice, the voice of the Lord is full of Maieſtie, it breaketh the Cedars, even the Cedars of Lebanon; ſhaketh the wilderneſſe, even the wilderneſſe of Kadeſh. And he withall declareth the uſe of ſtorms, and tempeſts, thunder, lightning, and raine: Give to the Lord the honour due to his name: in his Temple, let every man ſpeake of his praiſe 
                  Pſal. 29. 2. &c.. And againe, hee ſaith, Fire, and haile, ſnow, and vapour, ſtormy wind, and tempeſt, doe fulfill Gods word 
                  Pſal. 148. 8..
               Oh then it is a great ſinne, for men to impute theVſe. raiſing of ſtormes and tempeſts, winds, and foule weather, to the Devill, Conjurers, Witches, and Wizards, Aeolus, &c. Indeed, I will not deny, but that Satan is called the prince that ruleth in the aire
                  Epheſ. 2. 2.; and that he is very cunning and artificiall to worke ſtrangely, in all the regions of the aire, to ſtirre up meteors, lightning, thunder, wind, raine, haile (as appeareth from the ſtory of Iob:) neither will I deny, but that Witches and Conjurers, by the helpe of the Devill, with whom they are in league, may raiſe ſtormes and tempeſts in the aire, which may eaſily be diſcerned from naturall tempeſts, in reſpect of the ſudden and violent raiſing thereof Kings Daemono
                        
                           ••
                        . lib. 2. c. 5. p. 117.: but this is certaine, the providence of God ex endeth it ſelfe to all, even moſt minutiall things, and

neither Devill nor Conjurer can doe any exploit, but by limitation and leave Archbiſhop Abbot, on Jona
                           •
                        s Lect. 3. pag. 51.; not being able to exceed one haires bredth beyond that is granted unto them. Wherefore, whether we be letted, hindred, or hurt, by ſea or land, with any ſtorme or 
                     •
                  mpeſt, let us aſſigne all to the providence of God, depend on him for ſafetie, and give him the honour due to his name for ſuch great workes. Herein was Iob well taught, who ſaid, The Lord giveth, and the Lord taketh away 
                  Iob 1. penult.
                  .
               But though God be the Author, yet he hath ordinary 2 Meanes. meanes and inſtruments, ſubſerving to his pleaſure, in raiſing of ſtormes; and thoſe either ſupreme, as (by his permiſſion) Satan; or inferiour, as ſlaves, and expirations from the cavernes and cranies of the earth, where the aire being impriſoned, and labouring to get out, as it maketh a 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , and earthquake, ſo on ſea a great concuſſion and ſhaking; but moſt commonly by wind, which, if it blow vehemently, doth greatly worke upon that liquid and 
                     •
                  luid plaine patent body; but ſpecially, if it be contrary to the naturall fl
                     •
                  x and motion of it, which wee call the Tide. So David deſcribing a tempeſt by ſea, ſaith, Hee commandeth, and raiſeth the ſtormie wind, which lifteth up the waves thereof 
                  Pſal. 107. 25.. And God ſent out a great wind, and there was a mightie tempeſt on the ſea 
                  Ionah 1. 4.: And Saint Paul deſcribing the tempeſt he was in, ſaith, It was cauſed by a tempeſtuous wind 
                  Ty
                        •
                     honicus v
                        •
                     ntus., called Euroclydon 
                  Acts 27. 14.. That this Tempeſt was cauſed by a wind, is cleare; for Saint Marke ſaith, There aroſe a great ſtorme of wind 
                  Marke 4. 37.: And S. Luke ſaith, There came a
                  
                  ſtorme of wind upon the lake 
                  Luke 8. 23.: And our Euangeliſt ſaith, Chriſt rebuked the winds: yea the other two Euangeliſts tell us the name of this wind 
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     , turbo.
                  ; which receiveth not denomination from the quarter from whence it bloweth, as the Scriptures doe ſpeake of Eaſt-wind, Weſt-wind, and others, both cardinall, and collaterall; but of the vehemencie of it; yea not properly one wind, but a conflict of many winds 
                     Eſt 
                           •
                        utē 
                        
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                         ſive turbo, plurium conflictus ventorū. Lorin. in 2 Pet. 2. 17. pag. 389. coll. a.
                  : A whirle-wind, ſuch a wind, as at once ſmote all the foure corners of the houſe, wherein Iobs children feaſted 
                  Iob 1. 19.; ſuch a wind, as was neither ſide nor contrary, but at once ſmote every part of the ſhip, and brought the waves every way upon it, as if at once it would have buried it, and all the paſſengers therein, in the ſurges. So much for the Senſe.
               Here for inſtruction we may learne, that there isDoct. Lit. no creature ſo good and neceſſarie, vſefull and ſerviceable for man, but God can make it his ſcourge. What more neceſſarie and comfortable than fire? yet with it hee deſtroyed Sodom and Gomorrah 
                  Gen. 19. 24.; and two Captaines with their fifties 
                  2 King. 1. 10. 11. &c.. What more neceſſary than water? yet with it, hee deſtroyed the old world 
                  Gen. 6. 17.; and Pharaoh and his hoaſts 
                  Exod. 14. 28.. The wind alſo a moſt comfortable and uſefull creature (as it were Gods fanne) for purging of the aire, growth of all vegetables, and paſſage by ſea; and God hath uſed it as an inſtrument in ſome of his moſt renowmſd miracles. With a ſtrong Eaſt-wind he dried up the Red ſea 
                  Exod. 14. 21.; Brought Quailes 
                  Numb. 11. 31.; and God himſelfe is ſaid to flie upon the wings of the wind 
                  Pſal 18. 10.: But with an Eaſt-wind God brought locuſts upon the Land
                  
                  of Aegypt 
                  Exod. 10. 13.; Overthrew the houſe on Iobs children, Iob 1. 19. and brake the ſhips of Tarſhiſh 
                  Pſal. 48. 7.; and like to have drowned Ionah, and Paul, yea Chriſt and all the paſſengers with them; as it hath done many thouſands.
               Wherefore, it behoveth us not to reſt contented,
                     Vſe 1. Wherefore wee aske daily bread, though wee have bread. that we have the creature we ſtand in need of, but to pray to God for the ſanctified uſe thereof: elſe we may eat of the beſt, and yet not be nouriſhed; be clothed with the coſtlieſt, and yet not be warmed 
                  Hag. 1. 6.; yea our table become a ſnare, and our proſperity our ruine 
                  Pſal. 69. 22.: that which may be to others a bleſſing, may become to us a curſe.
               Secondly, haſt thou beene endangered by fire,Vſe 2. wind, or water? bleſſe God for thy deliverance. Haſt thou ſuſtained loſſe? cry not out on Chance or Fortune; do not raile and curſe: but humble thy ſelfe, it was Gods hand: even the winds doe blow according to his pleaſure. So much for the Letter.
               
                  There aroſe] By the riſing of this tempeſt onSenſe myſtic. the ſea, is ſhadowed out the ariſing of troubles in the Church of God. As God was the Author of the one, (the winds and all creatures being ſubordinate to his pleaſure) ſo is he of this; both Devils in Hell, and Men on Earth, being but his inſtruments, who cannot move an haire from the heads of his children, but according to his good pleaſure 
                  Matth. 10. 30.. There is no evill done in the Citie, and the Lord hath not done it 
                  Amos 8. 6.. Even the Medes & Perſians are called Gods ſanctified ones, Eſay 13. 3. Aſhur that afflicteth,Cofirmation. and leadeth the people of God into captivitie, is but the rod of Gods wrath 
                  Eſa. 10. 5, 6.; And the mightie

ſtaffe of his anger. The ungodly man is but Gods ſword Pſal. 17. 13.. Rabſhakeh ſaid to Ieruſalem, Am I now come up without the Lord againſt this place, to deſtroy it? the Lord ſaid to me, Goe up againſt this land, & deſtroy it 
                  2 Kings 18. 25.. And Pharaoh Necho King of Egypt, comming up to fight againſt Carchemiſh at Euphrates, and Ioſiah going out againſt him, he ſent Ambaſſadors to him, ſaying, What have I to doe with thee, thou King of Iudah, I come not againſt thee, this day, but againſt the houſe wherewith I have warre, for God commanded me to make haſte; forbeare to meddle with God, who is with me, that he deſtroy thee not: but Ioſiah would not heare, but went and fought with him in the valley of Megiddo, and there was ſlaine 
                  2 Chron. 35. 20.. Oh doth the providence of God extend it ſelfe to moſt minutiall things? as the blowing of winds, falling ofEpiphonema. raine, flying of birds, numbring of haires, clothing of graſſe, growing of plants, biting of wormes, ſwimming of fiſhes? Yea doth Gods providence order and diſpoſe things moſt contingent and caſuall; as the flying off of the Axes head from the helve, whereby a man is ſlaine Deut. 19. 5.; and an arrow ſhot at random, yet ſhould hit the King Ahab betwixt the ioints of his Brigandine, and ſlay him 1 Kings ult. 34.? Yea if the Lot be caſt into the lap, even the whole diſpoſition thereof is it from the Lord 
                  Prov. 16. 33.? And ſhall any be ſo ignorant and faithleſſe, as to thinke, that any ſtirres and troubles can ariſe in the Church of God, to perſecution, impriſonment, loſſe of goods, libertie, and lives of Gods children, without God his good pleaſure, and purpoſe?
               Oh, as I have from the letter reproved theReprehension.
                  
Atheiſme of thoſe men, who in ſtormes and tempeſts on the Sea or Land, doe not looke up to the ſeat of Majeſtie, and give him the glory thereof, who doth, rule and governe that huge and vaſt Element: So let me reprove the Atheiſme of thoſe, who when ſtormes and tempeſts are raiſed in the world, or againſt the Church of God, do not looke up to the ruling and over-ruling hand of Iehovah; but cry out upon chance, or fortune; or gaze too much upon the meanes: Oh if this had not hapned, or that had not beene! whereas all is but under God, for the executing of his good pleaſure and purpoſe.
               Did not the Lord ſtir up Hadad the Edomite, toVſe. be an adverſarie to Salomon 
                  1 Kings 11. 14.? and ſtir up another adverſarie alſo, Rezon the ſonne of Eliadah 
                  1 Kings 11. 23.; and Ieroboam alſo, not only to lift up his hand againſt the King, and trouble him in his peace; but alſo in the daies of his ſonne, to rent away ten Tribes from his houſe, and perpetually to divide the Kingdoms of Iudah and Iſrael 
                  1 Kings 12. 16.? Doth not God ſay, he hath created the deſtroyer to deſtroy? Eſay 54. 16. Good Lord, how plaine and plentifull are the Scriptures in this point, if I would inlarge my ſelfe! Oh that men would therefore looke to the hand that ſmiteth; ſearch out the cauſes of ſuch tempeſts; beare with patience his hand, and ſeeke unto him for a calme.
               I beſeech you, learne this leſſon, That all the enemiesExhortation. of Gods Church they are Gods ſouldiers, he hath levied them, and giveth them pay, they fight under his banner, and hee hath ſent them to

deſtroy, though themſelves doe not know ſo much. The Lord of Hoaſts muſtreth the hoaſts of the battell, Eſa. 13. 4..
               Oh, but why will God ſuffer ſuch havocke and deſtruction to be made of his people?Obiect. Sol.
               
               I anſwer, becauſe through long peace, plenty, and proſperity, they are become unthankfull, loath the heavenly Manna, earthly-minded, proud, covetous, rebellious againſt Gods word and ordinance, and will obey it no further than it doth like themſelves; prophaning his Sabbaths, growing ſenſeleſſe and obdurate at his corrections of famine; peſtilence, ſickneſſe; deſpiſing the warnings of his ſervants, and in ſtead of repenting and turning to God, and meeting him with the intreatie of peace, falling foule upon his meſſengers, mocking and abuſing them.
               Theſe are the ſinnes which he hath threatned to puniſh Levit. 26. 3. 14. &c. Deut. 28. 15, &c.; theſe were the ſinnes, oh theſe were the ſinnes of Gods people, in France, Palatinate, and other places of Germany, whereby the Lord of Hoſts being provoked to anger, hath muſtered hisApplication to the Churches abroad. Armies, and ſent his Souldiers to deſtroy, and avenge his quarrell.
               Oh therefore that they had grace to humbleVſe. themſelves under the mighty hand of God, to turne to the Lord in faſting, weeping, and mourning; to rent their hearts for their ſinnes, and become more cheerefull in their obedience to the Goſpell, and zealous in the profeſſion of it: Oh then would the Lord ſoone humble their enemies, and turne his hand againſt thoſe that hate them; and either cauſe their rage utterly to ceaſe, (as hee

did ſundry times in Iudah, when the people ſo ſought his face) or if in his juſtice he did harden their hearts, to purſue, as the Egyptians did the Iſraelites into the heart of the Sea, they ſhould not need to feare, but even ſtand ſtill, and ſee the ſalvation of God, in the perpetuall confuſion of ſuch cruell and bloud-thirſtie enemies.
               Oh England, God calleth to thee to be warnedApplication to England. by the example of thy neighbours, friends, allies, and brethren, to meet the Lord by repentance, and whilſt he doth ſhake the rod at thee, to ſhake off that ſluggiſh and careleſſe profeſſion of the Goſpell, to ſcoure off the ruſt of thoſe ſinnes, which ſo long peace, plenty, and proſperity have bred; to cauſe thy love to ſpring againe afreſh to the Goſpell, and more ſincerely to practiſe the duties of pietie and godlineſſe, being fruitfull in all good works. If thou doeſt ſo, the Lord of Hoſts will caſhier and diſcharge his Armies, put an hooke in their noſthrils, and a bit in their iawes, as hee did againſt that proud Sennacherib 
                  Eſay 37. 29.. Or elſe they ſhall plot and fight without him, yea take our parts againſt them, and arme the winds & waters againſt them, as ſometimes he hath done, to his everlaſting praiſe. But if England will not be reclaimed and reformed, but ſtill refuſe and be rebellious, hating to be reformed, adding drunkenneſſe to thirſt, making a mocke of Gods Iudgements, when they are threatned; the Lord will turne thy calme into a ſtorme; and to truſt in any earthly thing, were but to make vanitie our refuge: There is no wiſdome, counſell, nor ſtrength againſt the Lord: It is the Lord

that raiſeth tempeſts, and if he be diſpoſed to raiſe one, it ſhall riſe indeed, he hath wayes and meanes which we ſee not. David was as confident as wee can be, that his mountaine was ſo ſtrong that it could not be moved; but it was moved and ſhaken indeed. Cannot he that hangeth the earth on nothing, ſhake a mountaine? He doth weigh them in ſcales. Remember this doctrine.
               Yea let every one that is inwardly troubled andVſe. 2. afflicted in ſoule, know, that howſoever God may therein uſe Sathan, and permit him to vex and diſquiet, or elſe the melancholike evill diſpoſition of our bodies, yet ſuch ſpirituall afflictions are from God 
                     David and Iob call them the terrours of God.: They neither come by chance or fortune, nor properly from Sathan, or our ſelves; but God Almightie laieth ſuch troubles upon our ſoules, for exerciſe of our Faith, Patience, Meekneſſe; and he will not ſuffer us to be tempted above that we ſhall be able to beare, but will give iſſue with the temptation 1. Cor. 10. 13.; and in good time cauſe a calme. And therefore ſtill let us provoke our ſoules to wait upon God, and to be of good comfort in him. So much for the qualitie.
               Now as this tempeſt was raiſed ſuddenly, as aPart. 2. whirle-winde, or guſt vpon the Sea; ſo for quantitie, it was a great one 
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     : Motus magnus, Concuſſio magna.
                  . It is worthy to be obſerved, that when our Saviour wrought any miracle, the Euangeliſts are directed to deſcribe the greatneſſe of the evill by ſuch circumſtances, as declare, that the evill was by naturall helpe and meanes utterly incurable; As a man full of leproſie came to Chriſt, and he did but touch him and cure him.

                  Luk. 5. 12. A woman had beene diſeaſed with an iſſue of blood twelue yeeres, and had ſpent her living on Phyſitians, neither could be healed by any Luk. 8. 43.; came behinde him, and did but touch the hem of his garment, and immediatly her iſſue of blood ſtanched. A man that was borne blinde, having his eyes anointed with clay, was made to ſee Iohn 9. 1.. Lazarus, who had beene dead foure daies, and was ſaid to ſtinke, by the voice of Chriſt was raiſed to life. Iohn 11. 39. The like may be obſerved in many others. So here, that the glorie of this Miracle might be the more, which redoundeth to Chriſt frō cauſing this calme, the Euangeliſt telleth us, there was a tempeſt, a ſudden tempeſt, a great tempeſt; and it appeareth it was ſo, from divers paſſages of the ſtorie: For firſt, the inſtrumentall Cauſe, was a 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , a ſudden and furious winde, which God did caſt upon the Sea, (for ſo the word in Ionah ſignifieth) He
                        •
                     ill; from Hil in Hiphil, Eiecit, Proieci
                        •
                     . the waves alſo ſo lifted up, and toſſed with it, that the very ſhip was covered with them, or (as the word ſignifieth) was filled brim full; for S. Marke uſeth the ſame word which is uſed in S. Iohn at the Mariage-Feaſt in Cana of Galile, where the Waterpots are ſaid to be filled up to the brim Ioh. 2. 7. 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                      
                     Implete: 
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                      
                     u
                           •
                         iam impleretur. Mar. 4. 37.; yea the paſſengers, whereof ſome of them were Fiſhermen, as Peter, Andrew, Iames, Iohn, were exceedingly fearefull they ſhould be drowned. Surely they had ſeene many a tempeſt before, and were men inured and accuſtomed to ſuch dangers, of whom the Poet ſaith truly, Their hearts are of braſſe, and oake, to encounter dangers Illis robur, & 
                        •
                     s triplex. Horat.; yet even they are, as at their wits end (as David ſaith) and diſtracted

with the greatneſſe of this perill, and cry out to their Maſter, Saue vs, wee periſh; All which, declare the truth of my Text, that this was a great, & dangerous tempeſt indeed; wherof more, hereafter, whēl come to ſpeake of the ſhip being covered with waves.
               In the meane time receive this doctrine, (whichDoctrine. cōtaineth both the Hiſtory & Myſterie;) viz. That God many times ſuffereth his people, to come into great perills, dangers, extremities, and very hard exigents, before he deliuer them; which being a doctrine lately and largely in this place handled from another Text Serm. on Heſth. 3. ult. pag. 13. &c., I onely now barely propoſe it, and proceed.
               
                  Vpon the Sea:] When God divided the watersPart. 3. Senſe lit. from the dry land, he called the dry land, Earth, and the gathering together of the waters, Seas 
                  Gen. 1. 10.; and ever ſince, the Hebrewes have uſually called all collections, and gatherings together of waters, Seas. Yea, that veſſell which Solomon made for the vſe of the Temple, in ſtead of the Laver in the Tabernacle, and was for containing of two or three thouſand Baths of water for the Prieſts to waſh with, is called a Braſen Sea, and Moulten Sea 
                  1. Kings 7. 23. 2. Chron. 4. 3.. And howſoever my Text calleth this gathering of waters (Sea) and elſewhere it is called the ſea of Galile 
                  Iohn 6. 1., becauſe the promiſed Land, being divided into three Provinces, Galile, Samaria, and Iewrie, this Sea was in the Province of inferiour Galile: It is alſo called the Sea of Tiberias 
                  Ibid.; from a Citie on the banke of it, of that name Built by Herod in honour of Tiberius Caeſar.
                  . It is in the Old Teſtament, called the Sea of Chinnereth 
                  Numb. 34. 11.; and in the New Teſtament, it is called the Lake of Geneſar
                        •
                     th 
                  Luk. 5. 1.; A lake, (and ſo

it might more properly be called, than Sea Iſidor. l. 13. c. 19.) and ſo S. Luke calleth it, even in recording this ſtorie, A ſtorme of winde came on the Lake Luk. 8. 23. 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     
                  ; for that it was but a few leagues in compaſſe Plin. lib. 5. c. 15.: and the Lake of Geneſereth, becauſe the countrey of Geneſereth adioyned unto it Matth. 14. 34.. I
                     •
                   was a Sea, that abounded with Fiſh Varia ſunt in 
                        •
                     o p
                        •
                     ſcium genera. Ioſeph. de bell. Iud. lib. 3. cap. 18., and there was the place where Peter, and Andrew, Iames, and Iohn were Fiſhers. It was nouriſhed with that ſweet and pleaſant Riuer of Iordan, which riſing at the foot of Mount Libanus, running in a narrow channell, did firſt inlarge it ſelfe in a ſmall Lake, called Merom, where Ioſuah diſcomfited the Canaanites; Ioſ. 11. 4▪ 5, 7. and then contracting it ſelfe againe, kept channell till it came ſecondly, more to inlarge it ſelfe in this Lake or Sea; and then paſſing out of it againe, did at the laſt emptie it ſelfe into the dead Sea; a (Sea) though having no entercourſe with the Ocean; and (dead) becauſe no fiſh, or other creature doth liue in it, becauſe of the bituminous, & ſulphureous matter. I know no waters in the world, comparably renowmed to this Riuer, and this Sea. Howſoever1. Iordan. diſgracefully Naaman once ſaid, Are not the riuers of Damaſcus, Abana
                        •
                     , and Pharpar, better than all the waters of Iſrael 
                  2 Kings 5. 12.? Yet hath God enabled the waters of Iſrael, aboue all the waters of the world, and the waters of Iordan aboue all the waters of Iſrael. The waters of this Riuer (betwixt this, and the ſalt Sea) did ſtand as on an heape (at that time when Iordan overflowed all his bankes) till his people Iſrael paſſed over it, on drie ground, into the land of Canaan, right over againſt Iericho 
                  Ioſ. 3. 13—17.; Eliah
                  
and Eliſhah divided the waters of this Riuer with their cloake, and went over on dry ground 2 Kings 2. 8, 14.. Naaman the Syrian, waſhing ſeuen times in it (according to the word of the Prophet) was clenſed of his leproſie 2 King. 5. 10, 14.. In this did the Prophet Eliſha, cauſe the Iron to ſwim 2 Kings 6. 6.. Yea, in this was Chriſt baptiſed, and the Baptiſt ſaw heauen open, heard the voice of the Father, and ſaw the Spirit in likeneſſe of a Dove, deſcend and light on Chriſt Matth. 3. ult.
                  .
               Oh, that famous River of Iordan! no Sea, more2. The Sea. ennobled than this, thorow which it ran. Here did Chriſt call 
                     •
                  oure of his firſt and prime Apoſtles Matth▪ 4. 18, 19.: On this ſea, Chriſt and Peter walked Matth. 14. 26. 29: Here did hee calme the Tempeſt; and here hee appeared after his Reſurrection, when they tooke an exceeding multitude of fiſhes Iohn 21. 1. 11.: On this famous ſea, now this great Tempeſt was. So much for the Letter. I having formerly ſhewed how marvellous God is, in this Creature, and provoked you to give him due glorie.
               As the Ship repreſenteth the Church; ſo the Sea,Senſe myſtic. this world: and may ſo fitly in a threefold reſpect.
               Firſt, as the ſea is alwaies in motion, but ſpecially1. Vnſtable. tempeſtuous, when the winds doe blow; ſo this world is reſtleſſe, ever in action, but then ſpecially ſtormie, and tempeſtuous, when Tyrants and Heretikes doe blow upon it.
               Againe, as the ſea is Dangerous, for ſhelfes, rocks,2. Dangerous. ſands, unleſſe men ſaile by a very good compaſſe, and thouſands doe make ſhipwracke, to the loſſe of lives and goods: So in this world, are many dangers, and perils; and ſpecially, hereſies, and ſins,

are as rockes, whereon thouſands, even all that doe not ſaile by the true compaſſe of Gods word, doe make ſhipwrack, to the eternall deſtruction of ſoule and bodie; as Saint Paul ſaith, that Hymeneus and Alexander did 1 Tim. 1. ult.
                  .
               Laſtly, as the 
                     •
                  ea is full of fiſhes and living Creatures;3. Full of living creatures. 
                  there goe things creeping innumerable 
                  Pſal. 104. 25.: ſo is the world: and as fiſhes in the ſea are caught with nets; ſo are men by the net of the Goſpell, as Chriſt ſaid to his Apoſtles, Follow me, and I will make you fiſhers of men 
                  Matth. 4. 19.: And the kingdome of heaven is like to a draw-net caſt into the ſea, Matth. 13. 47. And as in the ſea, ſmall fiſh are a prey to greater: ſo in this world, the poore and weake are as a prey, devoured of the rich and ſtrong. In which reſpect, the Lord, by his Prophet, calleth them Fiſhers 
                  Ierem. 16. 16.: for which (and divers other reſpects, if I would ſtand upon them) the world may very fitly be compared to the Sea. Yet, the Booke of the Revelation doth teach us, that this world is a very ſtrange ſea; and and that in two principall properties, viz.
               
               Firſt, it is like a ſea of criſtall glaſſe 
                  Revel. 4. 6.: [Of glaſſe]1. Of Glaſſe. becauſe it is moſt brittle, no mans eſtate in this world, being more certaine than the glaſſe, which now being whole, and uſefull, faire and beautifull, anon with a rap is broken all to peeces. How quickly hath many mens great and faire eſtates, beene utterly broken, in one night, in an houre; how wealth, honour, health, libertie, life, and all loſt, as a glaſſe which is broken all to pieces. And of Criſtall; for howſoever there are many workes of darkneſſe in the world, which the eye of man cannot ſee and behold;

yet is the world as cleare as a Criſtall-glaſſe before him that ſitteth upon the Throne: All things are naked and o
                        •
                     en before his eyes, with whom we have to doe 
                  Heb. 4. 1
                        •
                     . 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     .: He diſcerneth the very leaſt obliquity, and irregularitie of thoughts; no man can more clearely ſee a blot in a criſtall glaſſe, than God doth the ſinnes of men, be they in thought, word or worke; and therefore we ſhould ſtrive to be holy, as being ever in the eyes and ſight of God.
               Secondly, it is a ſea mingled with fire 
                  Rev. 15. 2.: It is ordinary2. Mingled with fire. in Scripture▪ by fire, to ſignifie tribulations, as when thou paſſeſt thorow the fire, I will be with thee 
                  Eſay 43. 2.: I went thorow fire and water 
                  Pſal. 66. 12.: And brethren thinke it not ſtrange concerning the fiery triall 
                  1 Pet. 4. 12.: The ſea of this world is mixed with abundance of that fire; whereſoever Gods children become, they ſhal meet with hot and ſ
                     •
                  orching tribulation and afflictions, yet ſhal this fire but ſcoure away the droſſe, to make them ſhine the brighter in Gods eyes; the buſh burned with fire, but conſumed not, Exod. 3. 2. This fire ſhall only conſume the Reprobate. And ſo much for the deſcription of the Tempeſt, now followeth the aggravation of it.
               
                  In ſo much that the ſhip was covered with waves]2. Gen. part. Senſe lit. Now the Euangeliſt doth aggravate, the perils that Chriſt and 
                     •
                  i
                     •
                   D
                     ••
                  ciples were in, by two maine Circumſtances; the firſt from the greatneſſe of the tempeſt, which was ſuch, that even the ſhip was covered with waves; the word which Saint Marke uſeth, ſignifieth to f
                        •••
                     
                   
                  
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     : Marke 4. 37.; and is ſo tranſlated, ſo that the ſhip was now full. Saint Luke alſo uſeth another word of the ſame ſignification; and ſo alſo

tranſlated, and they were filled 
                  
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     : complebantur.; for it is in the plurall, They, that is, the ſhip which carried them, by a Me
                        •
                     onimie of the adjunct; and alſo by a Sinecdoche, the ſhip, for hatches, which are but a part. But our Euangeliſt uſeth another word, which according to the proprietie of it, ſignifieth, to cover 
                  
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     , ut operiretur, of 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                      
                     tego.
                  , or hide a thing from ſight, as no man lighteth a candle, and covereth it with a buſhell 
                  Luke 8. 16.; and the Reprobate ſhall ſay at the day of judgement to the hills, fall on us and cover us 
                  Luke 23. 20.: In which, and many ſuch like places in the new Teſtament, we have the word of my text, in it proper ſignification; though the words be divers, the ſenſe and thing intended is all one, viz. They were in ſo great jeopardie of drowning, that the ſhip, that is, the upper part or hatches, were even filled, or covered, that they could not be ſeene: And wherewith was the ſhip covered? not with wind, but waves 
                  
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     . à fluctibus, 
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     .; and in Saint Iude there is added an Epithite, the raging waves of the ſea 
                  Iud. 13 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     .. And verily nothing in this world doth ſo rage, and is ſo furious, as the waves of the ſea, in a ſtorme or tempeſt. And ſo much be ſaid of the Senſe of the words.
               Whether only that this ſhip, wherein Chriſt andQueſt. Anſw. his Diſciples paſſed, was thus endangered, and covered with waves, and the reſt ſafe or no; is too hard 
                     •
                   queſtion for me peremptorily to reſolve, becauſe I am content to ſee no more, than the eye of my Text hath deſcribed unto mee: the Text ſaith, The tempeſt came upon the ſea; therefore likely, that all the ſhips on the ſea at that time, were endangered, though poſſibly, this ſhip was more endangered

than the others, both in regard of Chriſt his purpoſe, and Satans malice.
               The Letter teacheth us, what great perils andDoct. Lit. jeopardies ſea-faring men do many times fall into, ſometimes lifted up to heaven, with one wave; and ſometimes falling even downe to hell; and ſometimes the ſhip, as this, even covered with waves, that they ſee nothing but preſent death: and are as David ſaith, Even at their wits end, and crie unto God in their diſtreſſe 
                  Pſal. 107. 28.. But of this ſufficient. From handling the Tempeſt, the Circumſtance (according to Myſticall ſenſe) affording us three ſingular inſtructions, concerning the ſtate of the Church, viz.
               
               Firſt, what ever hath beene, is, and will be, the1. Doct. miſtic. common condition of Gods Church and people, viz. To be exerciſed with croſſes, tribulations, afflictions, publike and private; yea and ſometimes with ſword of bloudie and perſecuting foes and enemies: which doctrine I have lately more largely handled Serm. on Burning Buſh pag. 4. &c. and Serm. on Heſt 3. ult. p. 6. &c.; with Reaſons, Vſes, Application, and Exhortation; and therefore doe now but barely propound it.
               The ſecond Doctrine is this; That as this ſhip2. Doct. was covered with waves, ſo as none but themſelves knew, they held out; others might ſuppoſe they were drowned: ſo a Church which hath beene viſible in the publike miniſtrie of the Word and Sacraments, may through perſecution of Tyrants, be ſo covered, 
                     •
                  s become viſible to moſt.
               This is repreſented in the viſion, the Church reſembledConfirmatiō. to a woman clothed with the Sunne, and the
                  
                  Moone under her feet, and upon her head a crowne of twelve Starres: oh then was ſhee vi
                     •
                  ible and conſpicuous: But at another time driven into the wilderneſſe, out of the ſight of men; then was ſhe coveredRev. 12. 1, 5, 6.. Come to our owne Embleme; A ſhip on the ſea when it is calme, is plainly ſeene (yea it is one of the comely ſights of the world, a ſhip under ſaile in a proſperous gale) but if there ariſe a great tempeſt, it may be ſo overtopped with waves, and for a time be betwixt them, ſo as ſcarce the top of the maſt is ſeene, and moſt will thinke ſhee is drowned, yet anon ſhee riſeth upon the wave, and is ſeene againe: It is the condition of the Church of Rome, ſometimes viſible and a glorious Church; but now perſecuteth the faith it profeſſed, the godly being covered with waves: It is the condition of the Cities in Erance; and it was the caſe of the Church of God in this Land, which was glorious and viſible in the daies of King Edward; but covered with waves in the daies of Queene Mary, but reſtored to former glory by Queen Elizabeth, wherein for aboue ſixtie yeeres it hath continued, moſt eminent, in the eyes of the world.
               The Papiſts doe hold, that the true Church ofConfutation. God is ever viſibleEccleſia viſibilis, non poteſt def
                        •
                     ere. Bell. de Eccleſ. lib. 3. cap. 13.; hath had, and ſhall have, a perpetuall Succeſſion of Paſtors and Miniſters, and of publike ſervice and worſhip: They alſo ſay, that their Church hath been, and is ſo viſible; ours not, therefore theirs is the true Church of Chriſt, and ours is not.
               For the firſt, we ſay that howſoever the Catholique1 and Univerſall Church, hath continued from

the beginning of the world, and ſhall continue to the end; the Lord ſhall never want on earth a company of faithfull men to ſerve him; yet this Church is ever inviſible, an article of our Faith, to beleeve there is ſuch a Companie, and that we are of that number: but for a congregation of men and women to have the Word truly preached, and Sacraments adminiſtred, in publike, and by Authoritie, (which wee call a viſible Church) and is a mixt company; there hath not alway beene ſuch, neither can wee be aſſured, that there alwaies ſhall be ſuch.
               For the ſecond, viz. That they ſay the Roman
                  2 Church hath beene viſible, and enioyed ſuch a ſucceſſion, without interruption, ſince Chriſt and his Apoſtles time, profeſſing the ſame faith without change. I anſwer, there hath not been in the Church of Rome, that perpetuall ſucceſſion, they boaſt of. For to ſay nothing, whether Peter was ever Biſhop of Rome or not; or who ſucceeded him, whether Clement or Linus, which is diſputed amongſt themſelues; it is moſt cleare, that there have ſtood three Popes at once; and did the Succeſſion hold, when Pope Ioan ſtept into the Papall Chaire, and managed the affaires of the Church? Was ſhe alſo Saint Peters Succeſſor? and they lawfull Cardinals, Biſhops, and Miniſters of her ordination? Neither are his Arguments to be deſpiſed, who proveth, that now for divers yeares, ever ſince Sixtus, they have had no Popes, nor Cardinals, nor Biſhops, according to their owne Councels and Canons, &c. But grant them what ſucceſſion ſoever they challenge;

yet ſucceſſion of perſons and place, without ſucceſſion of doctrine, is nothing worth; as Ierome ſaid, Yee hold the Seat, and Faith of Peter
                  Et fidem, & ſedem. Jeron. Damaſo.; if faith be gone the ſtate is no better, then a chaire of peſtilence: Now the faith is gone, and not onely this latter Rome holdeth doctrine contrary to the Ancient Rome, within the five hundred or ſix hundred yeares after Chriſt, but now maintaineth ſtrange and novell doctrines and ſervice, which Rome knew not, when it firſt became the ſeat of Antichriſt; as the Conception of Mary; Latine Service; ſuppreſſion of Scriptures; the mariage of Prieſts; adoration of Images; ſupremacie of Pope; Communion in one kinde; Tranſubſtantiation, &c. and therefore is long ſince ceaſed to be any true viſible Church.
               Laſtly, whereas all Popiſhly affected perſons,3 doe commonly demand, Where was your Church, and who profeſſed your Religion, before Luthers times? I will anſwer plainly, that the ſimple may underſtand; the Doctrine, Faith, and Religion, which we profeſſe, is the very ſame, that all the Chriſtian Churches throughout the world profeſſed, for many hundred yeares after Chriſt and his Apoſtles; all the bleſſed Martyrs in the Primitive died for no other, but our Faith and Religion; after that the Church had peace (by meanes of godly Conſtantine) the learned Biſhops & Fathers taughtDoctor Field of the Church, lib. 3. cap. 8. no other; the people beleeved, received, profeſſed no other; (though as the myſterie of iniquitie began to worke in the Apoſtles time, ſo) the longer, the worſe, and moe errors, and corruptions; crept

into the Church, till in the end, the ſhip came to be covered with waves of hereſies & perſecutions; that the Church was not ſo glorious, eminent, viſible, & conſpicuous as before. Then came the darke time of Antichriſt for many hundred yeeres: yet even then were the Waldenſes, Bohemians, and others, who agreed with vs in the ſubſtance of Religion; and ſpake and wrote againſt the corruptions of thoſe times: but when it pleaſed God, to ſtirre vp Iohn Huſſe, Ierome of Prage, Martine Luther, and other his worthy ſervants, to open the skupperholes, the waves which ſo oppreſſed the Church, ran out; the ſhip came aloft againe; and that Faith which had ſo long beene oppreſſed, began publikely to be profeſſed, and a faire viſible Church in one place or other hath ever ſince continued, and I truſt ſhall now to the end of the world, and ſhall never be univerſally covered againe.
               Neither let any Papiſt ſuppoſe it a forfeiture ofPrevention. the cauſe, if wee cannot ſhew a preciſe and exact Catalogue, of the perſons, places, and times, by whom, where, and when, our faith was profeſſed.
               For firſt▪ howſoever in all ages ſome have oft appeared,1 and given ſingular witneſſe to our faith, (as our Martyrologe hath recorded) ſo the Church may be in ſome places, where none can ſee it; as in Elias time, there were ſeven thouſand in Iſrael, and yet hee ſaw never an one of them2 King. 19. 18.: And as wee doubt not but there are at this day in Spaine, Italy, Rome, even where Satans throne isRev. 2. 13..
               Againe, through defect of hiſtory, many things2
                  
are hid from us, and ſpecially the Church of Rome, doing her beſt to deface the memory of any thing, that might witneſſe for us and our Religion. If in theſe daies they will not ſpare man living, but wipe names out of bookes, give commandement, that none ſhall name them, but with contempt, and charge the Proteſtants with ſuch horrible opinions as wee hold not And are antiqua & convicta convitia.
                  ; As that God is the Author of ſinne, we condemne prayer▪ faſting, povertie, cha
                  
                     ••
                  itie, good workes, confeſſion; what may wee not thinke their Anceſtors have done, in formerWay to Church. page 319. &c. ages to men of our Religion? So as it may be there were many moe Martyrs, that then died for our Faith, yea moe Churches that profeſſed our Faith, then are come to our knowledge.
               Thirdly, howſoever the Church in theſe parts of3 the world, might for many yeares be oppreſſed, as the Moone in Ecclipſe, and as a ſhip covered with waves, yet even then Chriſt might have moſt glorious viſible Churches, in other parts of the world; for howſoever the Ieſuits brag exceedingly of their converſion of the Indies, where they ſay our Religion is ſcarce heard of Doct. Whites way. page 355.: Yet that learned Iewel of our Church hath long ſince ſhewed out of Veſpatius 
                  Biſhop Iewel. Defence of Apol. pag. 37., that in the Eaſt-Indies, there were many godly Biſhops, and whole Countries profeſſing the Goſpell, before the Portugals came there, or Popes name heard of. Yea, doe not they ſay; that the Apoſtle Thomas lieth buried in a City there, and that he converted them to the Faith of Chriſt? and did S. Thomas preach Popery, or no? If they ſay true, our Religion was there profeſſed before Popery.
               
                  Laſtly, give me leave (in a word) to anſwer4. them out of themſelves. Thus writeth Gregorie of Valence. When we ſay, the Church is alwaies conſpicuous, this muſt not be taken, as if we thought it might, at everie ſeaſon, be diſcerned alike eaſily: for we know, that ſometimes it is ſo toſſed with the waves of Errours, Schiſmes, and perſecutions, that it ſhall be verie hard to be knowne 
                     Annal. ſid. lib. 6. cap. 4. & comment Theol. tom. 3. p. 145. Yea, the learned Papiſts doe generally confeſſe, that in the ſuppoſed, or imagined reigue of Antichriſt, their Church ſhall be inviſible. Thus ſaith Acoſta: In the daies of Antichriſt, all light of Eccleſiaſticall Order ſhall lie buried; the Prieſts lament; the Church emptie; the Altars forſaken; and none come to the Lambs ſolemnitie Acoſta de noviſſ. tempor. lib. 2. ca. 15.. Many others, as Pererius, Suarez, Ovandus, and others, ſpeake to this purpoſe Dr. 
                        •
                     hite▪ W. p. 87.. I conclude, with that of the Rhemiſts; It is verie like that the externall ſtate of the Roman Church, and publike entercourſe of the faithfull with the ſame, ſhall ceaſe 
                     Rhem. annot. on 2. Theſſ. 2. 2. ſict. 6.. With what face then can the Romaniſts denie our Church to be the true Church of God, becauſe of the covering or obſcuritie thereof, whereas they doe acknowledge their owne, ſubject to the ſame.
               Thirdly note, that it is ſaid, the ſhip was [covered]Doctrine 3. with waves, but not broken or daſhed in peeces, or ſunke into the waves 
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     . So
                           •••••
                        tur a vi ſlu
                           •
                        lu
                           •
                        m.
                  . No, no, the waves may toſſe, and ſhake, and cover, but cannot breake, nor ſinke this Ship. Your third leſſon then is, Perſecutors may, by cruell and bloody practices, warres, murthers, and maſſacres, trouble and diſquiet the Church, leſſen the number of profeſſors, hypocrites

falling away, as the Corne which wanteth moiſture withereth, when Sunne ſhineth hot Matth. 13. 21.. They may deſtroy, for a time, the viſibilitie of the Church, and make ſuch as have publikely ſerved God in his Temple, now either ſerve God privatly in their Houſes, or Chambers, or in Wilderneſſes, Woods, Caves, Dennes, and ſolitarie places. All this they may doe: but to deſtroy the true people of God, they cannot. They may cut them off, and put hundreds, and thouſands of them to death: but as they fall by unities, they will riſe by multitudes. The blood of the Mattyrs will be the ſeed of the Church Semen in tempeſtate perſecutionis, iactum eſt. Tertul.. Nothing more dangerous to the Church than proſperitie. Herem is the Proverbe true, the Daughter devoureth the Mother 
                     Filia devoravit matrem. Tertull. Apol. cap. 45.. Religion, bringeth proſperitie; and proſperitie, deſtroieth Religion.
               Gods Church is like the Aire, the more it is fannedSimilies. with the Winds, the ſweeter it is: like Water, the more it runneth on Stones, the wholſomer: like Gold and Silver, the oftner tried in the Fire, the purer it is: like Camomill, the more troden on, the deeper it rooteth, and thicker it groweth: like the Lawrell, the more oppreſſed with waight, the further it ſpreadeth: like the Vine, the nearer cut, the more Fruit it beareth: like Spice, the more it is beaten and bruiſed, the ſweeter it ſmelleth.
               The more the Aegyptians ſought to deſtroy, theConfirmation. more the people of God multiplied Exod. 3. 2, 3.; being like the Buſh, all in flaming fire, but conſumed not. After the cruell decree of Haman, that all the Iewes
                  
ſhould be deſtroied, many of the people of the Land, became Iewes 
                  He
                        ••
                     . 8. ult.
                  .
               Never ſo glorious a Church (for zealous profeſſion)Examples. in England, as immediatly after the daies of Queene Mary, in whoſe daies, Gods people had beene as dry Stubble before the flaming Fire, and one would have thought but few left. Never more Proteſtants in France, then ſince their maſſacre: nor never more Proteſtants in the Chriſtian world, then ſince the league for to deſtroy them, and that the Ieſuites have ſo farre prevailed with Princes, to ſeeke utterly to root them out and deſtroy them. Theſe are the Iſrael of God, that may truly ſay, Often they have afflicted me from my youth up: but they have not prevailed againſt me 
                  Pſal. 129▪ 2.. Chriſt is in this Ship, and though on ſleepe, yet it is great weakneſſe in Faith, to feare the drowning of it. But all other Ships, though ſailing faire for a while, ſhall ſuffer ſhipwrack; Atheiſme, Arrianiſme, Turciſme, Iudaiſme, Anabaptiſme, Libertiniſme, Papiſme: and if there were as many Religions in the world, as there are Orders and ſorts of Friers in Rome; yet ſhall they all conſume and vaniſh: nothing ſhall continue, and abide in the waves, and outride all ſtormes and tempeſts, but the pure Religion, of the Goſpell of Chriſt. So ſaith Chriſt, in another Metaphor, Every plant which mine heavenly Father hath not planted, ſhall be rooted out 
                  Matth. 15. 13.. Such Trees may, for a time, yea a long time, take deepe root, and flouriſh, and ſpread: but the Axe is at the root, they muſt downe, and into the fire Matth. 3. 10..
               To conclude, ſeeing Poperie is no plant of GodsConcluſion.
                  
planting, but a wilding; a compoſition of novelties; a miſcellanie of hereſies; brought in by packing, and ambition of ſome; God may ſuffer it to ſpread and flouriſh, to ſaile faire for a while: but it ſhall one day be overturned with the breath of God, and ſinke into the waves. Chriſt is in the Feild with all his Armies; the Beaſt and falſe Prophet ſhall be taken. An Angel ſtanding in the Sun,Rev. 19. 17, 18, 19, 20. hath bid the gueſts to the ſupper of the great King, and told them their cheere, even the fleſh of Kings and Captaines. All Kings that make warre againſt the Goſpel, muſt to it.
               To ſhut up all in a word, know, that not one drop of water can come into the Ship, but according to Gods pleaſure: and therefore, that he ſuffereth ſuch a ſtorme and tempeſt, as the Ship even to be covered with waves, is doubtleſſe for his glorie, and the ſpirituall good of his Church. No affliction (ſaith the Apoſtle) for the preſent is joyous, but grievous. Oh Lord, how grievous and enough to draw teares from that heart which is not harder than the neather Mill-ſtone, that enemies ſhould come with Fire and Sword, to ruinate and waſte whole Countreys, and Provinces, take away the liues of ſo many, and utterly undoe moe, make many a widow, and fatherleſſe child! But ſee the good of it: by this meanes he hath made many ſmite on breſt and thighes, and ſhed many a teare, breathe out many a ſigh, powre out many a praier, which otherwiſe God had never heard of. How doth the miſerie of Gods Church, covered with waves abroad, cauſe in England, Scotland, Ireland,
                  
and other places, where by Gods mercy they enioy a calme, to be thankfull and pray. Verily, if the covering of the Ship with waves, do not wonderfully affect you and doe you good, it is not well with you; but I truſt it doth, and the Lord turne it to more good. So much for the firſt circumſtance, aggravating their danger, The ſhip was even covered with waves: The ſecond followeth.
               
                  But he was aſleepe.] Sleepe properly taken, ſignifiethPart 2. Senſe lit. the reſt of the bodie: and is a ſweet bleſſing of God, as David ſaith, He giveth his welbeloved ſleepe 
                  Pſal. 127. 2. 
                  
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     . Homer.
                  ; yet ordinarily cauſed by naturall meanes. For (as the Phyſitians ſay) the evaporations of meats from the ſtomacke, being condenſate and thickned with the cold of the braine, doe ſtop the paſſages of the ſpirits, and ſo locke vp the ſenſes from execution of their functions, and ſtay all the parts and members of the body from their labour. And this is that ſweet dew of nature Ros naturae., the repaſt of the body, and the greateſt comfort that nature hath, and without which no liuing creature can long continueQuod caret alterna requte, aurabile non eſt.. And ſleepe hath two degrees, either it is weake and remiſſe, ſuch as in ſicke perſons or aged people, who (as Salomon ſaith) awake at the chirping of the bird 
                  Eccleſ. 12. 4.; & this is called a ſlumber, Whileſt the bridegroome tarried long, they all ſlumbred, or (as the word ſignifieth) nodded with the head 
                  
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     , Nictaruni: From 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     : and that from 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     , annuo.
                  . And David placeth this in the eye-lids, I will not ſuffer mine eye-lids to ſlumber 
                  Pſal. 132. 4.; for this is only a heavineſſe in the eies, the lids falling downe, and by and by lifted up againe: it commeth not neere the heart, as the Church deſcribeth it, I ſleepe,
                  
                  but mine heart awaketh 
                  Cant. 5. 1.; and ſuch are very eaſily awakened 
                     Heb. Numab. Gr. 
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     . Lat. Dormitie, Nictatio.
                  : but there is a greater degree in ſleeping, when ſenſes are faſt bound and locked up; and this is expreſſed in Engliſh many times by addition of ſome other word, as deepe, ſound, heavie, faſt, and dead ſleepe; or (as the Scripture phraſe is) A ſleepe of God; as when David tooke away the Speare, and Cruſe of water from Sauls head, no man ſaw it, nor knew it, for a ſleepe of God was fallen upon them 1 Sam. 26. 12.. Which kinde of ſleepe the Poets call the Mortis Imago. Ovid. 
                  Image and 
                  
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     . Hom.
                   
                  brother of death. So it is ſaid, When God tooke a rib out of Adams ſide, God caſt him into a deepe ſleepe 
                  Gen. 2. 21.; and Stſerah, when Iael drove the naile of the tent into his head, is ſaid, To be faſt on ſleepe 
                  Iudg. 4. 21. Nirdam, ſoporatus.
                  : and Eutichus (whileſt Paul continued long preaching) is ſaid to fall into a deepe ſleepe 
                  Acts 20. 9. 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     : Demerſus ſomno pr
                           •
                        fundo.
                  : And Ionah went downe into the ſhip, and lay faſt on ſleepe 
                  Ionah 1. 5. & ſoporatus.
                  ; faſt indeed, when in ſtead of thoſe 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                   
                  Suadentia ſomnos, that Ovid and Virgil ſpeake of, as ſilence, &c. neither the raging nor roaring of the Sea, tumbling nor cracking of the Ship, like to be broken with euery wave, the crying of Mariners on their gods, their noiſe in caſting out their goods, could awake him. Well might the Ship-maſter ſay, What meaneſt thou ô ſleeper 
                  Ionah 1. 6.? And verily, our Saviours ſleepe at this time was very faſt, deepe, ſound, and (as I may ſay) a dead ſleepe, for that the word (which is here, & in Saint Marke uſed) ſignifieth 
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     , ex 
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     ; & 
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                      
                     bene, & 
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     , vere ſoporatus. And yet the word 
                        〈◊〉
                      
                     S Lube, uſeth, 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                      p
                        •
                     e
                        •
                     
                     ſeth ſome 
                        ••
                     
                     vines, as more emphaticall, 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     , amplius quiddam ſignificat, quam 
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     . Bez. in Luc.
                  ; His ſenſes were well and faſt bound; he was faſt aſleepe. But what? Had hee any 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                   or Soporiferum? Where was he? or what meanes of ſleepe did he uſe? Was he betaken

into ſome Cabin, or with Ionah into the Ship, and there laid upon ſome bed of Downe? No, indeed, onely Saint Marke telleth us, Hee was in the hinder part of the Ship aſleepe on a pillow
                  Marke 4. 38.; which yet (if we beleeve good Authors) was but a woodden pillow Cervical ligneū in Euthym. Theophilact.: and indeed it is moſt true of the Apoſtle, He that was rich, for our ſakes became poore 
                  2 Cor. 8. 9. Luke 2. 7.: poore in his birth, borne in a ſtable; poore in purſe, borrowing mony of a Fiſh to pay his tribute Matth. 17. ult.
                  ; poore in his greateſt triumph and ſolemnitie, riding on an Aſſe into Ieruſalem, Matt. 21. poore in apparell, wearing a Seameleſſe coatIohn 19. 23.; poore in diet, feeding on Barley bread Iohn 6 9.; poore in lodging, not having where to reſt his head Matth. 8. 20.; poore in his Diſciples, not Princes and Philoſophers, but Fiſher-men and Tole-gatherers, of the pooreſt of the people, Matthew 4. 18. poore in death, dying on a Croſſe Luc. 23. 33.; poore in his buriall, being laid in another mans toombe, Ioh. 19. 41. And all becauſe his kingdome was not of this world, Ioh. 18. 36. Yet alwaies contented and thankfull; and thereby teaching all his Diſciples ſo to bee with what it pleaſeth God to ſend. But alas, how proud are his Diſciples? Proud in their houſes, diet, apparell, lodging, &c. becauſe they ſet their hearts on theſe things, as if their kingdome were of this world. But probable it was, he was wearie with exerciſe of his Miniſtery amongſt the multitude on the ſhore, or had ſpent ſome night before in praier, and therefore now fell ſo faſt on ſleepe. But though theſe might be naturall meanes, they were but ſubordinate to his good pleaſure: for though his ſleepe was ſound, and not

fained; yet was it ſo, by Divine providence and diſpenſation, that the Faith of his Diſciples might be the more throughly tried. For even this did not a little adde to their feare, that in this dangerous tempeſt, hee was ſo faſt aſleepe. Thus much be ſaid for the opening of the Literall and Hiſtoricall ſenſe. From whence, firſt, according to the ſenſe Literall, we learne,
               That Chriſt is true man. (Which ſome ancientDoct. lit. Heretikes, as Manichees and Marcionites denied;) But hee, not onely tooke upon him the true nature and ſubſtance of our ſoules and bodies, with the Eſſentiall properties of both; as, in Soule, Will, Underſtanding; in Bodie, dimenſions: but Merae privationis, non pravae diſpoſitions. alſo the infirmities of both; as ignorance of ſome things, feare, ſorrow, & weariſomnes of body, hunger, thirſt, ſpitting on ground, weeping, ſleeping, paine, ache, ſoreneſſe, &c. Even like unto us his brethren in all things except ſin 
                     Heb 4. penult Naturales, & indetractabiles paſſiones. Aquin.. Which doctrine yet muſt be underſtood and qualified with a double caution: Firſt, That infirmities of ſoule are either unblameable, or ſinfull; Hee tooke the firſt onely, and not the ſecond
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     . Damaſc. Non repugnantes perfectioni ſcientiae & gratiae. Aquin. Sum. part. 3. queſt. 14, &c.
                  : Secondly, That infirmities of body are of two ſorts, viz. either generall, which accompany the nature of man, and may be found in everie true man, as hunger Matth. 4. 2., thirſt Iohn 
                        •
                     9. 28., ſleeping Matth. 8. 24., weariſomneſſe Iohn 4. 6.; to be ſicke or ſore, if beaten, &c. Or elſe ſuch as are perſonall and particular, ariſing from ſome priuate naturall cauſes, or laid on ſome, as the particular judgements of God; As to be borne blinde, deafe, dumbe, lame, crooked, deformed, or to be ſicke of a burning fever,

conſumption, dropſie, pluriſie. Now Chriſt tooke but ſuch as are generall, and doe accompany humane nature 
                     Quae pertinent ad communem. 
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     . Zanch. de incarnat. lib. 2. fol. 116., not the particular; for then hee could not haue beene our Redeemer, no, nor have liued one houre; but hee need not take any perſonall infirmities, no more than hee did any mans perſon.
               And verily, here is a matter of moſt ſweet comfortVſe. to the children of God, that wee have not a ſtranger to our nature, for our Redeemer; but (as Iob calleth him) a Goel, a Kinſman: a Shiliah, as Iacob ſaith, one that hath beene wrapped in the Secundine or Tunicle, borne after the manner of men; yea that hath had experience of our infirmities, &c. This comfort the Apoſtle laieth downe in theſe words, Hee tooke not on him the nature of Angels, but the ſeed of Abraham; yea in all things it behooved him to be made like unto his brethren, that hee might be a mercifull and faithfull high Prieſt in things pertaining to God; for in that hee hath ſuffered and beene tempted, he is able to ſuccour them that are tempted 
                  Heb. 2. ult.
                  . And againe, We haue not a high Prieſt, which cannot be touched with the feeling of our infirmities, but was in all points tempted as wee are, yet without ſinne: Let us therefore come boldly unto the throne of grace, that we may obtaine mercy, and finde grace to helpe in time of need 
                  Heb. 4. ult.
                  . Who can fully expreſſe the ſweetneſſe of this comfort? that wee have ſuch a Saviour to flie unto in all our wants and neceſſities, as was true man; not ſenſleſſe, as yron and ſteele, but ſenſible of miſeries, as having true fleſh and bloud; ſuch an one as hath had experience of

Satans temptations, of povertie, hunger, thirſt, weariſomeneſſe, ſlander, buffetting, cruell paine, death, diſtreſſe, &c. 
                     Exſenſu miſeriarum naſcitur cōmiſeratio. Non ignaramali miſeris ſu
                           •
                        
                        currere diſ
                           •
                        o. Dido Virg. Aeie
                           •
                        d. 2..
               How comfortable, I ſay againe, that we call on one, that had himſelfe experience of theſe things!Admiration. Example. If a man be ſicke of any diſeaſe, he is much comſorted that his Phyſitian hath beene ſicke of the very ſame: for he aſſureth himſelfe, he will both have the more care and compaſſion on him, and knoweth beſt how to goe about the cure. Nay more, wee call on ſuch an one, as is not only willing and able to heare and helpe, but hath an unconceiveable ſimpathie and fellow-feeling of all the miſeries of his children: he is even pinched as much with their povertie, want, and diſtreſſe, as themſelves. Patient Iob in all his miſery, felt nothing which Chriſt felt not with him; neither did Lazarus ſuffer any thing wherein Chriſt did not partake with him. So long as the myſticall Union holdeth (which by no means can be diſſolved) Chriſt the head muſt needs ſuffer with the members of his bodie. He that toucheth the faithfull, toucheth the apple of his eye 
                  Zach. 2. 8.. And he called to Saul from heaven, Saul, Saul, why perſecuteſt thou me 
                  Acts 9. 3.? He thought he had but to do with the poore abject & deſpiſed people of Damaſcus, & ſuch as had no man on earth, of any ſort, once to ſpeake for them, but were eſteemed as the off-ſcouring of the world; and whom he thought he might have bound, and impriſoned, and have killed, and ſlaine, without controulement; yea have done God ſervice, and purchaſed much favour and preferment: But behold, beyond his expectation, there

is a glorious Lord calleth unto him out of heaven, whoſe voice was of ſuch power and Majeſtie, that it caſt him upon the ground, and he would know the Reaſon why he perſecuted him.
               Oh that men and women had grace to know,Vſe. beleeve, and conſider that all the reproaches, ſlanders, and hurts, done to his people, (how ſimple ſoever in the world) are done to Chriſt; and though he ſleepe for a while, and ſeeme utterly to neglect them, yet will he, at the day of Iudgement, ſet all before them, and account all the good, or evill, done to the poore Saints, as done to himſelfe, and will accordingly reward or puniſh them Matth. 25. 34..
               In the mean time, let al the people of God reioice,Concluſion. that their Saviour doth but ſleepe, that they have ſuch an high Prieſt, as hath had experience of their infirmities, and therefore cannot but have compaſſion on them. And thus much bespoken of the Letter.
               As a man that is on ſleepe, heareth no cries norSenſe myſtic. complaints, regardeth not the wrongs and injuries done to him or his; but is altogether ſenſeleſſe of ſuch evill, as being awake he would not endure, but either reſtraine, or revenge: ſo when God maketh as though he heard not the prayers and complaints of his people; ſuffereth his enemies to reproach and blaſpheme his name, and at their luſt, to make havocke of his Church, and to deſtroy Religion, his Temples, and houſes, where he was wont to be worſhipped: then the Scriptures ſpeake of God, after the manner of men, that he is aſleepe. The ſleep of Chriſt then, in this ſtorme, doth lively repreſent

Gods ſeeming to neglect his Church in their great troubles, and letting the enemie even doe what he luſt. Which patience or ſleeping hath ſeverall effects; in the godly, and the wicked: firſt, it cauſeth the godly exceedingly to mourne, and complaine; yea & through Satans malice, and their weakneſſe, to feare, and much adoe to keepe from deſpaire. So the people of God being extreamely afflicted, and brought to great miſerie, under the perſecution of Antiochus, doe thus complaine; Oh Lord, thou goeſt not forth with our armies, thou makeſt us turne our backes upon our enemies: they that hate us ſpoile our goods; thou haſt given us like ſheepe appointed for meat, and ſcattered us amongst the Heathen: thou ſelleſt thy people for nought, and takeſt no mony for them: thou makeſt us a ſcorne, and deriſion, a by-word, a reproach, and ſhaking of heads. And then they pray in this forme; Awake, why ſleepeſt thou, O Lord, ariſe, and caſt us not off for ever, wherefore hideſt thou thy face, and forgetteſt our affliction, and our oppreſſion 
                  Pſal. 44. 23, &c.? And David thus for himſelfe; Ariſe, O Lord, in thine anger, lift up thy ſelfe, becauſe of the rage of mine enemies, awake for me to judgement which thou haſt commanded, oh let the wickedneſſe of the wicked come to an end, but guide thou the juſt, Pſal. 7. 6. Yea, as Chriſt his ſleepe did moſt trouble the Diſciples, (they had never been ſo fearefull in the ſtorme, nor ſo earneſtly called upon him, if he had been awake) ſo there is nothing ſo troubleth Gods people, in their generall and particular diſtreſſes, as that God ſeemeth not to regard them: this, oh this, hath more diſquieted them, than any thing elſe, and

cauſed moſt bitter complaints and expoſtulations; as, Why ſtandeſt thou ſo farre off, and hideſt thy ſelfe, in this time of affliction, when the wicked in his pride doth perſecute the poore 
                  Pſal. 10. 1. &c.? And againe, How long wilt thou forget me, O Lord? for ever? how long wilt thou hide thy face from me? how long ſhall I take counſell in my ſoule, and be ſo ſore vexed? how long ſhall mine enemie be exalted over me 
                  Pſal. 13. 1.? And againe, Will the Lord abſent himſelfe for ever? is his mercy cleane gone, and will he ſhut up his loving kindneſſe in diſpleaſure 
                  Pſal. 77. 9.? By which, (in ſtead of many places which might be alledged for this purpoſe) it is moſt evident, that Gods children have never ſuch conflicts, and ſuch wreſtling betwixt the fleſh and ſpirit, as when either the Church of God, or themſelves are in diſtreſſe, and God ſeemeth not to regard them, but to have caſt off all care of them, oh this breedeth complaints and roaring indeed.
               And as it begetteth great feare, and perturbation,2. Encouragement to the wicked. yea almoſt deſpaire, and deniall of Gods providence, as David ſaid of himſelfe; My feet were almoſt gone, my ſteps had well-nigh ſlipt: I was ſo grieved at the fooliſh, and to ſee the wicked in proſperity 
                  Pſal. 73. 2, 3.: So doth it wonderfully encourage the enemies of Gods people, and make them proud and inſolent: Then ſay they, Come, let us make havocke of them altogether, and let us cut them off from being a Nation, that the name of Iſrael may be no more in remembrance: let us take to our ſelves the houſes of God in poſſeſſion 
                  Pſal. 83. 4. 12.: And ſay God hath for ſaken them, perſecute them, and take them, there is none to deliver them 
                  Pſal. 79. 11.: Downe with Ieruſalem, downe with it even to the ground 
                  Pſal. 137. 7..

Oh how evill and wicked men beſtirre themſelves, when they perceive Chriſt to be aſleepe; then the ſea rageth indeed.
               Oh great is the ſtorme, which is now upon theApplication. ſea, and no ſmall trouble it is, to ſuch as are awake, to ſee men and women every where aſleepe in ſecuritie; ſpecially to ſee thoſe ſo faſt aſleepe, who ſhould waken others: Simon ſleepeſt thou 
                  Marke 14. 37. Simon dormis?
                  ? What, Ionah aſleepe in a ſtorme? What meaneſt thou O ſleeper 
                  Ionah 1. 6.? But that which moſt troubleth (if ever) now Chriſt is aſleep, notwithſtanding that the ſhip of his Church is in ſuch great perill and jeopardie; which as it (above all things) moſt perplexeth Gods children, and cauſeth much godly ſorrow and complaining; ſo doth it (above all things) animate & encourage the bloudy enemies of his people, to inſult, threaten, yea and triumph, as if all were now in their hands, to diſpoſe as they luſt, and Gods people ſhall now for ever be ſwallowed up quick. Whither ſhall I lead you, to ſweeten your ſoules in this gall of bitterneſſe? nay whither can I lead you in all the Scriptures to a place of greater comfort, to Gods people, or of feare, to all perſecuting enemies, then to this that Gods providence offreth to our conſideration? Oh what meat commeth out of this eater? what honie out of this ſtrong one? what joy from this occaſion of feare? how doth it abound with comforts? and ſpecially theſe three: viz.
               
               Firſt note, that it is ſaid, He was aſleepe: it is not1. Obſerv. 
                        •
                      Comfort. ſaid, He was dead: 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , he that is dead, can by no meanes be awakned; hee that

ſleepeth may; which comfort affordeth three branches.
               1. The great ſecuritie of Chriſt and his Church,I. Securitie.
                   in greateſt ſtormes and tempeſts. A man that is in danger, by water or land, will not ſleepe. The Shipmaſter wondred, that, in ſuch a ſtorme, Ionah would or could ſleepe; What meaneſt thou, O ſleeper 
                  Ionah 1. 6.? How did David reprove Abner for ſleeping, when Abiſhai went and tooke the ſpeare and cruſe from Sauls head 1 Sam. 26. 12.. Our Saviour ſaith, If the goodman of the houſe knew what houre the theefe would come, he would watch, and not ſuffer his houſe to be broken up 
                  Matth. 24. 43.. Our Saviour knew of this Tempeſt before; it roſe by his appointment: if there had beene any danger, would he have ſlept? No, no, he laugheth the waves and winds to ſcorne, and when the ſea moſt rageth and threatneth deſtruction, he layeth him downe to reſt, falleth on ſleepe, and is angrie with his Diſciples, for ſo fearefully awakening of him: he ſleepeth ſoundly, as it were contemning the danger Dormit ſecurus, contemnit. Aret. in Matth..
               Well, if Satan could not drowne the ſhip whenVſe. Chriſt was aſleepe; can he drowne it, now hee is awake? No, no, Caeſar bade the Mariner in a ſtorme be of good comfort, he carried Caeſar 
                  Confide nauta, nam Caeſ
                        •
                     r
                        •
                     m vehis.: Let theExhortation. Church of God be of good comfort, for Chriſt is in it. Oh let the people of God reſt upon their ſecuritie, and ſay, Gather your ſelves▪ O yee people, and yee ſhall be broken in pee
                        •
                     es; gird your ſelves, and yee ſhall be broken in peeces; take counſell together, and it ſhall come to nought; ſpeake the word, and it ſhall not ſtand, for God is with us 
                  Eſay 8. 9.: And againe, The Lord is
                  
                  my light and my ſalvation, whom then ſhall I feare? The Lord is the ſtrength of my life, of whom ſhall I be afraid? Though an hoaſt ſhould encampe againſt me, my heart ſhall not feare 
                  Pſal. 27. 1.. And againe, God is our refuge and ſtrength, a very preſent helpe in trouble, therefore will not we feare, though the earth be removed, and though the mountaines be carried into the midſt of the ſea, though the waters roare and be troubled, and the mountaines ſhake with the ſwelling thereof 
                  Pſal. 46. 1.. Oh the boldneſſe and ſecuritie of the faithfull, that have Chriſt, though he be aſleepe.
               Secondly, though hee be on ſleepe, he taketh2. Preciſe obſervation. good notice of the plots and projects of enemies; and of all the troubles and perſecutions of his Church and people. The Church ſaid, ſhe was aſleep, but her heart was awake 
                  Cant. 5. 1.: Chriſt in his Man-hood was aſleepe, but his God head was awake; He that keepeth Iſrael, doth neither ſlumber nor ſleepe 
                  Pſal. 121. 4.. David ſaith, His eyes behold, and his eye-lids trie the children of men 
                  Pſal. 11. 4.. Saint Auguſtine ſaith, there is apertio & opertio, oculorum: God ſeeth with open eye, when he diſcovereth a thing at firſt; but when God ſuffereth the wicked to goe on, and win
                     •
                  keth at their waies, taking leaſure and reſpite, before he powre any judgement upon them, then hee ſeemeth to ſleepe; yet even then his eye-lids trie the children of men: Oh hee is never more intent, than when hee ſeemeth to ſleepe.
               Thirdly, in his good time he will awake and deliver3. Seaſonable deliverance. his, and puniſh ſuch as have abuſed his patience. Noah was aſleepe, but he awaked and curſed Cham, who abuſed him in his ſleepe, Gen. 9. 24. Salomon
                  
ſaith, He doth all things in number, weight and meaſure; much more doth he number, weigh and meaſure the tribulations of his childrē. To the Angell of the Church of Smyrnah he wrote, ſaying, I know thy tribulation and povertie. Behold the Devill ſhal caſt ſome of you into priſon, that ye may be tried, and yee ſhall have tribulation ten daies: be faithfull to the death, and I will give thee the crowne of life 
                  Rev. 29, 10.. Loe, how he telleth before it come, how farre tribulation ſhall extend, and how long it ſhall laſt. Note, 1. The author, [the Devill:] 2. Perſons, [ſome of them:] 3. Extent, [caſt into priſon:] 4. Time, [but for ten daies.] At another time we reade, that the Diſciples were in a great ſtorme upon the ſea, and Chriſt was not with them; but the Text ſaith, Chriſt ſaw them toiling in rowing 
                  Marke 6. 48.; (yea even tormented, as Dives was in hell, for it is the ſame word; 
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     . Luk. 16. 23.) and he commeth unto them, and delivereth them out of all their feare: but it is long firſt; even the fourth watch of the night: he ſuffered them to toile all the night, and came not till the dawning of the day; teaching us, in tribulations and perſecutions to be patient, and to plie our oares, ſtill waiting, and being aſſured, in the appointed time, hee will awake, and turne all into a calme; he hath ever done ſo, and he ever will doe ſo, &c. So much for the comforts, that we gather from this firſt thing, that Chriſt is ſaid to ſleepe.
               Secondly, let us obſerve the place, where the Evangeliſt2. Place. ſaith, He ſlept, viz. in the hinder part of the ſhip Marke 4. 38. 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     , in p
                           •
                        ppi.
                  ; or in the ſterne, which is the place for the Pilot, or Maſter, the Navarchos, or Nauclerus;
                  
the Steereman, or Governour, who hath the care to governe the ſhip, that in ſailing it runne not on rocks or ſhelfs.
               Which obſervation yeeldeth us a great comfort,2. Comfort. That Chriſt is our Pilot & Governour: Then need not the Paſſengers feare any danger. How ſoever it is full of danger on the Sea, for the Stereman to ſleepe in places of danger; yet no danger for Chriſt to ſleepe, for that he foreſeeth all danger. Therefore all care away, ſeeing he is at the Helme, and our Stereſman; though it pleaſe him ſometime to ſleepe.
               The Papiſts would rob the Church of this comfort, who would not have Chriſt ſleeping or waking to be in the Sterne, but place the Pope there, put the Rudder in his hand Clavus & gubernaculum., and inveſt him with abſolute authoritie to governe the ſhip; every one muſt plie their tacklings according to his whiſtle: and though he runne them all upon the rocke, yet hath he that unlimited and tranſcendent authoritie, that no man may once queſtion him, or ſay, why doeſt thou thus? Oh dangerous, to paſſe in that Veſſell, wherein ſuch ignorant and wicked Atheiſts, are made ſole Governours and Commanders. But happy that Church, wherein Chriſt is in the Sterne, and hath the governing of the Helme, continually viewing of the Compaſſe, and ſounding, ſo as it is not poſſible for that ſhip to miſcarry.
               Thirdly, how is he diſpoſed there? Hath hee3. Diſpoſition there a bed of downe whereon to reſt? No, the Euangeliſt ſaith, he did but lay his head on a pillow;

                  Super cervical.; yea and an hard one too (as ſome conceive) a woodden pillow, little better than that of Iacobs, which was of ſtone Gen. 28. 11..
               A ſweet comfort alſo to conſider, how3. Comfort. ready Chriſt is to helpe his in diſtreſſe. The Church being called on, anſwered, I have put off my coat, how ſhall I put it on 
                  Cant. 5. 3.? Loe what a paine it is to riſe out of the warme bed, and put on cloathes. Chriſt hath not put off his ſeameleſſe coat, and is in his warme bed, that hee had rather all ſhould be much endangered, if not caſt away, rather than hee would ariſe, and dreſſe himſelfe. No, no, hee hath but leaned his head on an hard pillow, hee is ready to helpe in any need, as David ſaith, Hee is a preſent helpe in trouble 
                  Pſal. 46. 
                        •
                     .. Hee appeared unto Iohn, walking in the midſt of the ſeven golden Candleſticks 
                  Rev. 1. 13., as ready to helpe any member of the Church, that ſtandeth in need of him. And thus much bee ſaid of the firſt generall part in their ſailing, viz. their great danger or jeopardie. Now followeth to ſpeake of their deliverance.
            
            
               
               
                  VERSE 25.
                  And his diſciples came to him, and awoke him, ſaying, Maſter, ſave us, we periſh.
               
               COncerning deliverance out of this theirDiviſion. great feare, and danger, (the ſecond part in the ſtorie of their ſailing) two things are to be conſidered, viz. firſt, the procurement: and ſecondly, the performance of it.
               How deliverance was procured, the Euangeliſt expreſſeth in this 25 verſe, viz. when they were in greateſt danger, and extremeſt perill, as you have heard, the diſciples goe to Chriſt, give themſelves to prayer, and thereby procure it: whereof I purpoſe firſt to ſpeake generally, and then particularly.Method.
               
               In generall, from this example we learne, (according1. Gen. doct. lit. to the letter thereof) where-ever we become, what-ever we goe about, to exerciſe our ſelves in prayer. No dutie more often commanded, more highly commended, or abundantly rewarded. Wherefore David was given to prayer Pſal. 69. 13.. Invocation of the name of God, is made in the Scriptures, the true note, or marke of a Chriſtian. When Saul had got letters from the High Prieſts to perſecute the Church, it is ſaid by S. Luke; He received authoritie, to binde all that call on the name of God 
                  Acts 9. 14.. S. Paul, writing to the Church of Corinth,
                  
and deſcribing the ſaithfull, he calleth them Saints, and ſuch as call on the name of the Lord Ieſus 
                  1 Cor. 1. 2.. On the other ſide, the Prophet David noteth out the Atheiſt, that ſaith in his heart there is no God, by this marke, that ſuch an one calleth not on the Lord 
                  Pſal. 14. 4..
               By which it appeareth, that of many who deſireApplication. to beare, and be knowne by the name of Chriſtians, yet there are indeed very few ſound and true Chriſtians. The world is full of Atheiſts, very poore in heavenly graces, becauſe they have not the ſpirit of invocation, or ſupplication Zach. 12. 10., whereby to aske what they want 
                  Matth. 7. 7.. Oh it is the happineſſe of Chriſtians, that they may in all places 
                  1 Tim. 2. 8., and at all times 
                  1 Theſſ. 5. 17., in Gods houſes and their owne; by ſea or land; within doores, or without; in field, or bed; on mountaines, or in dungeons; at midnight, as well as at mid-day, lift up their hearts and hands 
                  1 Tim. 2. 8., and call on God.
               Oh, let us be aſhamed of our negligence herein,Vſe. both in Gods houſe, with the aſſembly of Saints, and in our owne; and let us more inure our ſelves herewith; let it be the firſt thing we doe when we awake, the laſt thing we doe when we lie downe to ſleepe; yea throughout the day, whether we eat or drinke, labour or reſt, worke or play, let our hearts be ever diſpoſed to prayer, and on every occaſion lifted up; if not with words, yet with devout ſighes, and vehement deſires; if no larger, yet in ſuch ſhort wiſhes, as here and elſewhere, Lord ſave us, God be mercifull, Chriſt bleſſe and proſper, Lord increaſe our faith. As Moſes by familiar

talking with God, had his face to ſhine 
                  Exod. 34. 29.: ſo aſſuredly, he cannot but be a good man, and have a ſhining ſoule and life too, that talketh much with God, and prayeth continually.
               Secondly, hence let us learne, that times of2. Gen. doct. neceſſitie, and great diſtreſſe, are both fitteſt for prayer, and great furtherers thereof. Yea this is a principall end, that God reſpecteth in ſending afflictions and perplexities, viz. to provoke the praiers of his people, wherein he delighteth: So ſaith the Lord, (when his people grew wanton, and ran after their lovers) I wil go, & returne to my place, til they acknowledge their offence, and ſeek my face; in their affliction, they will ſeeke me early 
                  Oſe. 5. ul
                        •
                     .. Let Iacob heare, that his fierce brother Eſau cōmeth out againſt him, & 400 men with him, threatning to ſmite him, & the mother with the children, & then he will pray, yea and wreſtle with God, and never let him goe▪ till he bleſſe him 
                  Gen. 32. 6, 9, 26.. Let the people of God be in danger at the Red Sea banke to be all deſtroyed, and then Moſes will cry 
                  Exod. 14. 15.
                  ▪ Let Annah be barren, and Peninnah upbraid her, and then ſhee will up to the Temple, pray, weepe, and powre out her ſoule before the Lord 1 Sam. 1. 6, 15.. Let Ieruſalem be beſieged, and Rabſhekah raile, and blaſpheme, and then Ezekiah will up to the Temple, and ſpread the blaſphemous letter before the Lord 
                  2 King. 19. 14.: yea let him receive a meſſage from the Lord, that he ſhall die, and not live, and then he will turne his face to the wall, and pray, and weepe ſore 
                  Eſay 38. 3.. Let a great Hoſt of Moab, Ammon, and Mount Seir come againſt Iudah, that they know not what to doe, and then King Iehoſhaphat will proclaime

a faſt, and pray, O Lord God, we know not what to doe, but our eyes are unto thee 
                  2 Cron. 20. 12.. Let David come into extreme miſeries, and out of the deeps he will cry unto God 
                  Pſal. 130. 1.. Few will when they goe to Sea pray with S. Paul 
                  Acts 21. 5.; (we reade not that theſe diſciples did) but let there ariſe a ſtorme, which mounteth up to heaven, and letteth them goe downe againe to the depths, that their ſoule melteth becauſe of the trouble, and they are even at their wits end, and then they will cry to the Lord in their trouble 
                  Pſal. 107. 28.. Let the ſhip be even covered with waves, and then the diſciples will goe to their Maſter Hic votis numen adorat, Brachiaque ad coelum, quod non videt, irrita tollens, Poſcit opem. Ovid. Diſcat navigare, qui neſcit erare.: Yea let Ionah be caſt into the Sea, and be ſwallowed of a Whale, and then he will cry to the Lord 
                  Ionah 2. 1.. A ſtrange thing, ſaith one, that he that ſlept in the ſhip, ſhould be awake in the Whales belly; and he that fled from God on dry land, ſhould flie to God in the bottome of the ſea Mira res, vigilat in Ceto, qui ſtertebat in navi..
               Oh when men have all things according to theirApplication. hearts deſire, they ſeeke not the Lord. Proſperitie dulleth devotion in the beſt, as David found by experience; In my proſperitie I ſaid, I ſhall never be moved, but thou hiddeſt thy face, and I was troubled; then I cried to the Lord, and made ſupplication to my God 
                  Pſ. 30. 6, 7, 8.. Oh to correct this dulneſſe and negligence it is, that God many times taketh away good things from his people, and ſendeth many evils, both generall to the Church and Common-wealth, as famine, peſtilence, ſword; and particular on our families and perſons, as ſickneſſe, ache, paine, death of friends, loſſes, and croſſes, and all becauſe (as we ſay) God would be better acquainted with us,

and ſee us at his Court; for in miſerie he knoweth he ſhall heare of us; but elſe let us alone, and we let him alone.
               So much (in ſtead of much more) be ſaid from the letter and hiſtorie. Now let us proceed to the myſterie.
               You have heard that this ſtorme ſo endangeringMyſterie. Doct. myſtic. this ſhip, doth repreſent perſecutions and troubles, which in this world, doe infeſt the people of God. As then the diſciples in this dangerous tempeſt went to Chriſt, and by prayer to him, procured a calme: ſo when the Church of God is perſecuted, and in danger, all the diſciples of Chriſt muſt goe to him, by prayer, for it. So doth David injoyne; Pray for the peace of Ieruſalem 
                  Pſal. 122. 6.. Luther calleth prayers, the Chriſtians Canons 
                  Orationes ſunt inſtrumenta bellica, & bombardae Chriſtianorum. Luth. loc. com. claſſ. 3.: and ſurely being well charged with faith and repentance, and fired with zeale and fervencie of ſpirit, they ſhoot farre, and pierce deepe; yea it pierceth heaven, and overcommeth enemies on earth Penetrat coelu
                        •
                      & hoſtes in terra vinc
                        •
                     t fidelis oratio. Origen..
               As then Kings and Princes, when enemies approach,Vſe. prepare their weapons, & armour, ſwords, and ſpeares: When Chriſtians heare of warres, and rumours of wars, they muſt prepare themſelves to prayer, muſter their petitions, and ſet them in battellHeb. verbum militare. Lorin. ut Iob 6. 4. array, as David ſaith, Pſal. 5. 3. and not truſt too much in earthly meanes, as David ſaith, Some truſt in horſes, and ſome in chariots, but we will truſt in the name of the Lord 
                  Pſal. 20. 7.. And againe, An horſe is counted but a vaine thing to ſave a man, neither is any mighty man delivered by his much ſtrength 
                  Pſal. 33. 17.: and I will not truſt in my bowe, it is not my ſword that can ſave me,
                  
                  but in God we boaſt all the day long 
                  Pſal. 44. 7.. The horſe is prepared for the day of battell, but ſalvation is from the Lord 
                  Prov. 21. ult.. By all which, and many other places of Scripture, which might be alledged to this purpoſe, the uſe of meanes is not condemned, but that they be not truſted in, but be ſeconded with true and faithfull prayer. David neglected not the meanes, yet purpoſely penned a forme of prayer for the people to uſe, when he went forth to battell: The Lord heare thee in the day of trouble, the name of the God of Iacob defend thee, ſend thee helpe from his Sanctuary, and ſtrengthen thee out of Sion 
                  Pſal. 20. 1, 2.. Moſes neglected not the meanes, when he ſent forth Ioſhuah with his Armies to fight with Amalek, but himſelfe went up to the top of the mountaine to pray, and did more there with his prayer, than all they with ſword and ſpeare. For when he held up his hands, Iſrael prevailed; when he let them fall, Amalek prevailed 
                  Exod. 17. 11.. King Aſa neglected not the means, when there came up an huge Armie of Ethiopians, even ten hundred thouſands and three hundred Chariots; He went out againſt them, and ſet the battell in array, and Aſa cried to the Lord, and the Lord heard his prayer, and diſcomfited them 
                  2 Cro. 14. 9, 10.. Yea the greateſt and moſt glorious deliverances and victories, that ever the Church received from enemies, were meerely obtained by prayer without a blow given Plus prae
                        •
                     ando, quàm prae
                        ••
                     ando.. Moſes and the children of Iſrael crying to the Lord in their diſtreſſe at the Red Sea, God hardned Pharaohs heart to purſue them into the Red Sea, where he and all his hoſts were drowned Exod. 14. 23.. Gedeon with three hundred men, only with

trumpets and lamps in pitchers, but ſounding their trumpets, breaking their pitchers, and crying, The ſword of the Lord and of Gedeon, not only the huge Armie of the Midianites ran, and cried, and fled, but every mans ſword was againſt his fellow, and they ſlew one another Iudg. 7. 21.. When Samariah was in exceeding diſtreſſe by ſiege, the Lord made the hoaſt of the Syrians to heare a noiſe of a great hoaſt, in the feare whereof they aroſe, and fled in the twilight, and left their tents, and horſes, and all the Campe as it was, and fled for their lives 2 Kings 7. 6.. When Ieruſalem was beſieged, at the prayers of Eſay and Ezekiah, an Angell was ſent, who deſtroyed in one night an hundred foureſcore and five thouſand in the campe of the Aſsirians 
                  2 Kings 19. 35.. When ſuch a great Armie came up againſt Iehoſhaphat, he commanded faſting and prayer, and his forme of praier is recorded, whereby they obtained, that their enemies deſtroyed one another 2 Cron. 20. 23..
               Oh the ſame God liveth ſtill, and is now as ableApplication. and willing to helpe his people as ever: but his people neglect him, goe not unto him, but truſt in their owne meanes, want the ſpirit of ſupplication; like Ionah, they are on ſleepe in this great ſtorme; either pray not at all, or very coldly. Where is that diſciple, that feelingly and fervently, zealouſly and faithfully, publikely and privately, at the leaſt thrice a day, with Daniel, is on knee for Ieruſalem, helping devotion with abſtinence and faſting, that ſo they may cry mightily, and wreſtle ſtrongly, reſolving as Iacob, never to let the Lord goe; and with the woman of Canaan, to take no nay or deniall,

but they will awake him, he ſhall never be rid of them. Alas, how are theſe things out of uſe? Where is watching, faſting, ſtriving in prayer? How little are many moved (being out of the ſtorme, and preſent danger themſelves) whether others doe ſinke or ſwim? but give themſelves to riot and luxurie, to feaſting and playing.
               Wherefore God hath ſent me to you againe,Vſe. as this Scripture commeth not to my hand by chance, ſo neither this paſſage, wherewith to renue in his name, the charge I have often already given. There is a great ſtorme, and if ever you deſire to ſee a calme, away (with his diſciples here) to Chriſt: What meane yee, oh ſleepers, ariſe and call on him, and plie him with your continuall prayers; he looketh for more earneſtneſſe than he hath yet found: Oh pray, pray, pray, for the peace of Ieruſalem. Reſolve with David, One thing I have deſired of the Lord, and that will I ſeeke after; 
                  Pſal. 27. 4. 
                  that the Lord will awake, and have mercy on Sion. So much be ſaid of this verſe in generall: Now let us view the words more particularly.
               Wherein (not tying my ſelfe to tread preciſelySub-diviſion. in the ſteps of the former Analyſis, though perhaps more Logicall and exact) for more plainneſſe of teaching, I obſerve in this verſe theſe foure things, viz. Firſt, who procured this calme (the Diſciples:) Secondly, of whom did they procure it, of Chriſt; (They came to him.) Thirdly, the effect of their comming to him; (They awoke him.) Laſtly, how did they awaken him, by prayer, the forme which they uſed, being here expreſſed,

                  (Lord, ſave us, we periſh.) Of which in order, for their Senſe, Doctrines, and Uſes.
               
                  And his diſciples] 
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     . Diſcipuli cjus.
                   The word hath beene ſufficiently1. Part. opened from the firſt verſe of this ſtorie, (his diſciples followed him.) I will not now rehearſe any thing was there ſaid, but come to raiſe the Doctrines from this place.
               
                  His diſciples.] Here firſt we learne, whoſe praiers1 Obſerv. 1. Doct. are ſo powerfull with God, for themſelves, and others; not the prayers of ſtrangers, forreiners, and enemies, but of diſciples, friends, and favourites, that follow him: The Lord heareth the prayers of
                  Cōfirmation. 
                  the righteous, and his eares are open to their cries 
                  u: He is nigh to ſuch as call on him faithfully: He will fulfill the deſires of ſuch as feare him; he will heare their cry, and will ſave them, Pſal. 145. 18. It is the prayer of a righteous man is ſo availeable, Iam. 5. 16. If any man be a worſhipper of God, and doe his will, him God heareth 
                  Iohn 9. 31.. Wherefore in the great calamitie and diſtreſſe of the Church, the Prophet calleth to the meeke of the earth, to ſeeke the Lord 
                  Zeph. 2. 3.. It was Abraham the friend of God 
                  Iam. 2. 23., that prevailed ſo much with his prayer for the Sodomites 
                  Gen. 18 penult.. It was his faithfull ſervant Moſes 
                  Heb. 3. 6., would not let him alone 
                  Exod. 32. 10., but ſtood up in the breach, and turned away Gods anger, that he could not deſtroy the people, as he ſaid 
                  Pſal. 106. 23.. It was zealous Phinehas 
                  Numb. 25. 13., that prayed, and ſo the plague ceaſed 
                  Pſal. 106. 30.. It was religious Ioſhuah, who ſaid, that he and his houſe would ſerve the Lord, Ioſh. 24. 25. that by his prayer commanded the Sunne and Moone to ſtand in the Firmament Ioſh. 10. 12.. It was fervent Elijah,
                  ``Froenum coeli. Auguſt.
                   whoſe tongue was the bridle of heaven *, opening

and ſhutting it by his prayer Iam. 5. 17.. It was holy Samuel, who by his prayer in time of wheat-harveſt, obtained ſuch a ſtrange thunder and raine 1 Sam. 12. 17.. It was the Church, by prayers, obtained an Angell to be ſent, who brake off Peters chaines, made the Iron gate to open of it owne accord, and delivered Peter out of Priſon, Acts 12. 7. &c. But God heareth not ſinners 
                  Iohn 9. 31.; though ſuch doe multiply their prayers, he will not heare 
                  Eſay 1. 25.; though ſuch ſeeke him early, they ſhall not finde him, he will ſtand aloofe, and laugh at their calamitie 
                  Prov. 1. 26.: as their prayers turne to be ſinne unto them 
                  Pſal. 109. 7.; ſo are they abhominable unto God Prov. 28. 9.. And no marvell: For how ſhall any call on him, in whom they have not beleeved 
                  Rom. 10. 14.? No matter therefore whether the wicked pray or no; yea all their faſting, praying, and crying, not worth a ſtraw.
               But oh yee meeke, yee true diſciples, yee that Vſe. have your hearts ſprinkled from an evill conſcience, and bodies waſhed with pure water 
                  Heb. 10. 22.: yee that have cleane hands, and a pure heart 
                  Pſal. 24. 4.: yee are Gods favourites, pray for a calme; yee are the chariots and horſemen of Iſrael 
                  2 Kings 2. 12.
                  : ſtand in the gap, day and night, keepe not ſilence 
                  Eſay 62. 6., and give the Lord no reſt 
                  Ibid., till he have mercy on Sion.
               
               Secondly, obſerve, that it is in the plurall, not2. Obſerv. 
                  (diſciple) but (diſciples) not one, or two, but (as farre as may be gathered) even all of them. And great reaſon: For as the penitent theefe ſaid toReaſon. his fellow, they were all in the ſame condemnation 
                  Luk. 23. 40.: If the ſhip had ſunke into the waves, they had all periſhed, Lord, ſave us, we periſh. It is otherwiſe in many of Gods Iudgements upon the Land, as

peſtilence, famine, ſword: Some are more ſubject to the evill and miſery of ſome of theſe, than the other: The poore are moſt pinched with famine, many rich men make great gaine thereof; but the ſword doth chiefly feed on the rich: It is the rich mans wealth, maketh him a prey to the poore, hungry, ravenous ſouldier. The rich in other CountriesApplication. 2. Doct. are puniſhed with ſword, the poore in our Country, with famine and want. But ye rich men know, that this is Gods judgement for your ſinnes, as well as the ſinnes of the poore; and if not to the ſame, yet (without repentance) yee are ſubject to greater condemnation. God hath in ſtore ſuch Judgements, as may more neerely touch you.
               Wherefore, put your necks under Gods yoke;Vſe. goe to Chriſt by prayer for the poore, have compaſſion on them beyond your power, be liberall unto them, eat no pleaſant bread your ſelves, abſtaine from feaſting, that you may be better able to feed the hungry, and ſuch as are forced to faſt.
               Obſerve laſtly, that the Diſciples, not Peter,
                  3. Obſerv. 
                  Iames, and Iohn, though counted pillars 
                  Gal. 2. 9., and in many things preferred before the reſt Matth. 17. 1. Mar. 5. 37.; yet all goe to Chriſt to further the common good, and to helpe by prayers to procure the common ſalvation.Matth. 26. 37. The godly poore man is ſometimes out of heart to goe to Chriſt and pray; and the rich man deſpiſeth his prayer, as Solomon ſaith, The poore mans wiſdome is deſpiſed 
                  Eccleſ. 9. 16.; but know, that with Chriſt there is no reſpect of perſons 
                  Acts 10. 34.: Hee hath taught the pooreſt man that beleeveth in him, as boldly to call God his Father, as the rich: Yea,

for their incouragement, David hath ſaid, God forgetteth not the cry of the poore 
                  Pſal. 9. 12.
                  : he doth not abhorre, nor deſpiſe the low eſtate of the poore, nor hide his face from him, but when he crieth unto him, he heareth 
                  Pſal. 22. 24.; he will deliver the needy when he crieth, the poore and him that hath no helper 
                  Pſal. 72. 12.. Let them then with good comfort pray, and let not rich men deſpiſe, but rather,Vse. by their mercifull dealing towards them, provoke them to bleſſe them 
                  Iob 31. 20., and pray for them: for David ſaith, The man is bleſſed, that conſidereth the poore and needy, the Lord will deliver him in the time of trouble 
                  Pſal. 41. 2.. Therefore make you friends of the mammon of unrighteouſneſſe 
                  Luc. 16. 9., (ſaith Chriſt to rich men.)
               If they be Diſciples, intreat them to goe toPrevention. Chriſt for you: Yea though you have never ſo great a meaſure of Knowledge, Faith, Zeale, and Godlineſſe your ſelves, yet may you reape benefit by the pooreſt and meaneſt in the houſhold of faith 
                  Gal. 6. 10.. Yea S. Paul himſelfe did often very inſtantly crave the prayers of all thoſe to whom he did write, whether great or ſmall, poore or rich Rom. 15. 30. Eph. 6. 18.; and hoped to finde much good from ſuch prayers Philip. 1. 19. Philem. 22.. So much for the firſt part, viz. the perſons procuring this calme (his Diſciples.) Now ſecondly to whom goe they? where doe they ſecke it?
               
                  To him] That is, to Chriſt, their Lord and Maſter.2. Part. The Heatheniſh Mariners in Ionahs ſtorme, did cry every man to his god 
                  Ionah 1. 5.. In nothing were the Gentiles more ſottiſh, than in this, the multitude of gods and goddeſſes, and aſcribing particular tutelar gods to particular places: Babylon had Belus; Egypt,
                  
                  Iſis; Athens had Minerva; and Epheſus, Diana: the Caldeans had Baal; Sidonians, Aſhteroth; Ammonites, Moloch, or Milcom; Moabites, Chamos; Syrians, Rimmon; and the Philiſtims, Dagon. Yea the Elements had their ſeverall gods, to rule over them: As the Heaven had Iupiter; the Aire, Iuno; the Sea, Neptune; and Hell, Pluto. The times of the Yeere had alſo their gods: As Maia and Flora of the Spring; Ceres, of Autumne. Pan was the god of Shepherds; Aeolus of Winds; Apollo of Fruit; Bacchus of Wine. Smiths had Vulcan; Phyſitians, Aeſculapius; Souldiers, Mars; yea and Harlots had Venus. Yea for every purpoſe, and occaſion; yea every ſickneſſe, or diſeaſe, they had a god to call upon. Alas, to what purpoſe ſhould I fully diſcover the madneſſe of the Papiſts, who in this (if it were poſſible) outgoe the Gentiles, having for every Country, Place, Calling, Creature, Diſeaſe, ſome Saint, or other, to call upon? Our Diſciples are better taught (Poperie was not then hatched, nor this point of Invocation knowne in the Church for 300 yeeres after; for it was 300 yeeres after Chriſt, that the Fathers uſed this Argument againſt the Arrians, Chriſt is invocated, therefore Chriſt is God) they doe not in this ſtorme call upon Aeolus, or Neptune; Saint Nicholas, or Chriſtopher: no, nor Noah, Moſes, Ionah, or any other, who had beene in danger of Seas, and waters before; but they come to Chriſt the true and only Lord of Sea, and Land, and all.
               Whoſe example let us follow. To pray to anyVſe. other, than the true God, hath no commandement,

commendation, promiſe, nor warrantable example, in all the Scriptures of God. To pray to dead Saints, is a diſhonour to the living God; and as great offence to make a new, as to denie the true God. God hath commanded, Call on me in the day of thy trouble 
                  Pſal. 50. 15.: Chriſt hath taught us to pray, Our Father which art in heaven 
                  Matth. 6. 9.: David renounced all other, Whom have I in heaven, but thee 
                  Pſal. 73. 25.? Who are Peter, or Paul? Samuel, or Moyſes? Gabriel, or Michael? or the Virgin Mary her-ſelfe, though more excellent than they all? yet who are any or all of theſe, that we ſhould give them divine honour of Adoration, Invocation, or Interceſſion 
                     See Turſeline of the Lady of Lauretto, and Carolus Scribonius amp
                        ••
                     theatr. Ieſuit.? Nay, howſoever the Papiſts doe plead it as a matter of honour, and ſay, in denying this, we diſhonour the Saints: it is not ſo; we give to the bleſſed motherPrevention. of God, and all the glorified members of Ieſus Chriſt, all honour bounded with modeſtie and ſobrietie; and never any learned Proteſtant did with tongue, or pen, out of Pulpit, or Preſſe, once touch the hem of their garments, to deprive them of the leaſt reverence, which the word of Truth hath taught us to give; and ſpecially conſiſteth in thankfull commemoration, and carefull imitation of their renowmed vertues Mr. Perk. Treat. of divine worſhip, T. 1. p. 702. and Refor. Cath. p. 603. & 677.: but to pray unto them in our wants, and neceſſities, is to give them ſuch honour as is due unto God: And if Olympias the Mother of Alexander the Great, wrote to her ſonne, when he ſtiled himſelfe, the ſonne of Iupiter, not to doe it, for feare of procuring the envie and diſpleaſure of Iuno; I dare ſay, it is a matter not only diſpleaſing to God, but to the Angels and

Saints themſelves: Did an Angell here on earth, refuſe that Iohn ſhould bow the knee of his bodie to him, and charge him, See thou doe it not, I am but thy fellow-ſervant, worſhip God 
                  Rev. 22. 9.; and will they be contented now that the knees of mens hearts be bowed, and prayers powred out unto them? No, no, if it were poſſible for them to heare ſuch unlawfull prayers of men, they would with both hands (as we ſay) put them from them, and labour to purge themſelves, Not unto us, Lord, not unto us, but to thy Name, be ſuch honour aſcribed 
                  Pſal. 115. 1.. Shall prayer, which one (of their beſt Pi
                        •
                     ed. in Iob. cap. 16. verſ. 18. Writers) ſaith, doth comprehend the whole worſhip of Religion and Piety, ſhall this be given to creatures? Oh keepe your ſoules unſpotted of ſuch a ſinne: when yee pray, pray as the Diſciples here by their examples have taught you, pray unto God, who only is able and willing, to heare and helpe you.
               Thirdly, what doe they, being come to Chriſt?3. Part. doe they ſit, leane, or lie downe, and diſpoſe themſelves to ſleep with him? No, but as in the ſtorme, the Ship-maſter awakened Ionah; ſo in this ſtorme the diſciples awakened Chriſt: or, (as the word ſignifieth) they raiſed him up 
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     , ſuſcitaverunt.
                  . Yea the word in many places is uſed, where mention is made of the reſurrection; as, Deſtroy this Temple, and in three dayes I will raiſe it up 
                  Iohn 2. 19.: and, Many bodies of Saints which ſlept, aroſe 
                  Matth. 27. 52.: and, If Chriſt be riſen from the dead, how ſay ſome among you, there is no reſurrection of the dead 
                  1 Cor. 15. 12.? In which, and many other places, and ſpecially in that Chapter to the Corinthians, the word of my Text is uſed, and not

improperly: for what is deep, faſt and ſound ſleep, but the image, and brother of death? Now Chriſt was in a faſt or dead ſleep (as we have heard) and therefore the Diſciples are ſaid, to raiſe him, as it were, from the dead.
               For the letter, it is probable, that they awakenedLit. Obſerv. him very turbulently, and irreverently, for their feare was great, and faith ſmall: Their words (as we ſhall heare) bewrayed a great deale of paſſion; and as death is of all fearefuls the moſt fearefull to nature, ſo doth it diſpenſe with ceremonies, and complements, and take away all reſpect of perſons. What are the clamours, vociferations, and curſitations of men in perill of drowning? We need not inquire of Seneca, Virgil, Ovid, and other Heathen, for the Pſalmiſt witneſſeth, ſaying, They are even at their wits end, and cry to the Lord in their trouble 
                  Pſal. 107. 27.: and in Ionahs ſtorme, the Mariners being afraid, cried every one to his god, and caſt out their wares 
                  Ionah 1. 5.. Howſoever then, at other times, the Diſciples carried themſelves in words, deeds, and geſture, humbly, dutifully, courteouſly, yet feare of death now made them forget themſelves, and offer violence with tongue and hand, they cried with their tongues, and at leaſt jogged him with their hands, never ceaſing till they had awakened and raiſed him. But I leave the letter. The word being fully opened, in myſterie, affordeth us two ſingular and uſefull inſtructions, and ſpecially for theſe times: the former from the Diſciples awakening; the latter from the Maſter awakened: in them importunitie, in him opportunitie. They

awaken him ſuddenly; hee awakeneth ſeaſonably: they awaken him violently; hee awakeneth voluntarily.
               For the firſt:
               From this Example of the Apoſtles wee learne2. Doct. to be importunate with God in our praiers, and never give over till we do awaken him, and that he doe heare, ariſe, and helpe us: Chriſt is faſt on ſleepe, the diſciples come unto him; and the leſſe he ſeemeth to heare or regard, the more doe they cry, and never give over till they awaken him.
               This doth the Prophet require; Yee that make
                  Cōfirmation. 
                  mention of the Lord, keepe not ſilence, and give him not reſt, till he eſtabliſh and make Ieruſalem a praiſe in the earth 
                  Eſay 62. 6, 7.: Chriſt biddeth vs aske, ſeeke, knocke 
                  Matth. 7. 7.; Yea and commendeth ſuch as offered violence to the kingdome of God, and tooke it by force 
                  Matth. 11. 12.. Where he ſpeaketh not of any corporall or naturall, but of a ſpirituall force; and the ſtrength of the ſoule ſpeciallyIlluſtration. conſiſteth in two things (as the hands therof:)
               Firſt, in Faith, which laieth hold on all the promiſed1. Faith. mercies and goodneſſe of God, and will not part with them, or let goe; as Iob profeſſed, Though the Lord ſhould kill mee, yet will I truſt in him 
                  Iob. 13. 15..
               The ſecond, is fervent Praier, which (as it were)2. Prayer. ſtriveth with God, breaketh open the doore of heavenly treaſures, and enricheth it ſelfe with what it wanteth: So the Apoſtle requireth the Romanes to continue inſtant in prayer 
                  Rom. 12. 12.; Yea, that they would ſtrive together with him in prayers to God for him 
                  Rom. 15. 30..
               Thus did Iacob, he wreſtled with God, and wouldExamples.
                  
not let goe his hold, till the Lord bleſſed him, though he received a blow which lamed him; yet hee would have a bleſſing, though it coſt him a limbe Gen. 32. penult.
                  ; he wept and made ſupplication, and by his ſtrength had power with God Oſe. 12. 3.. Moſes ſo encountered God with his praiers, that Hee intreated him to let him alone 
                  Exod. 32. 10.: And the woman of Syrophaenicia would take no nay, but in the end overcame and received both commendation and reward; Oh woman, great is thy faith, be it unto thee even as thou wilt 
                  Matth. 15. 28.. Dixeris, niſi accepero non recedam: prorſus accipies. Chryſoſt.
               
               If we make application, whatſoever our owneApplication. eſtate be, yet the Church of God ſtandeth in need of our beſt praiers; our brethren in France and Germanie are vnder the firie triall; how calme ſoever our Sea be, there is a great ſtorme in theirs, and the ſhip even covered with waves, and Chriſt faſt on ſleepe. Oh that he would ariſe, as David praied, Let God ariſe, and let his enemies be ſcattered, let them alſo that hate him flie before him, as ſmoake is driven away, &c 
                  Pſal. 68. 1.. Yea, oh that he would but awake Pſal. 44. 23., yea lift up his eye-lids, and but looke at his enemies, as ſometimes he looked vpon the hoaſt of the Egyptians, thorow the fierie and cloudie pillar, and then all the hoaſt of the Egyptians was troubled 
                  Exod. 14. 24.. But alas no marvell that the Lord ſleepeth, and (as it were) void of ſenſe and care, ſuffer all to goe to wrecke and ruine, ſeeing we doe not awaken him with our praiers: the moſt pray not at all; others, though ſaying often the Lords praier, or ſome other, yet know not what they aske; and the beſt pray negligently

and coldly, & if they come neere to God with lips, yet the heart is farre off 
                  Eſay 29. 13.. Their praiers are but the labour of lips, without fervencie of ſpirit, earneſt intention and contention of the ſoule; our bodies in Church, our mindes at home; Gods Altar is without fire, prayers without heat; tongue and heart are ſtrangers, the one knoweth not what the other is doing. Whereas he would have his bleſſings (as it were) wrung out of his hands by ſpirituall violence: a ſluggiſh and drowſie praier getteth nothing Ignavis praecibus re
                        ••
                     gnat., it is no better than babbling Matth. 6. 7..
               Oh would you be glad to ſee a calme? Goe toVſe. Chriſt by praier; pray, pray, pray, for the peace of Ieruſalem. Many cannot otherwiſe helpe the Church, but none ſo poore that cannot this way, as I have lately ſhewed; and be bold ſuiters, God delighteth in an holy inſtancie and importunitie; hee hath taught it by the example of a man comming to borrow bread of his friend at midnight Luk. 11. 8.: and by the parable of the wicked Iudge, being overcome by the importunitie of the poore widow Luk. 18. 1, 5.; yea ſometimes the Lord maketh as though he did not heare, and doth purpoſely deferre to helpe, becauſe he would ſet an edge on our deſire, and provoke us to pray more inſtantly and fervently: So he ſuſpended the Syrophaenicians ſuit, as it were, to hold her long in his companie, his eares being more delighted to heare her redoubled obſecrations, than the ſweeteſt inſtrument of Muſicke; it tried faith, won a ſoule, occaſioned a miracle. Wherefore the Apoſtle requiteth ſo often, not onely that we pray, but that wee pray continually 
                  1 Theſſ. 5. 17.;

and that wee be inſtant 
                  Rom. 12. 12.; and labour in them 
                  Rom. 15. 30.; and that wee watch in them 
                  Coloſſ. 4. 4.. I
                     •
                   ever wee will awaken Chriſt by praier, wee muſt watch in them our ſelves, a ſluggiſh praier doth but 
                     •
                  ull him on ſleepe. And herein many come juſtly to be taxedReprehenſiō. and reproved, for either they pray of cuſtome and faſhion without any ſenſe; or no ſooner have kneeled down & lifted up hands and eyes to heaven, but forthwith if they go ſo far, (as if they were aſleep, or in an heavy ſlumber) they have forgotten before whom they have preſented themſelves, and what is the thing they have in hand; or if for a while they hold out well, yet by and by they will ſuffer Satan to carrie away their mindes and ſet them on other things. The Diſciples did not ſo here, and doſt thou thinke to awaken God when thou calleſt on him with yawning, halfe aſleepe, halfe waking? Or doſt thou thinke to obtain any good bleſſing at Gods hands, by a cold, ſluggiſh and drowſie praier? No, no, as the pra
                     •
                  er of faithfull fervencie is an excellent ſervice to God, both exceeding pleaſing and available to bring downe many bleſſings from the Lord, &c. So, an idle perfunctorie praier is exceeding diſpleaſing and taking of his name in vaine, and only mightie to pull downe curſes. Oh pray then, but take 
                     •
                  e
                     •
                  d how you pray, be fervent in praier, and put up your ſupplications with ſobs, ſighs, grones, teares, and all earneſt intention of ſoule and bodie. Double, treble, yea multiply your praiers and ſupplications for your ſelves, and for his people, vnc
                     •
                  ſſan
                     •
                  ly importune him; and as Moſes, Nehemiah, and Daniel, urge his mercies,

compaſſions, promiſes, glorie, blaſphemie of enemies, &c. Oh this is the way to awake him; but cold ſuters prove cold ſpeeders.
               And becauſe (though the ſpirit be willing, yet)Direction. the fleſh is weake Matth. 26. 41.; even Moſes his hands grew wearie Exod. 17. 12.; as hee had Aaron and Hur to helpe to ſtay them up; ſo quicken thy ſpirit by faſting and meditation: and therein conſider, both how happy thou art, if God heare and grant thee thy bleſſing thou deſireſt; and how exceeding miſerable and wretched thou art, if he deny thee. It is a true Proverb, That life is ſweet, and no marvell, for it is the greateſt bleſſing unto man, and whereon all earthly bleſſings have ſo farre their dependance, as it ceaſing, all they alſo ceaſe to be the Diſciples: conſidering their life and all earthly happineſſe was now at ſtake; if the ſtorme ceaſe, they ſhall arive at the haven where they would be, and enjoy many comforts; but if the ſhip ſinke, they drowne, and then farewell life and all earthly good; this maketh them come to Chriſt, and in this needfull time ſo importunately awaken him.
               Secondly, obſerve in Chriſt awakened, opportunitie2. Doct. in helping; though he ſlept ſoundly, and long, yet he awakeneth in good time, to rebuke winds & ſeas; though he ſuffer great danger to be threatned, and his diſciples are exceedingly afraid, yet he ſuffereth no hurt to be done, in good time he awaketh and all is well. Which teacheth us, that howſoever it pleaſeth God, many times to turne the deafe eare to the prayers of his children, and to delay, and deferre to helpe them, and let things come into deſperate

extremitie, (for the triall and exerciſe of their faith, hope, patience, and godlineſſe; and that his bleſſings, when they doe come, may be the more welcome, and thankfully received, and he the more honoured, and his glory ſeene) yet he never failed, nor will faile in his good time, to awake, heare, and helpe.
               He was on ſleepe, when his people were in ſuchExamples. diſtreſſe at the Red-ſea banke, that they thought on nothing but graves, and where to be buried: but hee was awake, when hee looked on the hoaſt of the Egyptians, out of the fiery and cloudy pillar; when the waters returned, and drowned them all, there was not one of them le
                     •
                  t; and then his people praiſed God on the drie land 
                  Exod. 14. 15, &c.. He was aſleepe when Samaria was beſieged, and there was ſo great a famine, that an Aſ
                        •
                     es head was ſold for foureſcore peeces of ſilver: but he was awake, when he ſtrucke the Syrians with feare, and made them flie, and crie, and leave ſuch plentie in their campe, that a meaſure of fine flower was ſold for a ſhekel, and two meaſures of barley, for a ſhekel; then ſaid the Lepers, This is a day of good tidings, and doe we hold our peace 
                  2 King. 5. 25. 6. 16.? God was aſleepe when Ieruſalem was beſieged, and Rabſhekah ſo railed on the living God, and thoſe that truſted in him: but he was awake, when he ſent an Angell, who i
                        •
                      one night deſtroyed an hundred, foureſcore and five thouſand of them 
                  2 King. 18. 19. 19. 35.. He was on ſleepe, when there came ſuch a multitude againſt Iehoſhaphat and Iudah, that he confeſſed, We have no 
                        ••••
                     t againſt this great companie, neither know we what to doe? But he was awake, when they deſtroyed one another, and

Gods people in the valley of Berachah bleſſed God, ſaying, Praiſe yee the Lord, for his mercy endureth for ever 
                  2 Chron. 20. 12. 26.. He was aſleepe, when Haman obtained a Decree, that all the Iewes ſhould be deſtroyed; oh then was Shuſ
                        •
                     an in perplexitie: but he was awake, when by meanes of Queene Heſter, that Decree was made void, Haman and his ſons hanged, many of the people of the Land became Iews, and they celebrated daies of feaſting and joy Eſther. 3. 5, 6, 7, &c..
               Oh then, let Gods people in all their diſtreſſesVſe. ſo plie God with their prayers, as yet with patience to wait his good leaſure for deliverance: all times and ſeaſons are in his hands, and hee knoweth beſt when to helpe; only be aſſured, hee will not overſleepe himſelfe, but awake as one out of ſleep, and as a Gyant refreſhed with wine, he will ſmite his enemies in the hinder parts, and put them to a perpetuall ſhame. Pſal. 78. 65. Never any truſted, and waited on him, and were aſhamed. O Lord (ſay his people) wee have waited for thee, in the way of thy judgements 
                  Eſay 26. 8.. And marke the iſſue; Loe, this is our God, wee have waited for him, and hee hath ſaved us 
                  Eſay 25. 9.. Oh then, wait, wait on God, Even as the eyes of ſervants and hand-maids, wait upon the hands of their maſters and miſtreſſes, ſo in all diſtreſſes, let us wait upon God, till he have mercie upon us 
                  Pſal 123. 3.: For, bleſſed are all they that wait for him 
                  Eſay 30. 18..
               And here give me leave to reprove a commonReprehenſion. fault amongſt men, who take upon them to preſcribe the Lord when he ſhall helpe; and if they be not heard by and by, and their haſtie deſires be not ſatisfied, they grow impatient of delay, and ſay

with the King of Iſraels meſſenger, What ſhould I wait for the Lord any longer 
                  2 King. 6. ult.
                  ? If he will ſleepe, let him ſleepe. If they have prayed once or twice, and be not heard, they fling away in a cha
                     •
                  e, make ſhipwrack of patience, forfeit their confidence in God, rely upon other meanes, yea ſeeke to the Devil and his inſtruments. Yea even Gods owne children, do ſometimes grow impatient, and doe wonderfully bewray their infirmitie in this kinde, not only murmuring inwardly in their ſoules, if they lye long under ſome great affliction, and have powred out their ſuits unto God, for eaſe, comfort, and deliverance; but alſo ſpeaking unadviſedly with their lips; Alas, I have many times called on God, and made mine humble ſuit unto him for comfort, but I finde none, the Lord ſeemeth to hide his face from mee, to turne the deafe eare: What would you have me to doe? I am cleane out of heart, weary of praying; I feare me, the Lord is angrie with me.
               Oh let us labour to ſtrengthen our ſelves againſtExhortation. this weakneſſe, in patience poſſeſſe our ſoules 
                  Luke 21. 19.: The viſion is for an appointed time▪ though it tary, wait for it, it will ſurely come, and will not tary 
                  Hab. 2. 3.; Yet a little while, and he that ſhall come, will come, and will not tarie. Heb. 10. 37.
               
                  Iacob wreſtled long, and was almoſt out of breath,Examples. yea received a blow, whereon hee halted all the daies of his life; yet at laſt received a bleſsing 
                  Gen. 32. 28.. The woman of Canaan received many a checke; yet at laſt obtained her deſire, and 
                     •
                  rought a miracle by the force of her prayer, ſaying to the eares and mouth of her Redeemer, Ephata, be yee opened, ſo

they were; and he ſaid, Oh woman, great is thy faith, be it unto thee even as thou wilt 
                  Matth. 15. 28.. The ſtorme holdeth on, that they are in exceeding perill, and like all to be loſt and periſh, but at laſt, and in good time, Chriſt awaketh. I ſay then with David, Wait on the Lord, and he ſhall ſtrengthen thine heart, wait I ſay on the Lord 
                  Pſal. 27. ult.
                  . So I proceed to the laſt part, in the procuring of this calme, viz. their prayer, in theſe words expreſſed.
               
                  Lord, ſave us, we periſh.] In the hiſtory of Ionah
                  4. Part. we reade, that in the ſtorme, the ſea by no meanes could be calmed, or the Mariners ſafe, till Ionah was caſt into the ſea Ionah 1. 12.. Howſoever Ionah was a figure of Chriſt in his buriall 
                  Matth. 12. 40.; yet not in his drowning. As Saint Paul ſaid of the ſhip-men (ſeeking under a colour to eſcape) Except theſe abide in the ſhip, yee cannot be ſaved 
                  Acts 27. 31.: ſo I ſay, Except Chriſt abide in the ſhip, they cannot be ſaved. Thoſe Kings, Princes and Governours, who upon the ſtorme, goe about to caſt Chriſt, and his Golpell, and thoſe that profeſſe it, over-boord, take the only courſe to 
                     •
                  uine their ſtate. Th
                     •
                  ſe Diſciples were wiſer than ſo, they lay not hold on Chriſt, to caſt him into the ſea, but ſeeke to awaken him by prayer, Lord, ſave us, we periſh. Whenſoever any ſtorme ariſeth in Church, Common-wealth, or ſoule, they are ſafeſt, that cleave faſteſt to Chriſt, for he is the Saviour of all, and ſpecially of them that beleeve 
                  1 Tim. 4. 10..
               Now let us in the firſt place, compare the threeEuangeliſts compared. Euangeliſts, who doe record this ſtory; wherein three things offer themſelves to be obſerved.
               Firſt, the forme and manner of phraſe is varied.Obſerv. 1.
                  
Our Euangeliſt expreſſeth it in the forme of an humble prayer, Lord, ſave us, we periſh; but S. Marke layeth it downe in manner of an angrie and pettiſh expoſtulation, Maſter, careſt thou not that wee periſh 
                  Marke 4. 38. 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     ; Magiſter, non 
                           ••••
                         eſt 
                           ••••
                        non ad 
                           ••
                         pertinet?
                  ? The ſame alſo that David uſed, Will the Lord caſt off for ever? and will he be favourable no more? Is his mercy cleane gone for ever? doth his promiſe faile for evermore? Hath hee forgotten to be gracious? and wil he ſhut up his louing kindneſſes in diſpleaſure 
                  Pſal. 77. 7.? Yea, and all the people of God; Vp Lord, why ſleepeſt thou? awake, and be not abſent from us for ever 
                  Pſal. 44. 23.: And againe, Why withdraweſt thou thine hand, why pluckeſt thou not thy right hand out of thy boſome 
                  Pſal. 74. 12.?
               O Lord, how great is the weakneſſe of Gods people! How great their boldneſſe, that being but wormes, and duſt and aſhes, they dare ſo ſpeake to the eternall Maieſtie! even quarrell with him, that is able to deſtroy both body and ſoule. David acknowledged, it was his infirmitie 
                  Pſal. 77. 10.: It was theſe diſciples infirmity, it became them well to pray, but very unſeemely, ye
                     •
                   and dangerous▪ to expoſtulare and conteſt with Chriſt. Let us ſtrive to follow them in that which is good, and leave them in that which is evill.
               Secondly, whereas our Euangeliſt hath it butObſerv. 2. ſingle, Lord, ſave us; Saint Luke expreſſeth it with a double appellation, or with ingemination of the title, Maſter, Maſter, which intendeth their earneſtneſſe and fervencie in prayer.
               
                  Thirdly, they doe greatly vary the title whichObſerv. 3. they give him; yea the three Euangeliſts doe uſe three ſeverall titles, which (though the Latine and our Engliſh expreſſe not) are very ſignificant and emphaticall in their originall proprieties; S. Markes title is, 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , which in Engliſh ſignifieth a Teacher of letters, manners, or any Art 
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     : do
                        
                           •
                        eo.
                  ; in relation whereunto, they were called diſciples, ſcholars, or learners. A reverend title, which they often gave him, and he aſſumed; Yee call me Maſter, and ſay well, for ſo I am 
                  Iohn 13. 13.; and preſſeth the uſe of it; the diſciple is not aboue his Maſter 
                  Matth. 10. 24.. Saint Lukes title is, 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , which ſignifieth in Engliſh a Defender, a preſent Helper 
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     : ſiſto juxta 
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     , idem quod 
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     
                  ; ſuch as in times of warre, are ſworne brethren, to live and die together, commiles, ſuccenturiatus; and in times of peace, Guardians of infants. Shepherds have the ſame title, who are defenders of their flockes 
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     : Sophoc. in Ajace.
                  ; and Ariſtotle calleth Magiſtrates ſo, who are to defend their ſubjects from wrongs or hurts Ariſtot. polit. lib. 4. cap. 15.. A ſweet title this is; for how ſafe are they, whoſe defender the Lord is?
               The title in the Text is, 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , which ſignifieth power or might: Anſwerable to that glorious Tetragrammaton, Iehovah, which the Septuagint conſtantly tranſlate thorowout the old Teſtament, in this word, an eſſentiall title, and in the Hebrew, not given to any, but the true God; and this in the Greeke is the moſt common title Chriſt had, and by him acknowledged; Yee call mee Lord, and yee ſay well, for ſo I am 
                  Iohn 14. 14..
               The titles well conſidered, afford two waightie

Arguments or Reaſons, why they pray to him, and he is to heare and helpe them. In that he is their Teacher and Defender, ſheweth his willingneſſe: for will ſuch an one ſuffer his Scholars and Pupils to periſh? In that he is Lord and Iehovah, he is able to deliver them: So they pray unto him with Confidence, becauſe he is their loving Maſter and Defender: And with Reverence, becauſe he is their Lord and God. In that he is their Maſter, they pray in love; in that he is their Lord, they pray in feare: Hee being their Maſter, they are not timidi, overfearefull: He being their Lord, they are not tumidi, over-bold: but pray with love and reverence, as David counſelleth, they rejoyce with trembling. So much for the Obſervations inlightning the Text; and ariſing from comparing of the Euangeliſts.
               Now for our more orderly proceeding, note, inDiviſion. this their prayer, two parts, viz. Firſt, a Petition, [Lord, ſave us.] Secondly, a Reaſon, taken from their great jeoperdie [we periſh] q. d. Lord ſave us, for we are in danger now to be drowned. Of the Petition, firſt generally, and then particularly.
               The words are cleare and plaine for their ſenſe.1. Part. Senſe. Only by the way note in one word, that to ſave (in a ſtrict ſenſe) is properly to deliver from the guilt and puniſhment of our ſinnes, as the Apoſtle ſaich, There is no other name wherby to be ſaved 
                  Acts 4. 12.: & this is the Reaſon why Chriſt was called Ieſus or Saviour, becauſe he ſaveth his people from their ſinnes 
                  Matth. 1. 21.. But in a larger ſenſe, it ſignifieth to preſerve from ſome bodily hurt; and this appertaineth to Chriſt alſo, in which reſpect, hee is called the Saviour of all
                  
                  men 
                  1 Tim. 4. 10.; that is, in regard of this preſent life, as Saint Ambroſe expoundeth it Quantum ad praeſentem vitam. Ambroſ.; For in him we live, move, and have our being 
                  Act. 17. 28.; without whoſe good pleaſure, not an haire can fall from our heads 
                  Matth. 10. 30.; yea, He ſaveth both man and beaſt 
                  Pſal. 36. 6.: Or, as our laſt Tranſlators more fully expreſſe the ſenſe, Hee preſerveth both man and beaſt, and that is the ſenſe of this place: Lord ſave us, Lord preſerve us from theſe raging waves which threaten imminent death unto us. So much be ſaid for opening the ſenſe of th
                     ••
                   their Petition.
               Hence firſt in generall, we learne, that affliction,1. Gen. Doct. diſtreſſe, and perplexitie, is the beſt ſchool-maſter or miſtreſſe of prayer Neceſſitas, orand. magiſtra.. Which thing the Prophet teacheth from his owne experience: Lord, introuble have they viſited thee, they powred out a prayer, when thy chaſtening was upon them; like as a woman with childe, that draweth neare the time of her deliverie, is in paine, and crieth out in her pangs, ſo have we beene in thy ſight, O Lord 
                  Eſay 26. 16.. And another Prophet ſaith, In time of trouble they will ſay, Ariſe and ſave us 
                  Ierem. 2. 27.. Yea, God himſelfe hath ſaid, In their afflictions they will ſeeke me early 
                  Oſe. 5. ult.
                  . Wherefore David prayeth for his enemies good, in this forme, Fill their faces with ſhame, that they may ſeeke thy name, O Lord 
                  Pſal. 83. 16.. Let Moſes ſee the people of God in great danger, and then he will crie to the Lord 
                  Exod 14. 15.. Let Annah be barren, and Peninnah checke her and pro voke her, and then ſhee will weepe, and powre out even her ſoule in prayer 
                  1 Sam. 1. 6, 15.. Let God turne away his face from David, and he will get unto his Lord right humbly 
                  Pſal. 30. 8.. Yea, if hee come into the deepes, hee

will crie unto God 
                  Pſal. 130. 1.: Let Ionah be caſt into the ſea, and devoured of a Whale, and he will pray out of the fiſhes belly; and crie, by reaſon of his affliction 
                  Ionah 2. 1.: Let the woman of Canaans daughter be grievouſly vexed with a Devill, and ſhee will pray to Chriſt, yea follow after him, and take no deniall 
                  Matt. 15. 22, 27.: Let there ariſe a ſtorme, that the Diſciples are all like to be drowned, and then you ſhall heare their prayers, Lord, ſave us, &c. Let Pharaoh be plagued, and if he cannot pray himſelfe, he will intreat Moſes and Aaron to doe it for him 
                  Exod. 8. 8..
               And ſurely (amongſt others) this is one ſingular benefit of affliction, that it provoketh prayer, than which, there is nothing more pleaſing to God, or profitable to our ſelves; yea this is not the leaſt benefit, from the great troubles which have befallen the Church and people of God, that God hath received many a ſigh, ſob, groane, teare, and prayer; which elſe he had not knowne.
               Well, if Affliction be the Miſtreſſe of Prayer,Vſe. ſurely never were Gods people more taught to pray, than in theſe daies; ſuch warres, and rumours of warres, troubles, diſtreſſes, perplexities on everie ſide; Oh pray for the peace of Ieruſalem 
                  Pſal. 122. 6..
               But alas, herein we are generally too cold andApplication. negligent; how are publike humiliations and ſolemne aſſemblies, in faſting, weeping, mourning, and confeſſing of ſinnes laid aſide, and as it were worne out of date? How juſtly may God complaine of us, as ſometimes he did of his owne people; I called to faſting, weeping, mourning, baldneſſe, and girding with ſack-cloth: But behold joy and glad
                  
                  neſſe, ſlaying oxen, and killing ſheepe, eating fleſh, and drinking wine: Let us eat and drinke, for to morrow we ſhall die 
                  Eſay 22. 12.: Or who in private is ſo affected with the calamities of their brethren, as feelingly and fervently to pray for them, in the words of my Text, Lord, ſave them? No, no, in ſtead of faſting and praying, we feaſt and play, we wanton and riot it ſtill; we thinke our ſelves out of danger, in ſure harbour, and are therefore ſenſleſſe of the miſeries of our brethren, few as they ought doe pray for them; a ſinne which once God threatned, This is revealed in mine eares; ſurely this iniquity ſhall not be purged from you till yee die, ſaith the Lord God of hoaſts 
                  Eſay 22. 14.. Oh ariſe and call upon God, in this troubleſome time, that we periſh not.
               Secondly, hence we may learne, how powerfull2. Gen. Doct. even a ſhort prayer is with God, ſo it be fervent; yea therfore ſhort praiers commonly moſt powerfull, becauſe commonly moſt fervent Brevis eratio penetrat Caelum.: The counſell of Salomon is, Let thy words be few 
                  Eccleſ. 5. 1.: The counſell of Ieſus the ſon of Swach i
                        •
                     , Make not much babbling when thou prayeſt 
                  Ecclus. 7. 14.: Ye
                     •
                  , Ieſus 
                        •
                     he Son of God, and wiſer than Salomon, biddeth, When we pray, to uſe no vaine repetitions 
                  Matth. 6. 7..
               In all which, long prayers are not ſimply forbidden,Prevention. diſcommended or diſgraced, ſo they be with ferven
                     ••
                   of ſpirit, and without opinion of being heard for much babbling ſake: A great part of the day at a publike faſt was ſpent in prayers, and confeſſion of ſins 
                  N
                        •
                     he
                        •
                     . 9. 3.: And though our Saviour Chriſt many times were very briefe yet he ſpent whole nights in prayer 
                  Luke 6. 12.: And a large Chapter is but one of his

prayers Iohn 17.; therefore moſt ſweet and powerfull are the long prayers of Gods people, when time place and occaſion ſerve; but becauſe even Moſes his hands grew heavie 
                  Exod. 17. 12.; and though the ſpirit be never ſo wiling, the fleſh is weake 
                  Matth 26. 41., and quickly dulled and diſtracted, and no prayer is further heard, or pleaſing to God, than it is fervent; therefore the Scripture prayers, which have moſt prevailed with God, are moſt ſhort; and but as holy ejaculations: Moſes [cried] but ſpake never a word Exod. 14. 15.: Annah powred out her ſoule, and wept ſore, but ſpake not 1 Sa
                        •
                     . 1. 15.: The prayer of the Leper was, Lord, if thou wilt, thou canſt make me cleane 
                  Matth. 8. 2.: The prayer of the blind men, O Lord, Sonne of David, have mercy on us 
                  Matth. 20. 31.: The prayer of Chriſt for himſelfe; Father, if thou wilt, let this cup paſſe from me; and againe the ſame words Matt. 26. 39. 44.; and for his enemies, Father forgive them, they know not what they doe 
                  Luke 23. 34.: The prayer of the Publican, God be mercifull to mee a ſinner 
                  Luke 18. 13.: The prayer of the father of the ſicke childe, Lord helpe mine unbeleefe 
                  Marke 9. 24.: The prayer of the penitent theefe, Lord remember me when thou commeſt into thy Kingdome 
                  Luke 23. 42.: The prayer of Saint Stephen for his perſecutors, Lord lay not this ſinne to their charge 
                  Acts 7. ult.
                  . The prayer of the Diſciples here, becauſe the time was ſhort, death at hand, place inconvenient, and diſtractions many, they beg all, in a few words, and couch a great deale of devotion in a little roome; Lord, ſave us, we periſh.
               
               All which I obſerve, for the ſpeciall comfort ofVſe. ſuch as mourne in their ſoules, becauſe of their want in this kinde, and are much aſſaulted with

this temptation, that they cannot pray, and therefore cannot be Gods children, becauſe they have not Gods ſpirit. Indeed, the Spirit of God is called the ſpirit of ſupplication 
                  Zach. 12. 10.; and it is an excellent gift of the Spirit, and much to be deſired, whereby a man or woman, (when times, places, and occaſions ſerve) are able to lay open their wants, and (in Scripture phraſe) to expreſſe their deſires; but yet the Apoſtle ſaith, The Spirit doth helpe our infirmities with ſighes and grones which cannot be expreſſed 
                  Rom. 8. 26.; yea if thou canſt ſay no more, but as thou haſt heard, Lord ſave us, Lord have mercy, Lord remember, Lord helpe mine unbeleefe; If faithfully and fervently, theſe are moſt powerfull prayers with God: yet ſtrive to increaſe in this grace, for God may accept at the beginning, what he will not afterwards be content withall▪ yea, whoſoever uſeth this gift aright, ſhall doubtleſſe finde a gracious increaſe therein. And ſo much be ſaid of the petition in generall: now let us view it more particularly.
               It is ſhort, and in moſt languages that I know,Particular obſervations. hath but three words, I ſay (in moſt) for ſuch is the elegancie of the Hebrew Language, affixing the Pronounes, that in it here are but two Thoſe Hignann Adoni.
                  ; yet in Greeke, Latine, and Engliſh, three 
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     . Domine, ſalva nos. Lord, ſave us.. Which three words containe ſo many vertues in this, and in all godly compoſed prayers: The firſt noteth the partie, to whom all prayers are to be made, (Lord.) The ſecond, the bleſſing they crave, (ſalvation.) The third, communitie and love, (us) Lord ſave us.
               
               
                  For the firſt, they pray to the Lord, not to the1. Obſerv. Lady: to change the Gender is Popiſh wickedneſſe. A Reverend Biſhop Dr. King on Jon. Lect. 16. p. 214. hath truly obſerved, that it is a ſufficient challenge to all the Papiſts, that in ſo many prayers of both ancient and righteous Patriarcks, Prophets, Iudges, Kings, regiſtred in the Booke of God, and in an hundred and fiftie Pſalmes, an hundred whereof at leaſt are prayers and ſupplications, and in all the devout requeſts that the Apoſtles of Chriſt, and other his diſciples, ſent into Heaven, (if they take the pen of a Writer, and note from the beginning of Geneſis to the end of the Revelation) they cannot finde one directed to Cherub or Seraphim, Gabriel or Raphael, Abraham or Moſes, or Iohn Baptiſt after his death, or any other creature in Heaven, or Earth, ſave only to the Lord, and his Anointed; yea, for above two hundred yeeres after Chriſt, Interceſſion of Saints was not heard of: Origen was the firſt that broached it Lord of Pleſſ. 
                     
                        •
                     on the Maſſe, lib. 3. 
                           ••
                        p. 13.; not as the publike doctrine of the Church, but as his owne private conceit: above three hundred, that Baſil, Nyſſen, and Nazianzen, gave ſome occaſion of prayer to the dead, by their Rhetoricall ſpeaking unto them: Yea till 500 yeeres, Invocation of Saints was not received into the publike Liturgie of the Church: For it was after 400 yeeres that S. Auguſtine ſaid, We doe not make gods of Martyrs, they are named of the Prieſt, but no prayer is made unto them 
                  
                     Auguſt. de Civ. Del, lib. 22. cap. 10.: And it is ſaid, that Petrus Gnaphaeus, an Heretike, did firſt put Invocation of Saints into the publike prayers of the Church Niceph. lib. 15. cap. 28.. See how new this corruption is, which the Church of England
                  
hath godly reformed, and in her approved Homilies Homil. concerning Prayer, 2. Part. requireth foure things in the par
                     •
                  ie to whom we are to pray, viz. Firſt, that he underſtand whereof we ſtand in need: Secondly, that he heare our prayers: Thirdly, that he be willing: And laſtly, that he be able to helpe. Finde theſe in any, but in the true God only, and then wee may pray unto them: otherwiſe, wee may pray as fondly as the Papiſts, who pray to the Virgin Mary (for example) to pray to Chriſt for them: and then they pray to Chriſt, that he would accept of Maries prayers for them Sic ambulant imp
                        •
                     i in circuitu.. Thus are men puckled, when they follow their owne conceits, and leave the light of Gods word. Oh, call on me, ſaith God Pſal. 50. 15.: and come to me, ſaith Chriſt Matth. 11. 28.. So doe the Diſciples here, ſo doe we ever, when we pray, Lord, ſave us.
               
               
                  Save] Nothing ſo pleaſing to the Saviour, as2. Obſerv. to come to him for life and ſalvation. He complained of his people, Yoe will not come to me, that yee might have life 
                  Iohn▪ 5. 40., yea being a faithfull Creator 
                  1 Pet. 4. ult., and Saviour of all men 
                  1 Tim. 4. 10., he is well pleaſed, that in times of danger, men ſhould call on him for bodily preſervation, Lord (save) us▪
                  
               
               But let us learne from this Example (if we deſireDict. to be heard) to pray only for ſuch things as are needfull. Chriſt hath taught us to pray for bread, not gorgeous apparell, ſtately houſes, great livings and honours: for howſoever (according to ſeverall places, callings, and charges) ſome men may pray for much more than others; yet if our deſires be boundleſſe, and we proceed from neceſſaries, to crave wanton ſuperfluities, we offend, and

as S. Iames ſaith, Yee aske, and receive not becauſe yee aske amiſſe, that yee may conſume it upon your luſts 
                  Iames 4. 3.. Our learned Academick ſaith, It is not lawfull, nor doth ſtand with a good conſcience, to ſeeke for any more, than is ſufficient for preſervation of us and ours 
                  Mr. Perk. T. 
                        •
                     . 
                        •
                     . 768.. If any thinke him too ſtrict, let him hearken what Saint Bernard ſaith, Let thy prayers which thou makeſt for temporall matters, be reſtrained ever to things neceſſarie 
                  Sit oratio, quae pro temporal▪ bus eſt, circa ſo as neceſſitates reſtricta. Bern.. If any yet thinke that devout and mortified Cloyſterer, too ſtrait laced, let them heare what S. Auguſtine a Biſhop ſaith; If any man ſhall ſay, Lord increaſe my riches, and give me ſo much as thou haſt given to ſuch an one, and ſuch an one, I thinke that man in the Lords prayer will finde no ſuch direction 
                  Domine, multiplica divitias mea
                        •
                     , puto 
                        ••
                     m non inve
                        ••
                     re. Auguſt. epiſt. 121.. Iacob prayed but for bread to eat, and clothes to put on 
                  Gen. 
                        •
                     8. 20.. Solomon prayed but for food conventent, and neither for riches, nor povertie 
                  Prov 30. 7.: Lepers to be made cleane Match. 8. 2.: blinde men to ſee Mat. 20. penult.: and the Diſciples to be preſerved in the ſtorme: Chriſt heard them and was well pleaſed.
               Oh let us be moderate and wiſe in our deſires.Vſe. Indeed Chriſt his promiſes are very large and generall; Whatſoever yee ſhall aske my Father in my name, he will give it you 
                  Iohn 16. 23.. And againe, If you ſhall aske any thing in my name, I will doe it 
                  Iohn 14. 14.. But an ancient Father ſaith, True prayer is a requeſt of ſuch things, as are fit for God to give, and us to have 
                  Petitio decentium. Damaſc.. And another ſaith, No man can aske in the name of the Saviour, that which is againſt ſalvation 
                  Non pet
                        ••
                     ur in nomine Salvatoris, quicquid pe
                        ••
                     tur contra rationem ſa
                     
                        •
                     a
                        ••
                     s. Aug. Tract. 102. in Iohan..
               For our better direction therefore we muſt note, that if we will be heard, we muſt only crave bona, & bene, good things, and for good uſes and purpoſes.

Good things are of two ſorts, viz. abſolute,Rules. 1. or reſpective. Graces ſpirituall, and neceſſarie for ſalvation, as Faith, Repentance, Remiſſion of ſinnes, &c. are abſolutely good, never evill to any, and therefore we may abſolutely aske them: but all corporall and earthly bleſſings, as Health, Wealth, Honour, are not abſolutely, but reſpectively good, as it ſhall pleaſe God to ſanctifie them, and therefore are not abſolutely to be asked, but with condition, ſubmitting our ſelves to Gods will Mr. Perk. on L. Pr. in Tom. 1. p. 333.; as the Leper did, Lord (if thou wilt) thou canſt make me cleane 
                  Matth. 8. 2.: if ſuch or ſuch a bleſſing be for thy glory, and my good, grant it unto me.
               And as we muſt aske good things, ſo to good2. uſes and purpoſes; as Solomon begged wiſdome, whereby he might goe in and out before the people 
                  1 King. 3. 9.. For the Miniſter of the word, to beg increaſe of knowledge, preſervation of health, libertie, that he may doe God and his Church ſervice: the Magiſtrate, to aske underſtanding and courage, that he may the better execute Iudgements betwixt man and man: the man that asketh increaſe of wealth, that he may more cheerefully ſerve God, and be better able to help and releeve ſuch as are in want; this is to aske good things wel, and to good purpoſes, & ſuch may looke to receive what God knoweth to be indeed for their good: but to aske exquiſite knowledge and learning, becauſe they would excell in Poyſoning, Sorcery, Witchcraft, and ſuch like damnable Sciences; or wealth, that they may oppreſſe their neighbours, or compaſſe their ſinfull deſires; or health and ſtrength of body, to

revenge wrongs, or devoure wine and ſtrong drinke, and follow their pleaſures. Theſe aske good things amiſſe: neither let ſuch looke to receive; yea it is great mercy in God to denie In non dando, miſericors. Auguſt. in Pſ. 86. Miſericordiae eſt, aliquando ſubtra
                        •
                     ere miſericordiam. Bern. ſerm. cont. vitium Ingratitud.: as a father in his love, denieth a knife, or ſharpe-edged toole to his childe, which he knoweth to be dangerous and hurtfull to him. The Diſciples knew not of what ſpirit they were, that deſired fire from heaven upon the Samaritanes 
                  Luk. 9 55.: Peter wiſt not what he ſaid, when he deſired to have three Tabernacles built on Mount Thabor 
                  Matth. 17. 3. Mar. 9. 5.. The Diſciples that deſired to ſit one on the right hand, and the other on the left hand of Chriſt, knew not what they asked Matth. 20. 22.. Whatſoever we aske, let us aske according to his will, and he heareth us 
                  1 Iohn 5. 14.; if not according to our will, yet to our profit, and as is beſt for us.
               Here wee ſee how earneſt the Diſciples wereMyſterie. with Chriſt for the temporall good of their bodies, Lord, Lord, ſave us: How much more earneſt ſhould we be with him, for the eternall good of our ſoules? and importunately to beg thoſe excellent gifts of Knowledge, Faith, Repentance, Remiſſion of ſinnes, Senſe of Gods love, Patience in adverſitie, Lowlineſſe in proſperitie, Peace of conſcience, Ioy in the Holy Ghoſt: as Chriſt hath counſelled, Firſt ſeeke the kingdome of God, and his righteouſneſſe 
                  Mat. 6. penult.; and as the Apoſtle counſelleth, Set your affections on, and ſeeke thoſe things which are above 
                  Coloſſ. 3. 1, 2. 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     .. Was Chriſt well pleaſed with his Diſciples that craved the ſaving of their bodies? and is he not much more pleaſed we ſhould call and cry unto him for the ſalvation of our ſoules?

ſeeing hence he hath his glorious name, whereat every knee muſt bowe 
                  Philip. 2. 10., and is able perfectly to ſave ſuch as come unto him 
                  Heb. 7. 25..
               But herein our great dulneſſe and negligenceApplication. commeth juſtly to be taxed. We are very ſenſible of our bodily, and ſenſleſſe altogether of our ſpirituali wants: if wee be naked and cold, wee are pinched with it, and all our care is for fewell and apparell: if we be hungry, how greedy wee are for food? In this time of Famine, how the hungry poore runne from doore to doore, pitifully and importunatly begging bread? Whoſe heart doth not earne to ſee the ghaſtly countenances of poore priſoners in their chaines, and thorow their grates craving releefe? How doe ſuch as have money, plie the market for corne, and if they have it not in one, runne to another, and ſtrive who ſhall be firſt ſerved? How did the leprous, blinde, and diſeaſed flocke to Chriſt for cure? And if in theſe dayes there were a man knowne to cure all diſeaſes, how would they ſeeke to him by Sea and Land, yea ſell Houſe and Land, to get helpe? And if the life be in danger by fire or water, then what crying is there, Lord ſave us? But alas, our ſoules are ready to ſtarve, and we doe not hunger; are naked, and we care not for garments; ſicke and diſeaſed, and we ſeeke not to the Phyſitian: yea, we are in danger every moment to ſinke into the pit of perdition, and for ever to be loſt in hell and deſtruction, and yet we cry not to Chriſt for helpe, Lord ſave us.
               
               And the reaſon hereof is, becauſe we doe notReason. know our ſelves to be loſt, and ready to periſh; but

with thoſe of Laodicea, ſay, we are rich, and increaſed with goods, and have need of nothing, and know not, that we are wretched, and miſerable, and poore, and blind, and naked, Rev. 3. 17. That which cauſed the Diſciples here to cry ſo earneſtly to Chriſt to be ſaved, was the ſenſe of miſerie; they ſaw if he preſently helped not, there was no way but one with them, they were drowned every mothers childe, they muſt all preſently periſh: & certainly none can earneſtly ſeeke and crave ſalvation, that doe not feele themſelves to be moſt miſerable ſinners, under the wrath of God, utterly loſt in themſelves, & looke every moment to be ſwallowed up of death, hell, and condemnation. Chriſt came to ſeeke and ſave that which is loſt 
                  Matth. 18. 11.; and was ſent only to the loſt ſheepe of the houſe of Iſrael 
                  Matth. 15. 24.; came not to call the righteous, but ſinners to repent 
                  Matth. 9. 13.: i. ſuch as in their owne ſenſe and feeling are miſerable and loſt ſinners.
               When Peter began to ſinke, he cried, Lord ſave
                  Illuſtration. 
                  me, and immediatly Ieſus ſtretched out his hand, and caught him 
                  Matth. 14. 30.. When the ſhip was covered with waves, then the Diſciples cry, Lord ſave us, and he rebuked the winds. Oh, it is not poſſible for any to be earneſt with Chriſt for ſalvation, till with Peter their ſoules begin to ſinke into Hell, and the poore cockboat of their Conſciences is even covered with the waves of Gods diſpleaſure. One deepe calleth on another, Pſ. 42. 6. the deep of miſery, to the deep of mercy: De profundis clamavi, Pſ. 130. 1. Alas, thouſands of Proteſtants who profeſſe Chriſt to be their Saviour, yet never taſted now ſweet the Lord is, nor ever were earneſt with him for ſalvation, becauſe

they were never thorowly touched with the ſenſe of their ſpirituall miſery, to ſay with David, I have gone aſtray like a ſheepe that is loſt 
                  Pſal. 119. ult.
                  ; and from my youth up thy terrors I have ſuffered with a troubled minde 
                  Pſal. 88. 15.: Thou haſt vexed me with all thy ſtormes, and all thy waters are gone over me, &c. And never till then can any affectionately pray with David, O Lord, ſay to my ſoule, I am thy ſalvation 
                  Pſal. 35. 3.: And with the Diſciples here, Lord, Ieſu, ſave me.
               
               Many doe wonderfully brag and boaſt thatTriall. Chriſt is their Saviour, ſhed his precious bloud for them, & if at that inſtant they ſhould die, they were ſure to be ſaved, and to goe to heaven to him. I would aske ſuch a queſtion (or rather deſire themQueſt. to demand it of their owne ſoules) Didſt thou ever ſee thy wofull miſery, and the wretched eſtate wherein thou art by reaſon of ſinne? Didſt thou ever ſee what great need thou hadſt of Gods favour, and of the bloud of Chriſt? Have thy ſinnes ever muſtred themſelves againſt thee, which hath made thine heart to tremble with feare? Yea, haſt thou even bin at the brinke of hell, and with ſighs and teares intreated mercy and ſalvation? They anſwer,Anſw. (and I ſuppoſe truly) No, God be thanked, they were never ſo troubled or diſquieted, but have ever had merrie and peaceable hearts, and have beene ever aſſured of Gods love, neither would they for all the world doubt of it; they have heard Miniſters preach much of diſtreſſes and perplexities of the ſoule, but they know not what they meane.
               Alas poore ſoules, how are theſe deceived? HowCenſure.
                  
are they carried away with a ſtrange preſumption? What a dangerous lethargie ſpirituall are they ſicke of Graviſ
                        ••
                     mè aegrotat, qui non ſe ſentit aegrotare.? Even of all men moſt to be pittied.
               Oh know, the high way to grace is to know ourDirection. ſoules to be emptie of grace: the high way to be ſaved, is to know our ſelves in our ſelves to be loſt and damned: never ſhall any have the benefit of one drop of the bloud of Chriſt, that (as for life and death) have not begged it.
               Oh, ſee then what a bleſſing of God it is to beConcluſion. faithfully told and reproved for ſins, and to ſee our damnable eſtate in the looking-glaſſe of the Law, that ſo ſeeing our ſelves to be utterly loſt and undone, we may cry day and night vnto God, with the Diſciples here, Lord, Ieſus, ſave us.
               
               So much for the bleſſing deſired: the third & laſt word followeth, for whom they deſire ſalvation.
               
                  Vs.] It is not ſaid that Peter came and praied forPart. 3. himſelfe, Lord ſave me; and Iames for himſelfe, Lord ſave me; and Iohn for himſelfe, Lord ſave mee, &c. as if they cared not though all the reſt were drowned, if they themſelves eſcaped: but they pray in common, each one being as deſirous of his fellowes ſafeguard, as of his owne; which ſheweth that they praied in love, Which (as the Apoſtle ſaith) ſeeketh not her owne things, and without which in preaching and praying, Wee are but as a ſounding braſſe, and tinkling Cymball 
                  1 Cor. 13. 1.. That which our Saviour intended,Cōfirmation. in that forme of praier which he hath preſcribed, teaching us to pray in the Plurall, Give (us) this day our daily bread, forgive (us) our treſpaſſes,
                  
                  lead not (us) into temptation, but deliver (us) from evill 
                  Matt. 6. 11, 12.. I doubt not but in particular caſes, we may make particular ſuit unto God for our ſelves. AsPrevention. 
                  Iacob in his iourney vowed, If God will be with mee, and will keepe me in this way, and will give mee bread to eat, and raiment to put on 
                  Gen. 28. 20.. And David, Save (me) ô God, for the waters are even entred into my ſoule 
                  Pſal. 69. 1.. And Peter when he was ſinking into the ſea, cried, Lord ſave (mee 
                  Matth. 14. 30..) Yea Chriſt himſelfe praied, Lord let this cup paſſe from mee 
                  Luke 22. 42.. But theſe were particular caſes; but in common caſes we muſt have common hearts, yea though our caſe be particular, yet there may be others in our condition, which we know not, and therefore we are ſo to pray for our ſelves, as yet explicitely, or implicitely, we crave the like bleſſings to all ſuch as are in the like want with us.
               Here then commeth a common fault worthy toReprehenſiō. be reproved, (for it marreth all ſuch praiers, as The wilde goord marred all the meſſe of pottage 
                  2 Kings 4. 40.;) viz. We are ſtrait laced, & full of love, but it is ſelf-love, we wholly love our ſelves, & ſeeke our owne good; what meaneth elſe that common wicked Proverb, Every man for himſelfe, and God for us all? Or if they bee aſhamed to profeſſe thus much with mouth, yet they are not aſhamed to wiſh it in their hearts: yea they wiſh evill to others, ſo any good may thence redound to thēſelves. How many wiſh a famine, if they have any corne to ſell? Yea how few but doe greatly reioyce to heare of peſtilence, ſword, ſhipwracke, ſedition, or any manner of evill to befall their neighbours or brethren, ſo they

reape advantage from it? Which ſheweth that in their hearts they doe onely deſire their owne particular good, and (as we ſay) care not who hunger, ſo their bellies be filled; who goe naked, ſo they be clothed; who be poore and vndone, ſo they grow rich; who lie without doore, ſo they lodge warme; who dy, ſo they live; who ſink or ſwim, ſo they come ſafe to ſhore. So few pray, as lovingly and heartily for others, as themſelves, as our Example teacheth us to doe, Lord, ſave us. So much for the petition.
               
                  We periſh.] Extreme paſſion commonly cauſethPart. 2. either ſilence, or (that which is next unto it) imperfect and defective ſpeech; whereunto God alluding ſaith, I have ſworne in my wrath, if they ſhall enter into my reſt 
                  Heb. 3. 11.. The Diſciples being in great feare, ſpeake imperfectly (we periſh) the cauſall cōjunction is wanting Ellipſis., it is in effect, q. d. otherwiſe, or elſe wee periſh: The originall word 
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     . is of hard and harſh ſignification; in beſt ſignification it is to die, as, it is expedient for us, that one die for the people 
                  John 11. 50.; yea to die by ſome miſerable meanes, as with hunger, I periſh with hunger 
                  Luke 15. 17.; it is commonly tranſlated, to deſtroy, as, he will truly deſtroy thoſe husbandmen 
                  Matth. 21. 41.; Let us not tempt Chriſt, as ſome of them alſo tempted, and were deſtroyed of ſerpents 
                  1 Cor. 10. 9.: yea it ſignifieth the deſtruction of hell, They ſhall be puniſhed with everlaſting deſtruction 
                  2 Theſſ. 1. 9.. In which reſpect Iudas is called, The ſonne of deſtruction 
                  Iohn 17. 12.; and the Angell of the bottomleſſe pit is called in Hebrew Abaddon, and in Greeke Apollyon, i. a Deſtroyer 
                  Rev. 9. 11.. Here it is meant of the loſing, periſhing, or deſtroying of the bodie by waters; which we call

drowning or choking in the waters. So much for the ſenſe.
               Hence firſt we learne, That it is an effectuall1. Doct. Confirmatiō. motive of mercy in praier, to declare unto God our miſery. How often doth David (to this purpoſe) in his praiers lay open his miſeries before God, as, Save me, ô God, for the waters are come in, even unto my ſoule, I ſinke in the deepe mire where is no ſtanding. I am come into deepe waters, where the flouds over flow me: I am wearie of crying, my throat is dry, mine eyes faile while I wait upon my God 
                  Pſ. 69. 1, 2, &c.. And againe, Thou haſt caſt off, and abhorred; thou haſt beene wroth with thine anointed, thou haſt made void the covenant of thy ſervant, and haſt caſt his crowne to the ground: thou haſt broken downe all his hedges, and brought his ſtrong holds to ruine; all that paſſe by ſpoile him, and he is a reproach to his neighbours: thou haſt ſet up the right hand of his adverſaries, and made his enemies to reioyce; thou haſt turned the edge of his ſword, and giueſt him not victory in battell 
                  Pſal. 88. 38.. To this purpoſe alſo doth he declare the miſery of Gods Church; O God, the Heathen are come into thine inheritance, thine holy Temple have they defiled, and made Ieruſalem an heape of ſtones; the dead bodies of thy ſervants have they given to be meat to the fowles of the heaven, and the fleſh of thy Saints to the beaſts of the earth: their bloud have they ſhed like water, round about Ieruſalem, and there was no man to bury them 
                  Pſal. 79. 1.. Yea, thus lamentably doe all Gods people complaine, Thou goeſt not forth with our armies; thou makeſt us to turne our backes upon the enemy, they that hate us ſpoile our goods; thou haſt given us like ſheepe
                  
                  appointed for the ſlaughter; thou ſelleſt thy people for nought, & takeſt no mony for them▪ thou makeſt us a reproach, deriſion, by-word, and ſhaking of the head, 
                  Pſal. 44. 9, &c. 
                  &c.
               
               The Reaſon of this doctrine is, becauſe God isReaſon. a moſt mercifull God, and it is the nature of mercy to be exceedingly moved with miſery; Miſericordia. Yea his mercy is called, a tender mercy 
                  Luke 1. 78. 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     : Viſcera miſericordiae.
                  , or bowels of mercy. Great is the compaſſion of a brother, as we ſee in Ioſeph, a godly man, when he ſaw his brother Beniamin, he made haſte and 
                     •
                  ought where to weepe, For (ſaith the Text) his bowels did yearne upon his brother 
                  Gen. 43. 30.: Greater the compaſſion of a father towards his ſonne, as we have lately had an example, when the father ſaw his hungry, naked, leane, (though a prodigall ſonne;) yet he could not containe himſelfe, But ran and met him, and fell on his necks, and kiſſed him, and commanded his ſervants with all ſpeed, to feed, and cloath, and decke him 
                  Luke 15. 20.: But greateſt of all is the compaſſion of a mother towards her childe. How the woman of Canaan plied Chriſt with praier for her daughter, and would receive no▪ anſwer, but her cure Matth. 15. 28.: Yea, and Salomon in his wiſdome diſcerned which was the true mother of the childe hereby; for when ſhe heard the ſentence pronounced, that it ſhould be divided, her bowels yearned on her ſonne 1 Kings 3. 26.. But the compaſſion of a brother, father, or mother, is crueltie, compared with the compaſſion of God: God himſelfe hath ſaid, Can a woman forget her ſucking childe, that ſhee ſhould not have compaſsion on the ſonne of her wombe? Yea, they may forget, yet will I not forget thee 
                  Eſay 49. 15.. Our Saviour therefore uſeth an

argument from the leſſer to the greater, ſaying, If yee that are evill, give good gifts to your children, how much more ſhall your Father which is in heaven, give good things to them that aske him 
                  Matth. 7. 11.? The Lord profeſſed of himſelfe, that his bowels were troubled for Ephraim his deare ſonne, and pleaſant childe 
                  Ier. 31. 20.: Yea that his heart was even turned within him, and his repentings did roule together 
                  Oſay 11. 8.. As if he had begotten mercy, he is called the father of it 
                  2 Cor. 1. 3.: Yea, as if there were no end thereof, he is called, The Father of mercies 
                  
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     . Pater miſericordiarum.
                  : Yea whereas he is called the God of many things, as of Patience 
                  Rom. 15. 5., Comfort 
                  Rom. 15. 13, 33., Hope 
                  Ibid., Peace 
                  Ibid., &c: But Father, and in plurall of none but this, as if he were nothing but mercy.
               Chriſt had compaſſion on the multitude, whenApplication. he knew they were but hungry Matth. 15. 32.: He had compaſſion, when he ſaw them bring their ſicke unto him Matth. 14. 14.; and will he not have compaſſion, when life is in danger? Oh right deare and precious in his ſight is the death of his Saints 
                  Pſ. 116. 15.; Hee wept when his friend Lazarus was dead 
                  Iohn 11. 35.; and will he not prevent it in his diſciples? Yes aſſuredly, if it be for his glory, and their good: they doe well therefore to goe to Chriſt, but it is enough to tell him what is their danger and miſery: Lord, ſave us, we periſh.
               
               Is then the Church of God in danger, throughVſe. cruell rage of bloudy perſecutors, ſo as it cannot in likelihood ſubſiſt? goe to Chriſt and pray for his people, Lord, ſave us, we periſh: Art thou thy ſelfe in danger, through hunger, thirſt, by water, fire, ſword, peſtilence, &c. Goe to Chriſt, and ſay, Lord ſave me, I periſh. So did David, I will cry unto God
                  
                  moſt high, and he ſhall ſend from heaven, and ſave me, from ſuch as would ſwallow me 
                        •
                     p, Pſal. 57. 2.
               Yea; and go to him with great comfort and confidence,Encouragement. for he hath beene made like unto his brethren, that he might be a mercifull and faithfull high Prieſt 
                  Heb. 2. penult.
                  ; yea, hath beene touched with the feeling of our infirmities; therefore let us goe bolaly to the throne of Grace 
                  Heb. 4. ult.
                  , and ſpecially in danger of death.
               Let us (with his Diſciples here) goe to him, whoExamples. hath himſelfe both ſuffered, and feared it; and hath in nothing more declared his goodneſſe and greatneſſe, love and power, than in delivering his ſervants from it, when their lives have beene for his glory; as his people, from rage of enemies and Red ſea Exod. 14. 13.; Moſes from the water Exod. 2. 3.; Ionah out of the Whales belly Ionah 2. ult.
                  ; the three Children out of the fiery furnace Dan. 3. 2
                        •
                     .; Daniel out of the Lions den Dan. 6. 23.; yea, Paul out of the mouth of the Lion 2 Tim. 4. 17.. Oh the dangers that every where, by ſea and land, at home and abroad, by day and night, we are continually ſubject unto, and wherein we had long ſince periſhed, if he had not mercifully by his good providence and powerful protection of his good Angels preſerved us! To him let us ever commend our ſelves, Lord, ſave us, that we periſh not.
               
               But I heare ſome object againſt this Vſe, andObiect. ſay, Doe not Gods people complaine, For thy ſake are we killed all the day long, and as ſheepe appointed for the ſlaughter 
                  Pſal. 44. 22.? Doe they not complaine, that the enemies prevailed, and gave the bodies and fleſh of his ſervants to be meat to the beaſts of the field, and fowles of the heaven, and ſhed their bloud like water 
                  Pſal. 79. 2.?

And againe, They breake in peeces thy people, and afflict thine heritage; they ſlay the widow and ſtranger, and murther the fatherleſſe 
                  Pſal. 94▪ 5.: The ungodly even for his owne hearts luſt doth perſecute the poore 
                  Pſal. 10. 8, 9..
               Never might ſuch complaints be more juſtlyApplication. made, than in theſe daies: wherefore it ſeemeth that Chriſt doth not care, though his people doe periſh; but as the careleſſe ſhepherd ſaid, That which periſheth, let it periſh, Zach. 11. 9.
               I anſwer, that ſometimes God ſuffereth greatSol. havocke to be made of his Church and people for their ſinnes, and giveth the dearely beloved of his ſoule into the hands of their enemies, Ierem. 12. 7. nor will heare his beſt ſervants for them, Ezech. 14. 20. but caſteth them off, to ſword, peſtilence, captivitie, Ier. 15. 2. And then the enemie groweth proud, and blaſphemeth, Who is the Lord, that he ſhould deliver Ieruſalem out of mine hands 
                  Eſay 36. 20.? And there is no helpe for them in God 
                  Pſal. 3. 3.; and then, even Davids feet had wel-nigh ſlipt 
                  Pſal. 73. 2.: And the Prophet Habakkuk is wonderfully offended, and expoſtulateth with God, Oh God, why doeſt thou hold thy tongue, when the wicked devoureth the man that is more righteous than he 
                  Hab. 1. 13.? Yea then, ſuch as are not ſound at heart fall away, and ſay, It is in vaine to ſerve God; what profit is it, that we have kept his ordinance, and that we have walked mournfully before the Lord of hoaſts 
                  Malach. 3. 14.? I ſay to all ſuch enemies, Vnderſtand ye bruitiſh among the people: He that planted the eare, ſhall he not heare? he that formed the eye, ſhall hee not ſee 
                  Pſal. 94. 8, 9.? He heareth the ſighes and groanes, and ſeeth the miſery of his people; and when he hath ſufficiently ſcourged his

people, and accompliſhed his great worke upon Sion, and Ieruſalem, he will burne the rod 
                  Eſay 10. 5.; and Aſhur ſhall pay for it, as he hath threatned, I was wroth with my people, and gave them into thine hand, but thou didst ſhew them no mercy, upon the Ancients haſt thou very heavily laid the yoke 
                  Eſay 47. 6.. Oh the perſecuting enemies have an heavie day comming. And I ſay to all ſuch as feare God, Stand ſtill, and ſee the ſalvation of God 
                  Exod. 14. 13.. Never any father corrected his childe with more unwillingneſſe, than God doth afflict his people: his bowels yearne, He putteth all their teares in his bottell 
                  Pſal. 56. 8.. And as he will preſerve them, they ſhall never everlaſtingly periſh; ſo either their bodies ſhall not periſh, but be preſerved from ſword of enemie 
                  Pſal. 97. 10.; or, if he give them for a prey, he will fill them with patience, comfort and joy, and receive them to eternall happineſſe, ſo as they ſhall praiſe him, and for ever confeſſe, Thou haſt tried us as ſilver, thou broughteſt us into the net, thou layedſt affliction upon our loynes, thou haſt cauſed men to ride over our heads, we went thorow fire and water; but thou haſt brought us into a wealthy place 
                  Pſal. 66. 10, 11, 12.. Reſt aſſured, Moſt precious in the ſight of God is the death of his Saints 
                  Pſal. 116. 15.. They may confidently pray, they may not periſh; for he hath numbred their very haires, Matth. 10. 30. He keepeth their very bones, ſo as not one can be broken 
                  Pſal. 34. 20.; much leſſe any one ſhal die, but as it is for Gods glory, and their good.
               Our ſecond leſſon is, That even the Godly are2. Doct. ſometimes much afraid of bodily death. You ſee your example is plaine. The diſciples thinking they ſhould preſently be drowned, crie out, we periſh:
                  
ſo did Peter (their mouth in that excellent confeſſion of their faith Matth. 16. 16.;) ſeeing the wind boiſterous, he was afraid, and when he began to ſinke, he cried, Lord, ſave me 
                  Matth. 14. 30.. The Doctrine is ſufficiently confirmed, and ſo I might leave it. But becauſe many of Gods children are herewith greatly troubled, and Satan aſſaulteth their ſoules, ſuggeſting that they have not faith nor true peace of conſcience, nor are in good eſtate with God, becauſe they are ſo fearefull to die; give me leave a little to inlarge my ſelfe for their comfort; and for illuſtration of this Doctrine, preſent unto you foure glaſſes, and thorow which it is, that men and women looking, Death is ſo fearefull, or comfortable.
               The firſt, is the glaſſe of Nature; the ſecond, of Fortune; the third, of the Law; and the fourth, of the Goſpell. In the three firſt, Death appeareth fearefull; only in the fourth, comfortable: Yea fearefull in the glaſſe of Nature; more fearefull in the glaſſe of Fortune; and moſt fearefull in the glaſſe of the Law. God would have all the wicked to behold Death in the three firſt, that through feare of Death, they may repent of their ſinnes, and flie to Chriſt, who ſaveth from it: and hee would have the godly to behold Death in the glaſſe of the Goſpell, that having found grace to beleeve, and repent, they may die comfortably. But Satan (who ſeeketh mans deſtruction) well knowing how remarkable the ſickneſſe and deaths of men are, and what deepe impreſſions the laſt ends of the dead make in the minds of the living, laboureth to invert this order. And whereas God would have

his children to behold death in the glaſſe of the Goſpell; he (as much as he can) hideth that from their ſight, and ſhuffleth in the other before them, that he may terrifie them with the dread and horror of death, and (if it be poſſible) draw them into impatience, and to ſpeake unadviſedly; which the wicked hearing and ſeeing, are thereby animated in their evill courſes, ſaying, You ſee ſuch and ſuch an one, great profeſſors and holy men; yet you ſee how impatient in ſickneſſe, how fearefull to die. And on the other ſide, when the wicked are ſick & readie to die (ſo much as he can) he hideth the three firſt glaſſes, and only preſenteth the fourth; and if in the time of health, they have heard any comfortable ſentences, he will helpe their memories to rehearſe them, to the end they may lie patiently, and die reſolutely and cheerefully: then doe ſuch ſinners boaſt, Loe, ſuch a man, though in his health a good-fellow, a drunkard, a whore-maſter, gameſter, ſwearer, &c. yet he died like a lambe, wagged neither hand nor foot; I deſire to make no better end, which I hope I ſhall doe, though I walke in his waies. Oh ſee the juggling of Satan, where God doth not over-maſter him! Be wiſe yee that feare God; Doe yee ſee a moſt wicked and prophane liver, to die quietly and well? condemne him not; ſometimes a good death may follow a bad life: but it is to be feared, Satan hath abuſed him, and preſented a wrong glaſſe before him; therefore ſay, I will not hazard mine eſtate upon ſo deſperate a point; I will not walke in his waies; I will live well, and then I ſhall die well: and doe you ſee ſuch an

one, as hath lived godly and well, and approved himſelfe to the conſciences of ſuch as knew him, to be an honeſt man, fearing God, and eſchewing evil, yet lieth, hardly, impatiently bearing his viſitation, toſſing, tumbling, ſweating, it may be, talking idly, and raving: Alas, this may befall the beſt of Gods children, partly through the malice of Satan, and partly through the weakneſſe of fleſh and bloud, and ſtrength of his diſeaſe. But let not theſe things trouble thee. That of Saint Auguſtine is moſt ſure, Non poteſt malè mori, qui bene vixerit; He cannot die ill, that liveth well. Yea, Thou art thy ſelfe ſick, and in danger of death, and thou art much troubled, to thinke how ſoule and bodie muſt part; friends and all be left; thy body, which thou haſt kept ſo delicately, clothed and fed ſo deliciouſly, muſt be laid in a place of darkneſſe and cold, become meat for wormes, and ſee corruption: but thou art more troubled, to thinke how thou muſt leave thine houſes, lands, offices, wealth and honour, thou knoweſt not to whom, (it may be to enemies) leave a deſolate widow, and fatherleſſe children, to the mercy of the world, thy ſelfe being cut off in the midſt of thine age, and deprived of all thine hopes: but thou art moſt troubled to thinke how Death came into the world, that it is the wage of ſinne, the ſeale of Gods anger, malediction of the Law, and portall of hell; thy minde can thinke of nothing elſe: ſo as now thou art even diſtracted with feare, and wouldſt give all that ever thou haſt for life. Oh, if thou beeſt a penitent beleever, ſuffer not Satan thus to abuſe thee, ſay unto

him, Avoid Satan, thruſt away theſe glaſſes from thee, let not thy minde meditate on theſe things; call for the glaſſe of the Goſpell, wherein thou ſhalt ſee the ſting of Death taken away; yea Death it ſelfe ſwallowed up in victory; thou ſhalt ſee the nature of it changed; being the end of ſickneſſe, ſorrow, ſinne, labour, and all miſerie; and the beginning of full happineſſe and glory; thou ſhalt ſee the Angels carrying ſoules into Abrahams boſome; thou ſhalt ſee the happineſſe of heaven, into which the ſoule (immediately upon departure hence) entreth; and ſuch as all the wealth, glory, and comforts of this life are but dung, in compariſon of: there ſhalt thou ſee God in his holy habitation, a Father to the fatherleſſe, and Husband to the widow; yea, there ſhalt thou ſee thine owne mortall and corruptible body riſe in glory. Oh behold Death in this glaſſe of the Goſpell, and thou ſhalt die moſt comfortably, and even deſire to be diſſolved, and be with Chriſt. I beſeech you marke well my diſcourſe of Death this day, and labour to remember (at the leaſt) the principal paſſages therof; you know not how ſoone you may have occaſion to make uſe of it; It is appointed for all once to die: but when; this day, or to morrow; this yeere, or the next; where; on ſea, or land; at home, or abroad; how; by fire, or water; ordinary ſickneſſe, or peſtilence; naturally, or violently, we know not: theſe things, if preſerved by you, may ſtand you in ſome ſtead in time of need. Wherefore what I have delivered in the groſſe, I will now more particularly unfold, and from the holy Scriptures

inlarge my. Diſcourſe ſeverally.
               The firſt glaſſe, is the glaſſe of Nature, I meane1. Glaſſe. of Nature corrupted, for it is the wage of ſinne; i
                     •
                   
                  Adam had not ſinned, there had not beene death. Thorow this, all the wiſe Gentiles, and Heathen, and all that know not God, doe behold it: and thus to looke upon it, is fearefull. It is true, that many Heathen men have ſeemed very valorous, and have contemned it; but it was rather raſhneſſe, and deſperate madneſſe, than true valour or courage. The Prince of Philoſophers himſelfe hath ſaid, not only that Death is fearefull, but of all evils the fearefulleſt 
                     Ariſt. Eth
                           ••
                        
                        ▪ lib. 3 cap. 6.. What need we their teſtimonies, when the Scripture it ſelfe is ſo cleare? Iob calleth it, The King of Terrors 
                  Iob 18. 14.. And the Apoſtle ſaith, Without Chriſt, all men, through feare of death, are ſubject to bondage 
                  Heb. 2. 15.. Oh, it is the enemie of Nature, ſeparater of ſoule and bodie, moſt loving twinnes; depriver of all earthly comforts, which ſo ſarre depend on life, as, it ceaſing, they alſo ceaſe to be. David ſaith, When men die, they muſt leave their wealth and honour to others 
                  Pſal. 4
                        •
                     . 
                        ••
                     .. God asked the foole, Whoſe ſhall theſe things be 
                  Luke 
                        •
                     2. 20.? And Abraham gave Dives, begging but a drop of water, a cold anſwer, Sonne, remember, thou in thy life time receivedſt thy good things 
                  Luke 16. 25.. Wherefore it is impoſſible for any man, utterly ignorant of Chriſt, and only ſeeing Death thorow the glaſſe of Nature, but he muſt needs feare, and either die ſullenly, or deſperately.
               The ſecond glaſſe wherein death is ſeene, I may2. Glaſſe. (with reverence to Gods providence) call the glaſſe

of Fortune, (as the goods of this world are called the goods of Fortune Bona fortunae.) and in this glaſſe, death appeareth more fearefull than in the former. Circumſtances doe greatly increaſe the feare of death: as if a man be young, healthy, luſtie, and in ſtrength of nature, bloud runnes freſh in the veines, and marrow in the bones: Quanto natura fortior▪ tanto dolor acerbior; The ſweeter the conjunction, the more bitter the ſeparation. Alſo, if a man be in high place of honour, or great hope of preferment: If a man be rich, and have all things at his hearts deſire, how fearefull are ſuch to die? Oh death, how bitter is the remembrance of thee, to a man that liveth at r
                        •
                     ſt in his poſſeſsions, to the man that hath nothing to vex him, that hath proſper it i
                        •
                      in all things 
                  Eccleſ. 41. 1.? Oh death▪ how bitter is thy remembrance to him that with Peter thinketh it is good to be here 
                  Matth. 17. 4.; that hath much to leave, and little to hope for? Againe, a violent death more fearefull than that which is naturall; and according to the meanes of violence, and inſtruments of execution: fearefull to die, by the hands of man; more fearefull to die, by the mouths of wilde beaſts; but of all moſt fearfull to die by raging fire & waters His Majeſties firſt ſpeech after diſcovery of gunpowder treaſon.. Which thing an Heathen Poet hath excellently expreſſed; I feare not death, but drowning, a miſerable kinde of death 
                  Non lethum timco, genus eſt miſerabile lethi; Demite naufragium, mors mihi munus erit. Ovid. de triſtib. El
                        •
                     g. 2.. Againe, to die ſuddenly, and ſpecially when God ſheweth ſome token of anger, doth wonderfully increaſe the feare of it. This made ſuch a cry thorowout all Egypt, when at midnight their firſt-borne were ſlaine Exod. 12. 30.. I doe not judge ſuch as die ſuddenly, and extraordinarily, by water or land. The wiſe man

hath taught us not to judge of any mans eſtateEccleſ. 9. 2. before God, by outward things. God knoweth whoſe caſe it may be; I am ſure it hath beene the caſe of ſuch, as the holy Scriptures aſſure, to have beene godly; as Eli, Ionathan, Ioſiah, Sampſon. The Apoſtle ſaith, Nothing can ſeparate the Saints from the love of God, which is in Chriſt Ieſus 
                  Rom. 8. 35.; not death, not manner of death. Sudden death to Gods children, is but like the tranſlation of Henoch and Elias, which was in a moment: yet let me ſay againe; (though we judge charitably of ſuch) yet to be ſuddenly and unlooked for ſurprized of death, with any note of divine anger, is both fearefull to the parties themſelves, and others. For though we know we muſt die, and ought alwaies to be ready, yet who ſo prepared, (eſpecially in times of health and proſperitie) but hath many things to ſet in order? And ſeeing all dependeth upon the laſt act, the whole life being but as a levelling and drawing, & death as the diſcharge of the arrow; our mother Church hath godly taught us, to pray, if it be his bleſſed will, to deliver us from ſudden death, and to give us time of repentance, and preparation, with underſtanding, memory, hearing, and ſpeech, to the laſt breath 
                     Haec eſt illa 
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        , quam ſibi ſuiſque precari ſolitus eſt Auguſtus Caeſar. Sic de obitu ejus ſcribit Suetonius, cap. 99.. Did not Lot know that his wife ſhould die? Yes: but to him, and all that ſhall heare the ſtorie, it is fearefull, that ſhee was ſuddenly turned into a pillar of ſalt 
                  Gen. 19. 26.. Aaron well knew that his ſonnes muſt die: but to ſee two of them (Nadab and Abihu) conſumed at once, by fire from heaven, it did ſtrangely aſtoniſh him Levit. 10. 3.. Iob knew ſo much too: but to heare, that all his children were

ſuddenly deſtroyed with the downefall of their eldeſt brothers houſe, wherein they were feaſting, made him riſe and rent his clothes Iob 1. 20. Scio me genuiſſe mortalem. Anaxag
                           •
                        ras de obitu filij.
                  . Yea and David knew ſo much, and comforted himſelfe after the death of another, ſaying, I ſhall goe to it, but it ſhall not come to me
                  2 Sam. 12. 23.: But when he heard of the ſudden death of his ſonne Abſolon, it made his heart even turne, and ouer-turne within him, he never ſo bitterly lamented any thing as that, Oh my ſonne Abſolon, my ſonne, my ſonne Abſolon, would God I had died for thee, O Abſolon, my ſonne, my ſonne 
                  2 Sam. 18. 33. Application.
                  .
               Come we to our diſciples. They ſee death, in the glaſſe of Nature, and it is fearefull: they ſee it in the glaſſe of their Fortune; they are now in middle age, ſtrong and luſtie, in great hope of preferment by their Maſter, and ſtriving for ſupremacie Mar. 9. 34., and who ſhall ſit on his right hand, and who on his left in his kingdome 
                  Matth. 20. 21.; death commeth upon them ſuddenly, robbeth them of all they now are, or hoped to be, they have not leiſure to ſet themſelves, or houſes in order, nor bid wife and friends farewell; not leiſure to ſwallow their ſpettle, nor ſay their praiers, but ſhortly, and abruptly, for life: they are like to die by waters, and become meat for the fiſhes - ſperare ſepulchrum; Et non equoreis piſcibus eſſe cibum. Ovid.; and that by ſuch a ſudden and raging ſtorme, as if heaven meant to deſtroy them, ſo as now their feare is much increaſed, and they cry out, Lord, ſave us, we periſh.
               
               The third is the glaſſe of the Law, which repreſenteth3. Glaſſe. death, as the wage and puniſhment of ſin, the demonſtration of Gods diſpleaſure, and the

gate of hell; when all the curſes and maledictions of God come fully, and for ever, to be powred out. Oh in this, death appeareth moſt fearefull, and like that dreadfull and terrible ſtrong beaſt, which Daniel ſaw in his Viſion, which had great Iron teeth, and ten hornes, and devoured, and brake in peeces, and ſtamped the reſt under feet Dan. 7. 7..
               Good Lord, how greatly are the wicked, andExamples. all guilty ſinners affrighted at this ſight of death? Saul being a wicked man, having a guilty conſcience, no ſooner ſaw death at hand through this glaſſe, but he fell ſtraight-way all along upon the earth, was exceedingly afraid, and there was no ſtrength in him
                  1 Sam. 28. 20.. When wicked Belſhazzir an enemy of Gods people, and, at that time, he and his Wives, Concubines, and Princes, carowſing in the Veſſels of Gold and Silver, which his father Nabuchodonezer had brought from the Temple of the Lord in Ieruſalem, and praiſed their gods of Gold, and Silver, Braſſe, Iron, Wood, and Stone; no ſooner caſt his eye on death, through the glaſſe of the Law, which God ſet up on the wall, over againſt the Candleſticke, but his countenance was changed, his thoughts ſo troubled him, that the ioints of his loynes were looſed, and his knees ſmote one againſt another
                  Dan. 5. 2, 3, &c.; and nothing could comfort him, or ſtill that raging ſtorme. This was ſignified by that dreadfull manner of giving the Law on Mount Sinai, with ſuch darknes, thunder, lightning, and earth-quake, that all the people fled Exod. 20. 18.; and Moyſes himſelfe confeſſed, I exceedingly feare, and quake 
                  Heb. 12. 21.. We ſee, when wicked and ungodly men come to die, how they fare; either

they die ſullenly, as Nabal, whoſe heart was dead as a ſtone
                  1 Sam. 25. 36.; it being the righteous judgement of God upon them, that ſuch as refuſed grace in their life time, when he offered it, ſhould in their ſickneſſe, neither have grace, nor crave it, but die blockiſhly and ſenſleſly.
               The Lord knoweth, our times are full of ſuchApplication. men and women, which, as David ſaith, have hearts as fat as brawne
                  Pſal. 119. 70.; poſſeſſed with a ſpirit of ſlumber
                  Eſay 29. 10.; you might as well ſpeake to the bed-ſted as to them; talke with them of the way of Redemption, Iuſtification, and Salvation; alas how ignorant? Tell them of Reſurrection, and laſt Judgement; they have no apprehenſion. Reprove them for their ſinnes paſt; they know no ſuch matter. Informe them in the doctrine of Repentance, Contrition of heart, longing after the righteouſneſſe of Chriſt, the happineſſe of heaven; they wonder, as if you were reading of Riddles to them. You ſhall finde no ſound knowledge, no token of true repentance, no fruit of lively faith, no teſtimonie of a well-grounded hope, no ſigne of Chriſtian joy, as looking for a better life; nothing but dulneſſe and deadneſſe of ſpirit, and all their deſire is to live.
               But others, being awakened out of their ſins, their conſciences accuſing, and they beholding death in the looking-glaſſe of the Law; good Lord, how are they affrighted? What toſſing, ſighing, groaning, ſweating, compaſſed about with the ſorrowes of hell, and he is overwhelmed with deſpaire? Now are his ſinnes ſet before him, the ſinnes of childhood,

youth, & age; his ſwearing, riot, uncleanneſſe, oppreſſion, contempt of Gods word, and generall profaneneſſe; ſuch as hee made but a mocke and ſport of; but now they come in troopes, and appeare ſo great, that he is ſwallowed up of diſmaiedneſſe, and letteth his tongue be wray his deſpaire, and utter blaſphemie; and let a man labour to comfort him, he ſtill holdeth Cains concluſion, My ſin is greater than can be pardoned 
                  Gen. 4. 13.. And thus as his life was full of ſinne, his death is full of ſorrow; as in his health he had no conſcience, in his ſickneſſe he hath no comfort; as in his life he mocked Gods counſell, in his death God laugheth at his deſtruction 
                  Prov. 1. 26.; and he is in hell, whileſt he liveth; which to prevent, he could wiſh the rocks and mountaines to fall on him, and cover him Rev. 6. 16..
               Yea, not only the wicked, and reprobate, butAmplificatiō. even the elect, and moſt righteous, having but a glimpſe of death, thorow this glaſſe, have beene exceedingly daunted, and brought into moſt fearefull fits. Holy Iob, a man (by Gods owne teſtimonie) that feared God, and eſchewed evill, and all the dayes of his life did wait for his change, Iob 14. 14. could in good meaſure beare the ſudden & ſtrange loſſe of all his ſubſtance, cattell, ſervants, and children, and ſay, The Lord hath given, and the Lord hath taken, bleſſed be the name of the Lord 
                  Iob 1. 21.: but let him be touched in his bodie, ſicke and ſore from the crowne of the head to the ſoale of the foot 
                  Iob 2. 7.; let God withall write bitter things againſt him, and make him poſſeſſe the ſinnes of his youth 
                  Iob 13. 26.; let him ſee death in the looking-glaſſe of the Law; and then he enjoyeth

                  weariſome nights, and is full of toſsings 
                  Iob 7. 3, 4.; yea will curſe the day, and all the ſervices of his birth 
                  Iob 3. 3, &c.. David (a man after Gods owne heart 
                  Acts 13. 22.) will wade thorow a world of troubles, and it is not the malice of Saul 
                  1 Sam. 20. 30., hatred of the Philiſtims 
                  1 Sam. 29., envie of the Princes Ibid., rebellion of Abſolom 
                  2 Sam. 15. 10., trecherie of Achitophel 
                  2 Sam. 16. 21.; no threatning of Goliah 
                  1 Sam. 17. 14., grapling with a Lion 
                  1 Sam. 17. 34., fighting with a Beare 
                  Ibid.; no hunger, cold, danger, can diſcourage him, but in all diſtreſſe, he comforteth himſelfe in his God 
                  1 Sam. 30. 6.: but let him ſee death in the looking-glaſſe of the Law, and hee will even roare for the diſquietneſſe of his heart 
                  Pſal. 38. 8.; his heart will be pained, the terrors of death fall on him, fearefulneſſe and trembling come upon him, and horror over whelme him, Pſal. 55. 4. yea the feare of death doth undoe him: then will he make his bed to ſwim, and even water his couch with teares 
                  Pſal. 6. 6.; and then all his prayers are againſt death, Oh ſpare me, that I may recover my ſtrength 
                  Pſal. 39 ult.: and, Oh my God, cut me not off in the midſt of my dayes 
                  Pſal. 102. 24.; Oh ſave me, for thy mercies ſake, for in death there is no remembrance of thee, and who will give thee thanks in the grave 
                  Pſal. 6. 5.? Let King Ezekiah receive a meſſage of death from God, and behold in the glaſſe of the Law, and hee will turne his face to the wall, and weepe bitterly, chatter like a Crane or Swallow, mourne like a Dove, and complaine that God like a Lion, hath broken all his bones, and all his prayer is for life, The living, the living ſhall praiſe thee 
                  Eſay 38. 2, 13, 14, 19, &c.. But in Chriſt himſelfe we have an Example of all Examples for this purpoſe, who (as Mediator) beholding death in the glaſſe of the Law, and the inferiour reaſon, preſenting it

to the minde, not with all circumſtances Dr. Field of the Church, lib. 5 cap. 18., he began to feare 
                  Mar. 14. 33., his ſoule was exceeding ſorrowfull even to death; yea, the ſorrowes of death compaſſed him about 
                  Pſal. 116. 3.; that he fell into a dreadfull agonie 
                  Luk. 22. 44.; his thoughts were troubled, his ſpirits affrighted, his heart trembled, his ioynts ſhooke, his pores opened, and a ſweat of drops like bloud, burſt thorow and thorow his garments Luk. 22. 45.. Oh this was a grievous ſtorme in his ſoule! And what doth he? As his diſciples came to him, ſo he to his Father, and in a ſweet and ſolitarie place, a Garden, an Oratorie, whither he had often reſorted to pray Iohn 18. 2., there he powreth out his ſoule in an heavenly prayer Matth. 26. 36. Luk. 22. 39, &c., moſt commendable both for ſubſtance, and circumſtance, with earneſt intention, for he did double and ingeminate the title often, Father, Father, with wonderfull fervencie of ſpirit, every word afforded a drop of bloud; in faith, he ſaid, my Father; with humbleneſſe, for he kneeled downe; with wonderfull reverence, he fell downe groveling, as it were kneeling on his face, and praying out of the duſt; with great conſtancie, he prayed three times; with ſubmiſſive obedience, Not my will, but thine be done; and with great charitie, for ever and anon, he viſited his Diſciples, and gave them good counſell, and comfort; and what was it he thus begged? Take, oh take away this cap: and he was heard in that which he feared 
                  Heb. 5. 7., the ſtorme was calmed, an Angell ſent, and comforted him Luk. 22. 43..
               Oh man, ſee in thy Saviour, what it is to be aVſe. ſinner! If the righteous and deare Sonne of God, having no ſinne but by imputation, was ſo affrighted

with the terrors of death; how would death diſtract, with the terrors of it, impenitent ſinners, if God did open their eyes, and let them ſee it, in the looking-glaſſe of the Law, clothed with the red robe of Gods fiery indignation, gaping with great Iron teeth, ready to devoure; having in the forehead written, Curſed is every one, that continueth not in all things written in the booke of the law, to doe them 
                  Deut. 27. ult., and having the keyes of hell and the bottomleſſe pit in his hand?
               
               Thus we have ſeene death in the looking-glaſſeConcluſion. of Nature, and it appeareth fearefull, for therein the bodie periſheth. We have ſeene it in the looking-glaſſe of Fortune, & therein it appeareth more fearefull, for therein bodie and all the good things of this world periſh. We have laſtly ſeene it in the looking-glaſſe of the Law, and therein it appeareth moſt fearefull, for therein bodie and ſoule periſh for ever.
               The fourth and laſt glaſſe, is the glaſſe of the4. Glaſſe. Goſpell; wherein (through the death of Chriſt) the nature of it is changed; of a foe, it is become a friend; and from a curſe and puniſhment of ſinne, is become a bleſſing; from the doore of Hell, it is become the portall of Heaven. Chriſt hath ſpoiled principalities and powers, and triumphed openly over them on the Croſſe 
                  Coloſſ. 2. 15.; yea and hath purſued Death into the grave, his Caſtle, and there conquered him, the ſorrowes of death being looſed, whereof it was impoſsible that he ſhould be held 
                  Acts 2. 24.; and ſo hath performed what he anciently threatned, O death, I will be thy plagues; oh grave, I will be thy deſtruction:
                  
                  Oſe. 13. 14. which made the Apoſtle (in the name of all the faithfull) ſo to triumph: O death, where is thy ſting? ô grave, where is thy victory? The ſting of death is ſinne, and the ſtrength of ſinne is the law; but thanks be to God, who giveth victory through Ieſus Chriſt our Lord 
                  1 Cor. 15. 55.. I am the reſurrection and the life, he that beleeveth in me, ſhall live though he die 
                  Iohn 11. 25.: He that beleeveth is paſſed from death to life, and ſhall not come into judgement 
                  Iohn 5. 24.. Now then there is no condemnation to them that are in Chriſt Ieſus 
                  Rom. 8. 1.: and, Bleſſed are the dead, that die in the Lord 
                  Rev. 14. 13.. Loe theſe are the comforts of the Goſpell againſt death, which all the faithfull have enjoyed from the beginning of the world, though more plentifully revealed in theſe laſt dayes. And hence it is, that where-ever death is beheld through the glaſſe of the Goſpell, it is ſeene, and ſpoken of, with abundance of joy and comfort: and as the nature, ſo the name of it is changed. God called Abrahams death, a going to his fathers 
                  Gen. 15. 15.; and the death of Iſaak 
                  Gen. 35. 29., Iacob 
                  Gen. 49. 33., Aaron 
                  Numb. 20. 24., and Moſes 
                  Deut. 32. 50., is called a gathering to their fathers. Ioſhuah calleth his dying, the going the way of all the earth 
                  Ioſh. 23. 14.. And David uſeth the ſame words 1 Kings 2. 2.. Moſes and Elias talking on Thabor of Chriſts death, call it ſo too, they talked of his departure 
                  Matth. 17. 3.. Yea Chriſt called it his departing out of this world to his Father 
                  Iohn 13. 1.; and Simeon prayed the Lord, to let him depart in peace 
                  Luk. 2. 2
                        •
                     .. It is but a taſte 
                  Luk. 9. 27., but a ſight 
                  Luk. 2. 26.. Lazarus death is called a ſleepe, Ioh. 11. Paul calleth his death, a looſing, as out of priſon 
                     
                        •
                     hilip. 1. 23.. S. Peter calleth his, a laying downe of his Tabernacle 
                  2 Pet. 1. 14.. Thus comfortably doe the Scriptures phraſe death, for the incouragement

of all mortall men, who muſt die: oh get into Chriſt and feare not death, no more than thou wouldeſt feare to lie downe and ſleep, or to put off an old garment, or to goe out of priſon, or of a rotten Cottage, that thou maiſt dwell in a Palace, a Paradiſe. Oh, death is not now terrible, but deſirable; as S. Paul ſaid, I deſire to be diſſolved and to be with Chriſt 
                  Phil. 1. 23.. And againe, Wee ſigh, deſiring to be clothed on, with our houſe, which is from heaven 
                  2 Cor. 5. 2.. Oh welcome death, which to all Gods children (through Chriſt) is the end of hunger, thirſt, ſorrow, care, ſickneſſe, ache, paine, temptations, ſin, and all evills; and the beginning of all good, without end Mors non terribilis ſed optabilis, laborum finis, & requici initium. Ambroſ.. Whereof ſome of the learned Fathers have written moſt large and excellent Treatiſes Scripſit S. Cyprianus tractatum de mortalitate, quem ſecutus eſt Ambroſius. lib. de bono mortis..
               If then, theſe Diſciples had beheld death in the glaſſe of the Goſpel, & had had a ſtrong Faith, they would never have given it ſo harſh & comfortleſſeApplication. a title, as calling it a periſhing; but (as you have heard) a ſleeping, going, and gathering to fathers, departing, laying downe of Tabernacle, &c. and if their Faith had beene ſtrong they would have ſaid, as the three children did to Nabuchadonozer, O King, our God, whom we ſerve, is able to deliver us 
                  Dan. 3. 1
                        •
                     .. Winds and Seas, what meane yee to rage? Our Maſter, whom we ſerve, is able to ſave vs, whether he ſleepe or wake; but howſoever, we feare not death, be it ſudden, or looked for; violent, or naturall; by ſea, or land; by water, or fire; for if we die, we ſhall goe to heaven, and then ſhall we know miſery no more.
               To conclude, theſe diſciples call, and pray toConcluſion.
                  
Chriſt for helpe, but withall they doe their duties. The Euangeliſt ſaith, They did toile in rowing, in another ſtorme 
                  Mark. 6. 48.; and ſo doubtleſſe did they in this. The heathen Mariners in Ionah, as they did cry upon their gods, ſo they caſt their wares into the ſea to lighten the ſhip, and did even dig and delve, or furrow the ſea with their Ores, if poſſibly they might have brought it to the land Ionah 1. 5, 13.. But herein appeareth a great deale of our folly; that, as moſt prayApplication. not at all; ſo many pray only, Lord, ſave us, and doe nothing elſe: whereas God would have every one in ſuch a ſtorme, to ſet to his hands to helpe to caſt out the lading of the ſhip, and lighten it. What is it that ladeth the ſhip of the Church, and endangereth it in a ſtorme? It is ſinne, which is heavier than ſand, or lead, or any ballaſt: It was too heavie for David to beare, Pſal. 38. 4. It made the Sonne of God ſweat, Luke 22. 44. Yea made God himſelfe complaine, That hee was preſſed as a Cart with ſheaves, Amos 2. 13.
               Oh Miniſters, Magiſtrates, all Chriſtian men and women, ſet to your hands; Over the boord with ſinne in your ſelves, and in others. Were it not madneſſe for Mariners in a ſtorme to take in more lading? And ſurely no leſſe madneſſe it is for men to cry unto God to ceaſe puniſhing, but themſelves ceaſe not to ſin Genus dementi
                        •
                      eſt nolle à malis qui
                        •
                     ſc
                        •
                     re, & velle Deum à ſuaiuſta ultione ceſſare. Greger.. What meane ye, mad people? The ſtorme is great, the ſhip is overburthened, and draweth deepe, every ioynt cracketh, and yet you will not lighten it, not part with your ſinnes, though all ſinke for it, &c. And thus much be ſaid of the procuring of the calme. It followeth.
            
            
               
               
                  VERSE 26.
                  And hee ſaid unto them, Why are ye fearefull? ô yee of little Faith!
               
               CHriſt being awakened by the importunitie of his Diſciples, preſently applieth himſelfe to deliver them out of danger. And their deliverance conſiſteth in a double reprehenſion or increpation: for our Saviour ſaw there was a double ſtorme; the one in the Sea, the other in the minds of his Diſciples. As the Sea did rage and endanger the deſtruction of their bodies; ſoOrder of hiſtory. their minds did rage, and there was a ſtrange ſtorme in their affections; which threatned no leſſe the deſtruction of their ſoules. Yea, the outward ſtorme had beene a calme, if they had had a calme within: wherfore he ſtilleth them both; but which in the firſt place, is a queſtion. Our Euangeliſt is plaine, he firſt rebuked his Diſciples. S. Marke and S. Luke are as plaine, That hee firſt aroſe and rebuked the winds and the ſeas. It muſt not trouble us, that ſuch differences appeare in the Euangeliſts. It may be, he rebuked his Diſciples twice Poteſt reſponderi, bis eſſe reprehenſos diſcipulos. Barrad., both before he ſtilled the Sea, and after; both to declare how juſtly he was offended, that they having heard ſo much Doctrine, and ſeene ſo many Miracles, yet they had profited no better; and alſo to worke a perfect cure in them, that hereafter they might no more bewray ſuch weakneſſe. And this anſwereth fully,

how one ſaith, It was before; and two, That it was after; for indeed it was both: and one Euangeliſt hath that which another omitteth; a thing ſo uſuall as needeth no proofe. But I rather incline to that of Chryſoſtome, That firſt he rebuked his Diſciples, and then the winds and ſeas; and that the other two Euangeliſts did not preciſely obſerve the order of the Hiſtory Non ſervaſſe ordinem temporis. Chryſoſt. Homil. 28.: not becauſe our Euangeliſt ſaith, [then] hee aroſe and rebuked the winds and ſeas; as noting preciſely the time to be after he had rebuked his Diſciples Argum. Ianſenij, in Concord, Euang. cap. 30.: For S. Luke hath the ſame, for the other, [then] he aroſe and rebuked the winds and ſeas: but becauſe Chriſt firſt laboureth to beget Faith, and then worketh a miracle to increaſe and confirme it: there is no greater let of miracles, than vnbeleefe, as the Euangeliſt ſaith, Hee did not many mightie workes there, becauſe of their unbeleefe 
                  Matth. 13. ult.
                  : and before hee cured the poſſeſſed of a dambe ſpirit, he ſaid to his father, If thou canſt beleeve, all things are poſsible to him that beleeveth 
                  Mark. 9. 23.: and reproved Martha, before he raiſed her brother, Said I not, if thou wouldeſt beleeve, thou ſhalt ſee the glory of God 
                  Iohn 11. 40.?
               Chriſt is now about to worke a glorious miracle: but the modicity of his Diſciples Faith, doth (as it were) ſtand in his way, and hinder him Omnia poſſibilia credenti, Mar. 9. 33 Omnia fier
                        •
                      poſſunt credenti, Syr. Bez. P
                        •
                     ſcat.: wherefore firſt he removeth that, Why are yee fearefull? By which order of proceeding, our Saviour teacheth vs, That God would have his people by FaithDoct. to reſt on him, even when they are in the midſt of their troubles. And herein lieth a great difference betwixt a worldling and a true beleever; a meere

worldlings heart is as dead as a ſtone in troubles, and can have no comfort as long as troubles continue. A Prince ſaid, when the Prophet prophecied plenty of victualls in Samaria, If the Lord would make windowes in heaven, can this be? 2 Kings 7. 2. But the true beleever in all diſtreſſe doth comfort himſelfe in God (as David did 1. Sam. 30. 6.:) Though hee kill mee, I will truſt in him, (ſaith Iob 
                  Iob 13. 15..) When the children of Iſrael were in ſuch diſtreſſe at the Red Sea, this was it Moſes required, Stand ſtill, and ſee the ſalvation of God 
                  Exod. 14. 13.; lay aſide their diſtruſt and murmuring, reſt on God; and then they ſhould ſee his ſalvation. And when there came ſo great an hoaſt againſt Iudah, King Iehoſhaphat (being well adviſed by Gods Prophet) ſaith to Iudah, and all the Inhabitants of Ieruſalem, Beleeve in the Lord your God, and ye ſhall be eſtabliſhed; beleeve his Prophets, ſo ſhall yee proſper 
                  2. Chron. 20. 20.: and then the enemies deſtroyed one another. And Heſter, and her maids, and people, muſt faſt and pray, and encourage one another: for they ſhall not be delivered, till they beleeve in God.
               Here then is the reaſon why the ſtorme ſo longApplication. continueth, and there are ſuch great troubles, and of ſuch long continuance in the Church of God, in generall; and in many a mans perſon and ſtate, in particular; viz. They are immoderately fearefullDiviſion. and out of heart, diſtruſt Gods power and providence: wherefore God doth ſtill proceed to correct their diſtruſt, and when his people have learned in their troubles to reſt on him, then ſhall they ſee the ſalvation of God: then (and never till then)

God will ſend a calme. And ſo much be noted from the manner of proceeding.
               Firſt, then, Chriſt reproveth his diſciples, andGen. Obſerv. that for two faults, viz. 1. For exceſſe of feare, Why are yee fearefull? 2. For defect of Faith, O yee of little Faith! The former is reproved by way of queſtion; the latter by way of admiration. Their Faith was in the Poſitive very little: their Feare in the Superlative very great. For the firſt, Why are yee fearefull? Away yee fearefull unbeleevers; Yee, and ſhip periſh together, &c. Hee reproveth them, but doth not reject them Obiurgat, non ut deſerat, ſed ut ſanet. Toſſan. in Euang.. No, no, he is that loving Shepherd, that doth ſeeke up the wandring and loſt ſheepe, beareth the tender lambs in his boſome, bindeth up that which was broken, and ſtrengtheneth that which was ſicke 
                  Ezech. 34. 16.: That loving Saviour, of whom it was propheſied, Abruiſed reed hee ſhall not breake, and ſmoaking flax hee ſhall not quench 
                  Eſay 42. 1. Matth. 12. 18.: And that mightie God, whoſe ſtrength is made perfect in weakneſſe 
                  2 Cor. 12. 9.. But if his offend, he will rebuke them: Martha is reproved for her worldlineſſe; Martha, Martha, thou careſt, and art troubled about many things 
                  Luke 10. penult.
                  . And Peter, if he be too curiouſly inquiſitive, muſt heare of it, If I will have this man ſtay till I come, what is that to thee 
                  Iohn 21. 22.? Yea, if he give him ill counſell, he will be ſharpe with him, Get thee behinde mee Satan 
                  Matth. 16. 23.. Yea let the Diſciples be in never ſo great danger, he will firſt reprove their fault, Why are yee fearefull?
               
               Thus we alſo ſhould doe, and ſo fulfill the RoyallApplication. Law, which ſaith, Thou ſhalt not hate thy brother in thine heart, thou ſhalt in any wiſe rebuke thy neighbour,
                  
                  and not ſuffer ſinne upon him 
                  Levit. 19. 17. Which Clemens Alexandrinus calleth the Chirurgery of the ſoule, in Paedag. lib. 1. cap. 8. And Saint Auguſtine, A ſpirituall almes, in Enchirid. But for want of this true love, and a fruit of hatred it is, that if we ſee any evil in our neighbour, either we flatter him, and ſay, All is wel; or never rebuke, ſaying, Why doeſt thou ſo? or elſe with ſcorne, contemne, deſpiſe, and reject him, never conſidering our ſelves, that we alſo may be tempted 
                  Gal 6. 1..
               But marke how meekely, mildly, and lovingly2. Gen. Obſer. he reproveth them; not one word of any ſharpnes, rigour, or aſperitie; no nor ſo much as affirme, This is your great ſinne, to be fearefull: but as God aſked Ionah a queſtion about his anger, Doſt thou well to be angry 
                  Ionah 4 4.? So, he only asketh them a queſtion about their feare, Why are yee fearefull? intimating, their feare was exceſſive and cauſeleſſe; and ſo the reproofe tended rather to comfort and encourage them: q. d. Be not ſo afraid, you have no cauſe of ſuch feare. Oh it is the gentle reproofe, the milde and loving objurgation and crimination which pierceth deepe; The Lords ſervant muſt be gentle towards all 
                  2 Tim. 2. 24.. This is the reproofe that David ſo much deſired, Let the righteous ſmite me friendly, and reprove me 
                  Pſal. 141. 5.. And the Apoſtle biddeth us reſtore ſuch an one, as is overtaken in a fault, with the ſpirit of meekeneſſe 
                  Gal. 6. 1.. But for want of love it commeth to paſſe, we reprove not at all; or, with ſuch fierceneſſe, gall, and bitterneſſe, as tendeth not to reſtore, but harden ſinners Non ſtud
                        •
                     o ſanan
                        •
                     i, ſed exulcerand
                        •
                     , & probro aff
                        ••
                     iendi: Mol. in Pſal..
               Oh let us from this Example, learne to be gentleVſe.
                  
and meeke towards poore and weake ſinners; and if any be too fearefull, becauſe themſelves or the people of God are in any great danger, let us labour to comfort them, to ſtrengthen the weake hands, and comfort the feeble knees 
                  Eſay 35. 3.. Speake to the heart of Ieruſalem 
                  Eſay 40 1.; Feare not, thou worme Iacob (though thou be but a worme.) And againe, Feare not, ye men of Iſrael, I will helpe thee, ſaith the Lord thy Redeemer 
                  Eſay 41. 10, 13, 14.. So much for generall obſervations.
               Now more particularly, conſider, what was itI. Particular Obſerv.
                   he reproved? [Fearefulneſſe:] not ſimply feare, for that is ingraffed in our nature; neither did Chriſt goe about to rob them of their affections, that they ſhould no more feare danger, than the maſt of the ſhip 
                     Hoc eſſet humanitatem ex ho
                           •
                        ane tollere. D. Ierom. Habet currus noſt
                           •
                        r qua
                           •
                        uor rotas: amorem & laetitiam, timorem & triſtitiam. Bern. expervis, Serm. 35.; yea Chriſt himſelfe had our affections, and namely, this of feare: but our Saviour reproveth the exceſſe of it, called fearefulneſſe. The word in the Originall 
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     ., is of harſh ſignification, both amongſt prophane Authors, as miſerable 
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                      
                     Homer.
                  , weake 
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                      
                     He
                           ••
                        od.
                  , and wicked 
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     . H
                           •
                        m.
                  ; and in the Scriptures, for ſuch as ſhall die the ſecond death 
                  Rev. 21. 8. 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     .; ſuch a feare, as God hath not given his children the Spirit of 
                  2 Tim. 1. 7. 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     
                  ; a feare, which maketh men miſerable, weake, and feeble in minde, wicked in practiſe, to uſe any meanes to eſcape the evill they feare, the high way to hell, and that timiditie which the wiſe Heathen have oppoſed to the vertue of Fortitude 
                     Ar
                           •
                        ſt. Ethic. 3. 6., and therefore reproved, Why are yee fearefull 
                  
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     ; quid timidi eſtis?
                  ?
               Wherefore, this reprehenſion muſt teach us, bothDoct. by divine and humane praier, and all worldly wiſe meanes, to bridle and reſtraine our paſſions, that they exceed not meaſure, nor we be tranſported

with the violence of them, to ſay or doe that which is evill; but to remember the Apoſtolike caution, Be angrie, but ſinne not 
                  Epheſ. 4. 26.: be merry, but ſinne not; be ſory, but ſinne not; be afraid, but ſinne not. If you give way unto it, it is a moſt painfull paſſion, yea (as Saint Iohn ſaith) Such feare hath torment 
                  1 Iohn 4. 18. 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     , cruciatum habet, tormentum: Auguſt.
                  ; and maketh men bondſlaves, Heb. 2. 15. Chriſt had paſſions, but blameleſſe, becauſe his nature was moſt holy and pure. And therefore, as a glaſſe ofSimile. ſnow-water, though never ſo much ſhaken, yet abideth cleare and pure; but the glaſſe of muddie water, though whileſt it ſtandeth ſtill, the mud ſinder to the bottome, and the top is cleare; yet no ſooner is ſhaken, but the mud ariſeth, and all is defiled: So, howſoever in times of peace, health, and proſperitie, our paſſions be moderate and calme, and ſeeme cleare; yet no ſooner are troubled, but they grow muddie, yea defile our ſelves, and all that come neare: the raging ſea did not more caſt up mire and dirt, than their troubled affections, ſpirituall defilements: for which cauſe Chriſt here reproved them, Why are yee fearefull?
               
               The ſecond particular obſervation is, What was2. Particular Obſerv. the object of this feare? Was it God, or his judgements? No; they did feare a temporall, not the eternall death; water, but not fire; ſea, but not hell; drowning, but not burning; a creature, not the Creator: they may truly ſay with David, The terrors of death are fallen upon us, fearefulneſſe and trembling are come upon us, and horror hath overwhelmed us 
                  Pſal. 55. 4, 5.. Which our Saviour reproveth, Why are yee fearefull?
               
               
                  And he teacheth us, that Gods people ſhould notDoct. lit. immoderatly feare, no not any manner of death. A leſſon which it behoveth us (in theſe daies ſpecially) to take out; for as the Apoſtle ſaid, If the word ſpoken by Angels, was ſted faſt, and every tranſgreſsion, and diſobedience, received a just recōpence of reward, how ſhall we eſcape, if we neglect ſo great ſalvation 
                  Heb. 2. 3.? So if theſe Diſciples having heard and ſeene but a little, and being now in ſuch great perill, yet are reproved for immoderate feare; how much more ſhall wee be reproved, to whom the Goſpell of Chriſt hath beene ſo clearely revealed, who have ſeene ſo many workes of Gods goodneſſe, mercy, power, as the Paſſion, Reſurrection, and Aſcenſion of Chriſt into heaven? Here is therefore a good leſſon for us, to labour that we be not immoderately afraid of death.
               I ſay not, not afraid of death at all: for the beſt ofIlluſtration. Gods ſervants mentioned in holy Scripture, as Moſes, David, Iob, Eliah, Ezekiah, and the reſt have been. I may ſay of them all, as the Apoſtle ſaith of Eliah, they were ſubject to this paſsion, as wel as we 
                  Iames 5. 17. 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     .. Therefore he doth not ſay, Why are yee afraid? but, fearefull; yea, as if the word were not ſufficient to expreſſe the meaſure of their cōſternation (which yet is very ſignificant, as you have heard) hee addeth thereunto an Adverb of affirmation: So 
                  
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     ; quid (ita) timidi?
                  , q
                        •
                     d. Why are yee ſo exceedingly fearefull, ſo fearefull beyond bounds and meaſure? This being that he reproved in them, and is reproveable in all his diſciples, viz. immoderate and exceſſiue feare of death. Let us now ſee by what meanes Gods children may moderate

the feare of death in them, wherein I doe ſpecially commend unto you theſe foure things, viz. 1. A good cauſe: 2. An honeſt life: 3. A ſtrong faith: 4. Godly meditation on the good of Death.
               Firſt, a great meanes to ſuppreſſe immoderate1. A good cauſe. feare of death, is to die (if not for, yet) in a good cauſe; Bleſſed is that ſervant, whom his Maſter ſhall finde well doing, Matth. 24. 46. It is a true ſaying, It is not the puniſhment, but the cauſe maketh a Martyr. Chriſt hath not abſolutely pronounced all bleſſed, that ſuffer perſecution; but all ſuch as ſuffer perſecution for righteouſneſſe ſake 
                  Matth. 5. 10.. This was the joy of the Saints in old time, that they could truly ſay, Lord for thy ſake are wee killed 
                  Pſal. 44. 22.. This cauſed the holy Martyrs of Chriſt in this Land, in the daies of Queene Mary, ſo cheerefully to receive ſentence of death, ſo joyfully to ſing in their priſons, darke and loathſome dungeons, ſo comfortably embrace faggots, kiſſe ſtakes, clap hands in flaming fire; becauſe all this was for a good cauſe, even for Chriſt, the Goſpell, and a good conſcience ſake: and the holy Ghoſt hath pronounced, Bleſſed are the dead, which die in the Lord 
                  Rev. 14. 13.. This made them rejoyce in death with joy unſpeakable and glorious 
                  1 Pet. 1. 8.. This was Ioſephs comfort in priſon, thatExamples. 
                  he was falſly accuſed 
                  Gen. 39. 2. 20.; And Daniels, that he was caſt to the Lions for the matter of his God Dan. 6. 5.. Therefore Saint Peters charge is, Let none of you ſuffer as
                  Vſe. 
                  a murtherer, or as a theefe, or as an evill doer, or as a buſie-bodie in other mens matters; but if any ſuffer as a Chriſtian, let him not be aſhamed, but let him glorifie
                  
                  God in this behalfe 
                  1 Pet. 4. 15.. But how great is the horror of malefactors? No doubt but it pierced Ahabs ſoule, more than the arrow did his bodie, that this was the juſt judgement of God upon him for his ſinne 1 Kings 22. 35.. How fearefull was death to all ſuch whoſe carcaſſes God overthrew in the wilderneſſe, and deſtroyed them with fiery Serpents, and other fearefull meanes 
                  1 Cor. 10. 9.? Who knoweth the unconceiveable dread and horror, which wicked men have in their ſoules, in their priſons, death-beds, or executions, when their owne conſciences tell them, This miſerie is come upon me, for murther, theft, adultery, riot, and ſuch like wicked courſes?
               I doe not deny, but ſuch malefactors may dieI. Caution.
                   ſullenly, or deſperately. Others may be deceived, and thinke they die in a good cauſe, when they doe not. So the ancient Donatiſts, and Arrians, and in our times, the Prieſts and Ieſuits thinke they die for Religion, and the true Catholike cauſe, and deſerve to be Canonized for Saints, whereas they ſuffer deſerved puniſhment for their rebellion and ſedition: yea they would in death be accounted Martyrs, before they have led the life of a Chriſtian 
                     Aug. Epiſt. 61. & contra Creſconium, lib. 3. cap. 47.: yet being thus abuſed and deceived by Satan, and God in his juſtice giving them over into a reprobate ſenſe, they may even aſtoniſh men, to behold their ſeeming patience, joy, and Chriſtian reſolution: but yet this ſtandeth firme, that no man ſuffering or dying for an evill cauſe, and his minde be rightly informed, can die with comfort and peace, but with exceeding dread and horror, ſuch an one muſt needs be exceedingly fearefull to die.
               
                  Yea, this that I have ſaid, muſt alſo be underſtood2. Caution. with exception of Repentance. Many men juſtly ſuffer preſſures and miſeries, tortures andExamples. torments, for their ſinnes and evill deeds; yet upon true repentance finde peace and comfort, in life and death. Moſes died in the wilderneſſe, and might not enter into the promiſed Land, becauſe hee did not ſanctifie God at the waters of Strife 
                  Deut. 34. 5.; but repenting, he died with comfort. Ioſiah fighting raſhly and without warrant from God, was wounded to death; but repenting of his folly, he died with comfort, and was gathered to his Fathers in peace 
                  2 Chron. 34. 28.. The theefe on the Croſſe died juſtly for his ſinnes; but repenting, he died with comport, and went to Paradiſe 
                  Luke 23. 40. 43.. Our Prodigall ſuffered hunger and miſery juſtly, for his riotous and luxurious dilapidating and waſting his goods; but repenting, he found comfort 
                  Luke 15. 21, 22.. Many a man commeth to great miſery, poverty, ſickneſſe, ache, impriſonment, baniſhment, death, for his diſordered life; yet truly repenting, findeth peace and comfort. But (theſe caſes excepted) no man (that is rightly informed in his minde, and continueth impenitent) can but be exceedingly afraid to die: wherefore, every one that would moderate the feare of death, muſt be ſure to live and die in a good cauſe.
               The ſecond meanes for moderation of the2. An holy life. feare of death, is to live an holy and ſanctified life. The Apoſtle compareth death to ſome fierce and truculent beaſt or ſerpent, which killeth all men that grapple with it, with a poyſonfull ſting, and telleth us, the ſting of death is ſinne 
                  1 Cor. 15. 56.. As a man then

would not feare, but with great boldneſſe encounter that Serpent, when he knoweth the ſting is gone: ſo may we boldly and comfortably die, when we know the ſting thereof is gone. Oh it is the guilt of ſinne, maketh men ſo fearefull to die! But great is the peace they have that love thy Law 
                  Pſal. 119. 165.. Mark the upright, behold the juſt, the end of that man is peace: The righteous are bold as Lions 
                  Prov. 28. 1.. Oh ſuch as here live in the feare of God, making conſcience of their waies, eſchewing evil 
                  Iob 1. 1., Walking in the Spirit 
                  Gal. 5. 16., Mortifying the fleſh with affections and luſts 
                  Gal. 5. 24., having their converſation in heaven 
                  Philip. 3. 20., And ever beholding the face of God, thorow the perſpective of holineſſe 
                  Heb. 12. 14., Setting their minds on thoſe things which are above 
                  Coloſſ. 3. 2., Being paſſed from death to life 
                  Iohn 5. 24., and alreadie entred into the firſt degree of glorification, (ſanctification being glorification inchoate; and glorification, ſanctification conſummate:) What comfort, joy, boldneſſe, have ſuch in ſickneſſe and death? How comfortable to the living to viſit ſuch, and to heare and ſee their cheerefulneſſe, patience, prayers, praiſes, benedictions, valedictions! (if infirmitie of fleſh and bloud, or ſtrength of diſeaſe doe not hinder:) on the other ſide, ſuch as walke in their life time after the fleſh 
                  Rom 8. 1., drinke up iniquitie like water, and are continually ſtrengthening and adding poiſon to the ſting of death; How are they diſtracted with feare, if they ſee that beaſt but gape upon them, or hiſſe at them? How comfortleſſe to viſit ſuch, ſee their impatience, obſerve their worldly mindedneſſe, and heare their words of diſcontent, diſcomfort, and diſtruſt! if God have not laid on them the
                  
                  ſpirit of ſlumber. Therefore let him that calleth on the name of Chriſt, depart from iniquitie 
                  2 Tim. 2. 19.. And whoſoever would, with comfort and boldneſſe looke for death, or Chriſt to judgement, Let him deny all ungodlineſſe and worldly luſts, and live righteouſly, godly, and ſoberly, in this preſent world 
                  Titus 2. 12..
               The third meanes of moderation, is by a lively3. A ſtedfaſt Faith. and ſtedfaſt faith: This is our victory, even faith 
                  1 Iohn 5. 4.. How can that man be immoderately afraid to die, who doth in his heart ſtedfaſtly beleeve that Chriſt died for him, and hath conquered Satan, death, and hell for him, diſarmed the ſtrong man Satan, deprived Death of its ſting, that it cannot hurt, that the nature of it is changed, an end of all evill, the beginning of all true good? It is not poſſible with the cleare eye of Faith, to behold death in the Cryſtallglaſſe of the Goſpell, and to be immoderatly afraid of it. Here then was the Diſciples want: they had a good cauſe, they followed their Maſter into the ſhip, they lived honeſtly (Iudas excepted;) but their faith was weake, and therefore their feare ſo ſtrong; Why are yee ſo fearefull? O yee of little faith! Wherefore, let all ſuch as deſire to moderate the feare of death, pray for increaſe of Faith 
                  Luke 17. 5..
               Oh ſee what an ineſtimable Pearle & Iewel Faith is, in that it doth not onely juſtine us before God, and appropriate unto us all the happineſſe of heaven through Chriſt; but is of ſo great uſe in this life, both in the times of health and proſperity (as time and occaſion ſerve) bringing forth moſt worthy fruits in regard of God, and our neighbours; and ſpecially in our adverſities and troubles. David
                  
confeſſed, hee had periſhed in his troubles, if it had not beene for his Faith 
                  Pſal. 119.: And the Apoſtle ſaith, Through Faith the Saints of old ſtopped the mouthes of Lions, quenched the violence of fire, eſcaped the edge of the ſword, were tortured, and accepted not deliverance, Heb. 11. 33. It is Faith that breedeth Patience 
                  2 Theſſ. 1. 3.; and begetteth godly comfort and courage: hee that beleeveth doth not make haſte 
                  Eſay 28. 16.; that is, whereas the vnbeleeving, comming into any diſtreſſe, any danger, or perplexitie, are diſtracted with care and feare, and make haſte, running and ruſhing into all manner of evill, and indirect meanes for releefe and deliverance, (as Saul, who for want of Faith, made too much haſte to offer ſacrifice 
                  1 Sam. 13. 9., and conſult with a Witch 
                  1 Sam. 28. 7.:) Such as truly beleeve, will not doe ſo, Though earth remove, and hills be hurled into the midſt of the ſea 
                  Pſal. 46. 2.. If God ſend famine, he is not ſo fearefull; for he knoweth God feedeth the Birds of the aire 
                  Matth. 6. 26., and the young Ravens when they call 
                  Pſal. 147. 9.; And whoſoever feare him ſhall want nothing that is good 
                  Pſal. 34. 10.. If God ſend peſtilence, he is not ſo fearfull; for he knoweth it is Gods arrow to hit whom he will, and that, if his life be more for Gods glory, than his death, A thouſand ſhall fall on one hand, and ten thouſand on the other, yet it ſhall not come nigh him 
                  Pſal. 91. 7.. If ſword come, he wil not be ſo fearfull, Though he were compaſſed with ten thouſands of enemies round about 
                  Pſal. 3. 6.; for he knoweth the wicked is but Gods ſword 
                  Pſal. 7. 13.; & that an haire cannot fall from his head, but according to the good will and pleaſure of his heavenly Father 
                  Matth. 10. 30.. If ſickneſſe and death come, he is not ſo fearefull; For he knoweth, though he die, yet
                  
                  ſhall he live 
                  Iohn 11. 25.; oh, of what ſingular uſe is faith in all our troubles?
               But I heare ſome (as diſcomforted with this diſcourſe)Obiect. ſay, I thanke God, my conſcience doth approve my cauſe and walking to be honeſt, (humane frailties excepted:) yet I finde my ſelfe often very ill diſpoſed, and fearefull to die, which maketh me doubt I have not faith.
               I anſwer, Our Saviour doth not ſay, BecauſeAnſw. his Diſciples were ſo fearefull, therefore they had no faith; but their faith was little. Immoderate feare argueth imbecillitie, but concludeth not a nullitie of faith. And for thy comfort know this, that even the beſt of Gods children are ſubject to ſuch feares; as David, The feare of death is fallen upon me, Pſal. 55. 4. But though it exceed meaſure for a time, their faith will keepe them from deſpaire, and in good time recover them, as David ſaid, I will not feare to goe thorow the valley, of death, &c. Pſalm. 23. 4. Oh pray then for the increaſe of faith.
               Whereunto, laſtly, may be added godly meditation4. Godly Meditation. on ſuch great bleſſings, as death (beheld in the looking-glaſſe of the Goſpell) doth bring to every true beleever: as that the Body is preſently brought into a better condition, than ever it had in this life; for by death it is both made inſenſible (and by that meanes freed from all the calamities of this life) and ceaſeth to be an Active and Paſſive inſtrument of ſinne: the Soule paſſeth to life, reſt, and glory, perfectly ſeeing and knowing God, without intermiſſion keeping an eternall Sabbath, and

without ceſſation or weariſomneſſe, keeping turnes with the Angels, praiſing Gods name for ever and ever; in fulneſſe, enjoying whatſoever may cauſe love and admiration, or procure joy and contentation; even an univerſall collection of all joyes, bleſſings, and comforts, beyond all we have heard, ſeene, or can poſſibly thinke. In regard whereof Solomon hath pronounced, The day of death to bee better than the day of birth 
                  Eccleſ. 7. 3.. And the Apoſtle deſired to be diſſolved and to be with Chriſt, which is beſt of all 
                  Phil. 1. 23.. And ſo much for the literall doctrine, Gods people muſt not immoderately feare any manner of death, and how that is obtained.
               Our ſecond doctrine is from the myſterie; the2. Doct. myſt. ſhip repreſenting the Church, and the ſtorme perſecution. Our Saviour reproving the diſciples for their immoderate feare in this ſtorme, doth 
                     •
                  each vs, That Gods people ſhould not immoderately feare, though the Church be in never ſo great danger, diſtreſſe, or perplexitie. What greater evill threatned to the Church, than by the Aſſyrian Monarch? Inſomuch that God cauſed the Prophet to call his ſonne, Maher-ſhalalhaſh-baz, or make ſpeed to the ſpoile 
                  Eſa. 8. 1.: yet even then the Prophet bade the people not be afraid, nor ſay a confederacie, a confederacie, but ſanctifie the Lord of hoaſts, and let him be your feare, and let him be your dread, and hee ſhall be for a ſanctuary &c 
                  Eſa. 8. 12, 13.: not forbidding a moderate feare, and uſe of godly meanes; but immoderate feare; and, for their ſecuritie, making ſuchApplication. leagues with Idolaters, and Gods profeſſed enemies, as was forbidden.
               
                  Oh, great is the ſtorme now, and the poore ſhipVſe. of the Church, in mans eye, in great perill: but bee not ſo fearefull, but reſt on God. The Church is in danger, beſet with enemies, both powerfull and politike, for crueltie and miſchiefe matchleſſe; who have confederated, and threaten her ruine. True: but hath not Chriſt ſaid, Hee will be with his Church to the end of the world 
                  Matth. 28. u
                           ••
                        .
                  : nay more, That the gates of hell ſhall not prevaile againſt it 
                  Matth. 16. 18.. The ſhip is covered with waves, but ſhall not be drowned; the Church is perſecuted, but ſhall not bee deſtroied; God will in his good time rebuke winds and ſeas, and ſend a comfortable calme. Mardochay beleeved comfort and deliverance would come Heſt. 4. 14., and it did come; and he that doth not beleeve as he did, may worthily bee rebuked, in the words of my Text, Why are yee ſo fearefull, O yee of little faith? And ſo much be ſaid of the firſt thing Chriſt reproved in his diſciples, viz. The exceſſe of feare. The ſecond followeth, which is the defect of faith, in theſe words.
               
                  O yee of little Faith!] Which reproofe is laid2. Part. downe in way of admiration: q. d. Oh that your 
                     •
                  aith ſhould be ſo little, and weake, hauing heard and ſeene what you have done! Out of which 
                        •
                     ater commeth meat, and out of this ſtrong commeth ſweetneſſe 
                  Iudg. 14. 14., (that I may uſe Sampſons Riddle▪) yea out of this reproofe doe flow comforts abundantly to all godly minded ones, who mourne in their ſoules, becauſe they are ſubject to the ſame reproofe, having but a little 
                     •
                  aith. For the further comfort then, of all poore, weake, and feeble beleevers,

ſuffer me, with your patience, fully to open this point.
               And marke his words: he ſaith not, O yee of [no]1. Obſerv. 
                  faith, for they all beleeved in him (Iudas excepted Iohn 6. 64.;) but, yee of [little] faith. The widow of Zarephath had not a Cake, but an handfull of Meale in a barrell, and a little Oile in a Cruſe 
                  1 Kings 17. 12.. That they followed him into the ſhip, and feared no danger; that in this extreme danger they come to Chriſt, calling him Lord, Lord, and pray him to ſave them; proveth that they had ſome faith: but that they are ſo fearefull, and awaken him ſo turbulently, as if they were in greater ſecuritie if he were awake, or he leſſe able to helpe them being on ſleepe, than awake; this was poore and little faith, and our Saviour reproveth it with admiration,2. Obſerv. 
                  O yee of little faith! Not of little courage or valour; for theſe and all other vertues grow from faith, as the Apoſtle ſaith, Some through faith have ſtopped the mouthes of Lions, quenched the violence of fire, of weake have beene made ſtrong, waxed valiant in fight, and have turned to flight armies of Aliens
                  Heb. 11. 34.. No vertue ſo uſefull in dangers as faith: the Apoſtie calleth it, our ſhield 
                  Epheſ. 
                        •
                     . 16.; and another faith, In all dangers and diſtreſſes wee are to encounter withall in this world, it is our victorie 
                  1 Iohn 5.; wherefore he wondreth they have ſo little of it: And as another Euangeliſt expreſſeth it, How is it, that yee have no faith 
                  Mar. 4. 40.? that is, How is it that yee have no better, or greater meaſure of faith? Or as S. Luke, vet in another phraſe and forme, Where is your faith 
                  Luk. 8. 25.? Or as the Greeke Article intendeth, Where
                  
                  is that your faith 
                  
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     ; Vbi eſt illa ſides veſira? Toll. Comment. in locum.
                  ? that meaſure and degree of faith, which you have ſhewed to be in mee? All which tend to one purpoſe, viz. to declare the weakneſſe, feebleneſſe, and modicitie of faith in this their great danger, when the ſtrength of their faith ſhould ſpecially have ſupported them.Obiect.
               
               But ſome may object and ſay, That after this time the Apoſtles are ſaid to have no faith; therefore they ahd no faith now. So after his reſurrection, it is ſaid, Chriſt appeared to the eleven as they ſate at meat, and upbraided them with their unbeleefe 
                  Mark. 16. 14. 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     : Exprobravit m
                           •
                        r
                           •
                        dulitatem eorum.
                  . And to Thomas hee ſaid, Be not faithleſſe, but beleeving 
                  Iohn 20. 27. 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     . Ne ſi
                           ••
                         m
                           •
                        cred
                           •
                        l
                           ••
                        , ſed credens
                  .
               I anſwer, That infidelitie, incredulitie, or unbeleefe, is twofold, viz. abſolute, and comparative.Anſw. Abſolute unbeleefe, is, when the heart is void of every, even the leaſt jot & grain of true faith and beleefe; as where the Apoſtle demandeth, What part hath he that beleeveth with an Infidell 
                  2 Co
                        •
                     . 7. 15.? Comparative infidelitie is in relation, not with any true, but with a ſtrong meaſure of faith. And thus a weake, or little faith; a faith, which in the houre of temptation is aſſaulted with doubtfulneſſe, is comparatively called faithleſneſſe, and unbeleefe: ſuch was their faith now, and after Chriſts reſurrection for a time.
               And now, if we make Application; Surely, if itApplication. bewrayed a ſmall meaſure of ſaith for them to be ſo fearefull, when Chriſt was, in humilitie, weakneſſe, and infirmitie, on ſleepe; and before they had ſeene many moſt glorious miracles, which after this time hee wrought for confirmation of their

faith; and before they ſaw his glory in his reſurrection from the dead, and his aſcenſion into heaven, and the ſending of the holy Ghoſt upon them, according to his promiſe: How much leſſe is our faith? yea how may wee juſtly thinke we have no faith, but are moſt worthy to be reproved for our infidelitie, if in any danger wee exceed in feare, having ſeene all his miracles, reſurrection, and aſcenſion, &c. in the glaſſe of the Goſpell? Was their faith little, becauſe he being on ſleepe, they did exceedingly feare danger? And ſhall not our faith appeare to be farre leſſe, if wee ſo exceedingly feare, ſeeing we know, he now ſitteth at the right hand of God 
                  Rom. 8. 34., having received all power and authority in heaven and earth 
                  Matth. 28. 18., and never ſlumbreth nor ſleepeth 
                  Pſal. 121 4..
               Oh then meditate on the promiſes, performances,Exhortation. and power of God; the merit of Chriſt, mercy of God, his goodneſſe and greatneſſe; who both will and can turne all to the beſt; that in greateſt perplexitie and diſtreſſe that can or may befall your ſelves, or any Gods people, you may have the commendation given to Abraham, that contrary to hope, he beleeved under hope 
                  Rom. 4. 18., and may avoid this reproofe, Why are ye fearefull? O ye of little faith!
               
               Here firſt we may learne, what great ſpirituall1. Gen. Doct. combats and conflicts Gods children in this world are ſubject unto. Our life is a warfare on earth 
                  Iob 7. 1.; as a well-tried, and expert Warriour (keeping the termes of his owne Art) called it: and the Apoſtle, a wiſe and valiant Captaine in Gods hoaſt, doth

not only furniſh every Chriſtian ſouldier, from top to toe, with compleat harneſſe, but alſo deſcribeth their enemies; We wreſtle not with fleſh and bloud, but againſt principalities and powers, againſt worldly governours, the princes of the darkneſſe of this world, againſt ſpirituall wickedneſſes, which are in high places 
                  Eph. 6. 12.. You ſee what enemies we have, and how exceedingly furniſhed, with ſtrength in their hands, and malice in their hearts, having all gainfull advantages, both from nature; they ſpirits, and we fleſh; and from place; they being above, we below, and far beneath them. In which combat of our ſoules, faith is our principall armour, both of offence and defence; and therefore the Apoſtle biddeth us, Reſiſt Satan, being ſtedfaſt in the faith 
                  1 Pet. 5. 9.; to take the ſhield of faith 
                  Eph. 6. 16.; and to fight the good fight of faith 
                  1 Tim. 6. 12.. Oh it is our faith, whereby we ſtand 
                  2 Cor. 1. ult.; and get victory 
                  1 Iohn 5.. Wherefore there is nothing ſo much aſſaulted as our faith, yea and many times is ſo exceedingly battered and ſhaken, and brought to ſo low an ebb, that even the beſt of Gods children have thought they have had no faith, and (at leaſt in the exceeding weakneſſe thereof) have made bitter complaints, My God, my God, why haſt thou forſaken me 
                  Pſal. 22. 1.? and, will the Lord abſent himſelfe for ever? and will he ſhew no more favor? Is his mercy cleane gone for ever? Doth his promiſe faile for evermore? Hath God forgotten to be gracious? Doth he ſhut up his mercies in his diſpleaſure? Lord, how long wilt thou hide thy ſelfe? for ever? and ſhall thy wrath burne like fire 
                  Pſal. 89. 46.? And, Oh wretched man, that I am 
                  Rom. 7. penult.! Loe theſe, theſe indeed are the grievous

conflicts and foiles, which even the choſen Captaines of the Lords Armies have received: and if ſuch Lions themſelves have roared, for the diſquretneſſe of their hearts; what have ſilly Lambes experience of in their ſoules? No marvell, though they ſigh, and mourne, and complaine, and be brought very low, as if they had no faith at all; but their hearts were full of unbeleefe, doubtings, feares.
               Oh let ſuch know, to their comfort, that the veryVſe. beſt of Gods children have had, and have, and ſhall have experience hereof, and ſhall grone under the burthen of the remainders of corruption, and lament the ſinfull infirmities which cleave unto them, and cry out of feare, doubting, and unbeleefe: yea know (becauſe Regeneration is imperfect in this life) where there is no doubting at all, no feare at all, no ſtriving againſt unbeleefe, there is no true comfort, no true faith, but a proud preſumption.
               For the illuſtration of this point, know firſt, That1. Obſerv. corruption is not ſeene or diſcerned by corruption, but by grace; as foule things are diſcerned by the light, not by darkneſſe; and ſickneſſe diſcerned by health; none being more deſperately ſicke, than he that feeleth it not; none in ſo dangerous caſe, as they that ſee not the corruptions, and feele not the wants of the ſoule, but are in that ſpirituall Lethargie, the Church of Laodicea was, thinking ſhee was rich, and increaſed in goods, and had need of nothing; when (hee was poore, and miſerable, wretched, blinde, and naked 
                  Rev. 3. 17. The more therefore we feele

our infidelitie, diſtruſt, rebellion, the better our eſtate.
               Secondly, man muſt be conſidered in a double2. Obſerv. eſtate, viz. as he is by nature; and as he is by grace. By nature, he is altogether fleſh; That which is borne of the fleſh is fleſh 
                  Iohn 3. 6.; he is wholly led by the fleſh, he delighteth in nothing but the works of the fleſh, and all the works of the fleſh are his; and if herein he continue, he and they ſhall periſh together. But in the eſtate of grace, though he live in the fleſh
                  2 Cor. 10. 3., he walketh not after the fleſh
                  Rom. 8. 
                        •
                     ., he warreth not after the fleſh
                  2 Cor. 10. 3.; he is led by the ſpirit
                  Rom. 8. 14.. Indeed the fleſh doth continually luſt againſt the ſpirit, and many times prevaileth, not only begetting evill motions, purpoſes, and deſires, but as a ſtrong enemy, leading the childe of God captive, to doe that which hee ſhould not, he would not Gal. 5. 17.. But theſe motions, theſe actions, they are not his, they ſhall never be laid to his charge. If Satan object them, hee may renounce them, and ſay, Indeed theſe are the motions & actions of the fleſh, and we were ſometime all one, but now we are ſeparate and divided; it only dwelleth as an inmate, but I doe not partake with her; never man and wife were more firmely divorced, than I and my fleſh: therefore if the fleſh have plaied the harlot, and begot theſe brats, caſt them at her doore, I will not owne them, I will daſh them in peeces againſt the ſtones. Wherein you have the Apoſtle himſelfe for a moſt excellent preſident; Now, if I doe that which I would not, it is no more I that doe it, but ſinne that dwelleth in me 
                  Rom. 7. 20.. If I ſhould not have doubts and feares, and diſcerne

much evill in me, I might then indeed juſtly doubt and feare, I were all fleſh; but I doe diſlike and deteſt them, and lay them to the fleſhes charge; and even hereby I know that I have received the Spirit, becauſe it ſheweth me the weakneſſe of my faith, and ſtirreth up holy grones, ſighes, and deſires to Heaven, for the increaſe of it.
               I ſay againe, let none of Gods children be tooVſe. much dejected, or caſt downe, or grow out of heart with themſelves, much leſſe call their eſtate with God into queſtion, becauſe the remnant of corruption, like a bold, ſaucie inmate, dwelleth in them, and doth continually vex and diſquiet them, diſturbe and trouble them, croſſe and hinder them in every good purpoſe and thing, and still haling and pulling on to ſinne with inceſſant importunitie, and ſometimes prevailing. The experience of this made the Apoſtle ſo exclaime, Oh wretched man! With whom give thanks feelingly to God for victory through Ieſus Chriſt, for that hee hath delivered thee from the dominion, bondage, and ſlaverie of ſin, that it doth not reigne in thee: & alſo keep a very watchfull eye, and ever give thy fleſh a ſowre look, keep it under, and in ſubjection, make it not thy counſell Gal. 1. 16.; be ſure to make a covenant with eyes
                  Iob 31. 1., eares, and all the ſenſes, they ſhall be ſtrangers to it; forbid thy ſtrangers to be acquainted with it, and then (though ſinne and corrupt fleſh be ſuch a ſhameleſſe inmate, to ſay as Ruth did to Naomie, Whither thou goeſt, I will goe; where thou dwelleſt, I will dwell; where thou dieſt, I will die, and there will I be buried
                  Ruth 1. 16, 17.; nothing but death can
                  
                  quite part and ſunder us) it ſhall not be able to hurt us. Oh ſee what a ſweet comfort the Goſpell propoſeth to Gods children, even from ſenſe and feeling of their wants, and weakneſſe of faith. Concerning which, I will not ſay as our Saviour did in another caſe, He that is able to receive it, let him receive it 
                  Matth. 19. 12.; but I will even thruſt it into the boſomes of weake and ſeeble Chriſtians (if any ſuch be here preſent) by removing two ſuch Objections, as are made againſt it, and whereby, as with both hands, they even thruſt it from them. The firſt is this.
               Oh, I could comfort my ſelfe many waies, if I1. Obiection. No ſenſe of Faith. had any faith, (though never ſo weake or ſmall) but I cannot diſcerne any at all, but mine heart is full of infidelitie and rebellion. I anſwer; GreatAnſw. is the ſenſe and aſſurance, which commonly beleevers have of their faith; otherwiſe the Apoſtle would never have ſaid, Prove your ſelves, whether you are in the faith or not 
                  2 Cor. 13. 5.: yet two times muſt be excepted, viz. the time when God firſt giveth it, and the houre or time of ſome great temptation. Recount then the times which are paſſed, and the yeeres of old, yea remember the yeeres of the right hand of the moſt high, Pſal. 77. 10. Haſt thou at any time had the aſſurance and comfort of faith? Be of good comfort, it will revive againe; Heavineſſe may endure but for a night, ioy will come in the morning: 
                  2 Cor. 4. 9. 
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , Thy faith may be caſt downe, but cannot be deſtroyed; Deliquium pati, non penitus mori; may ſownd, but cannot die. Or haſt thou never had the ſenſe of faith,

but now deſireſt it, and art heartily ſorry thou feeleſt it not? it may be this graine of muſtard-ſeed is but now ſowen in the furrowes of thine heart; water it with Word, Sacraments, and Prayer, and doubt not but thou ſhalt, in good time, have the ſenſe and comfort of it.
               Oh, but I have no ſenſe of Gods love; therefore2. Obiection. No ſenſe of Gods love. I have no faith. I anſwer: Chriſt had no ſenſe of Gods love, and yet beleeved, when he praied,Anſwer. 
                  My God, my God, why haſt thou for ſaken me 
                  Pſal. 22. 1.? How void was Iob of the ſenſe of Gods love, when hee complained, God accounted him as his enemy 
                  Iob 13. 24.; and made him as his butt to ſhoot at 
                  Iob 16. 12.? How far was David from deſpaire, when he complained, Is his mercie cleane gone for ever 
                  Pſal. 77. 8, 10.? No, no, that is but infirmitie, (as he confeſſed) God changeth not 
                  Numb. 23. 19.; nor hath any ſhadow of change 
                  Iames 1. 17.; whom he loveth, he loveth to the end 
                  Iohn 13. 4.: his covenant is more ſure, than that of the day and night 
                  Ierem. 33. 20.. It is but thy triall; In a little wrath, I hid my face from thee, for a moment, but with everlaſting compaſsion have I embraced thee 
                  Eſay 54. 8.. The Sunne ſetteth, and hath a time to paſſe thorow the other Hemiſphere; but the next morning it riſeth againe with greater comfort. God is a ſure friend, and many times intendeth moſt good, when he is leaſt ſeene or felt. Wherefore ſay, Oh my ſoule, beleeve thou haſt faith, though thou diſcerne it not; and preſume God loveth thee, though thou haſt no ſenſe of it.
               
               Our ſecond leſſon is; Afflictions are a great2. Gen. Doct. triall of faith, and commonly it doth greatly abate in them. So S. Peter ſaith, The faithfull went
                  
                  through many temptations, that the triall of their faith, being found much more precious than gold that periſheth 
                  1 Pet. 1. 7.. Thus God tried Abraham 
                  Gen. 22. 1., i. his faith; and Chriſt tried Philip 
                  Iohn 6. 6., i. his faith: yea and many times the faith of Gods children ſhrinketh in tribulations. Davids faith was ſtrong, when he ſaid, The Lord is my light, and my ſalvation, whom then ſhall I feare? The Lord is the ſtrength of my life, of whom ſhall I be afraid? Though an hoaſt ſhould encampe againſt me, mine heart ſhall not feare 
                  Pſal. 27. 1, 3.: yet Saul ſo long purſued him in the wilderneſſe, and brought him to ſo many ſtraits, that in the end, in weakneſſe of faith, he ſaid, I ſhall one day periſh by the hand of Saul 
                  1 Sam. 27. 1.. Peters faith was ſtrong, when there was no danger; he would die, rather than denie Chriſt 
                  Ioh. 13. penult.: but in the High Prieſts Hall, where was danger indeed, his faith was weake he denied, and forſware him Matth. 26. 72.. Andrew, Simon Peters brother, began well, There is a lad here hath five barley loaves, and two fiſhes: he held not out; no ſooner caſt his eye on ſuch a hungry multitude, but ſaid, What are they among ſo many? Our Diſciples were bold men on the ſhore, and feared nothing; but in the ſtorme▪ where is that faith? Oh let us judge charitably of ſuch, as (in times of temptation) have bewrayed weakneſſe; and prepare our ſelves, being ever ſuſpicious of our weakneſſe, and praying God to increaſe our faith. And thus much be ſaid in generall▪ Now let us more particularly view the word
                     •
                  .
               
                  O yee of little faith! 
                  
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     
                  ] Faith being one of the graces of infuſion, hath it meaſures and degrees, (I meane not one man compared with another, as

                  Abraham, who was ſtrong in faith Rom. 4. 20., compared with the father of the Daemoniack, Lord, helpe mine unbeleefe) but in the ſame man, it may be ſtrong at one time, and weake at another: and the ſtrength and weakneſſe of it, is in both the parts of it, viz. Knowledge, and Application; ſo as one man may be ſtrong in Knowledge, and weake in Application; and another may be weake in Knowledge, and yet ſtrong in Application.
               What is the greateſt, and leaſt degree of faith, can hardly be determined by the Scriptures. The ſtrongeſt we reade of, was that in Abraham, the fatherWhich is the greateſt meaſure of Faith. of all them that beleeve, whoſe faith is thus by the Holy Ghoſt commended; Againſt hope, he beleeved in hope. And againe, He was not weake in faith. And againe, Being ſtrong in faith, he ſtaggered not at the promiſe through unbeleefe, but gave glory unto God, being fully perſwaded, that what he had promiſed, he was able alſo to performe 
                  Rom. 4. 18, 19, 20.. Loe, what an high commendation is here given to Abrahams faith, He beleeved under hope, againſt hope; he was not weake, he was ſtrong, he ſtaggered not, he was fully aſſured. This is that great faith expreſſed by the Metaphor of a ſhip which commeth into the Haven with full ſailes, and is called 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , or a full aſſurance, Heb. 10. 22. 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                   
                  Lapid. in Rom. 14. 5. Which great meaſure of faith, he had not (nor any other ordinarily) at the firſt of his converſion, but attained unto it, by great ſchooling, many trials, and great obſervation, and experience of Gods mercy, power, goodneſſe, and greatneſſe. And this is the meaſure wee muſt all

ſtrive to attaine unto. Oh happy that ſoule, that can ſay truly with Iob, I know that my Redeemer liveth, whom I ſhall ſee 
                  Iob 19. 25.: and with the Apoſtle S. Paul, I am perſwaded that nothing can ſeparate us from the love of God, which is in Chriſt Ieſus our Lord 
                  Rom. 8. ult..
               There is alſo a leſſer degree of faith, which is called a weake, or little faith 
                  
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     
                  , reſembled to a bruiſed reed, ſmoaking flax 
                  Eſay 42. 3. Mat. 12. 20., and a graine of muſtard ſeed 
                  Matth. 17. 20., which is the leaſt of all ſeeds (that bringeth up ſuch a ſtalke or tree.) That it is very little, theſe Similies intend: but what is that leaſt meaſure, andWhich is the leaſt meaſure of Faith. degree, which every one muſt have, that will be juſtified, and ſaved, is a great queſtion, but behoveth us greatly to be reſolved in. Learned Divines ſay, it is a ſerious and conſtant deſire (ariſing from an humbled and broken ſpirit) to be reconciled unto God, and to have ſinnes forgiven. Some ſeeme to hold, that full aſſurance is eſſentiall to every true faith; and therefore deſcribe it, To be a full perſwaſion of the heart, grounded upon the promiſes of God, that whatſoever Chriſt hath done for others, he hath done for me. But alas, how far was that true beleeving father from this, who prayed, Lord helpe mine unbeleefe 
                  Mar. 9. 14.. And many thouſands of Gods children, who in the inſtant of their converſion, or by their negligence, in the uſe of good meanes, or by falling into ſome great ſinne, have ſo farre abated the power and efficacie of their Faith, that they cannot ſay, Chriſt died for them, that their ſinnes are forgiven, and God their Father in Ieſus Chriſt. Oh ſuch full aſſurance is

only eſſentiall to a ſtrong faith. It may be a true faith, which hath not that aſſurance, but is rather in great combat with diſtruſt, and deſpaire. Marke then your deſcription of the leaſt meaſure of faith; It is but a deſire, yet a true and conſtant deſire; and a deſire ariſing from an humbled and contrite ſpirit; ſuch a ſpirit as is caſt downe, and even broken, with ſight of ſinne, ſenſe of Gods anger, and feare of puniſhment. And the object of this deſire, is not ſo much life, and ſalvation, (which Balaam, and every meere naturall man deſireth) as Remiſſion of ſinnes, and Reconciliation unto God, which no unbeleever careth for.
               The ground of this Aſſertion is, becauſe the trueGround. deſire of any Grace, is as the bud of that Grace, and (in Gods eſteeme) the Grace it ſelfe. So then, the deſire of pardon, and reconciliation with God, is as the bud of faith. For as the bud includeth the bloſſome and fruit; and as in the Spring time, with the warmth and nouriſhment of Sunne & ground, the bud doth grow, bloſſome, knit, and hold fruit: ſo this true deſire, how little ſoever it ſeeme to be to him that hath it, or others, yet being nouriſhed with Word, Sacraments, and Prayer, it will grow ſtronger and ſtronger, like the graine of Muſtardſeed.
               But let us (I pray you) ſee, how the Scriptures wilCōfirmation. warrant this comfortable deſcription of a true faith, by the leaſt meaſure of it. David ſaith, Lord, thou haſt heard the deſire of the poore 
                  Pſal. 10. 17.: then there is faith in the deſire, for God heareth no prayer that is not made in faith
                  Iam. 1. 6.. And againe, He will fulfil
                  
                  the deſire of them that feare him 
                  Pſal. 145. 19.. Chriſt hath pronounced, Bleſſed are they that hunger and thirſt after righteouſneſſe 
                  Matth. 5. 6.. And againe, To him that is athirſt, I will give to drinke of the well of life freely 
                  Rev. 21. 6.. Hereunto I ſubſcribe, as unto the undoubted truth of God, and Tenet of our Church, which hath taught us thus to pray, O God, mercifull Father, that deſpiſeſt not the ſighing of a contrite heart, nor the deſire of ſuch as be ſorrowfull. Whereupon I inferre this comfort for the refreſhing of any wearied ſoule. Doeſt thou ſee thy ſins many, great, and grievous, whereby thou knoweſt thou haſt offended God, and ſtandeſt guilty, and liable to all his curſes, and puniſhments, in this life, and the life to come? Though in ſtrength of faith thou canſt not ſay, Chriſt hath redeemed me from the curſe of the Law, Chriſt hath by his obedience reconciled me unto God, and all my ſinnes are forgiven; only thou hopeſt thy ſins are pardonable, and thou deſireſt unfainedly, that God would pardon them, and be reconciled, &c. Be of good comfort, here is the bud and ſeed of faith, and in Gods acceptation, true faith, and thou ſhalt have thy deſire. And for confirmation hereof, marke theſe two things.
               Firſt, the true deſire of Grace, (as Faith and Repentance)Two Arguments proving a godly deſire of Grace, to be true Grace. is a ſanctified deſire, a ſanctified affectiō. Now where the Spirit of God once beginneth to ſanctifie, he doth ſanctifie throughout 
                  1 Theſſ. 5 23., the minde, memory, and will, as well as affections; and he that is ſanctified, doth beleeve, and is iuſtified 
                  Rom. 8. 30..
               Secondly, this holy deſire is a plaine evidence,2 and fruit of the Spirit, which ſtirreth up fighes and
                  
                  grones 
                  Rom. 8. 25.. Theſe deſires cannot proceed from the fleſh; For that which is from the fleſh, is fleſh 
                  Iohn 3. 6.; and being from the Spirit, it is an infallible argument, that Chriſt dwelleth in us, as Saint Iohn ſaith, Hereby we know that Chriſt dwelleth in us, even by his Spirit, which he hath given us 
                  1 Iohn 4. 13.. And, doth Chriſt dwell in us? Then ſurely we have faith, For he dwelleth in the heart by faith 
                  Epheſ. 3. 17.. Oh then be of good comfort, humbled ſoule, theſe holy motions and deſires may aſſure thee, thou art truly ſanctified, thou haſt the Spirit of God, thou haſt a true faith, though very little, weake, and feeble.
               But me thinketh (upon the delivery of this doctrine)Object. I ſee, both the Wicked to lift up head, & ſet up briſtles, ſaying, Nay, if good deſires will ſerve the turne, we are well, and ſhall be ſaved, for I am ſure we have enow of them; and the Godly yet ſtill to be of a deject countenance, ſaying, Alas, what wicked man is there in the world, but hath ſometimes good deſires?
               I anſwer, It is true that God ſometimes beſtowethAnſw. common gifts on the Reprobate; and ſo, in the judgement of man, they goe often farre in the way of ſalvation; but never any Reprobate, ever had, or ſhall have, the leaſt meaſure of juſtifying and ſaving faith; that is only of Gods Elect 
                  Titus 1▪ 1., and of ſuch as are ordained to ſalvation 
                  Acts 13. ult.
                  . And therefore all the fleſhly deſires of the Reprobate, may be diſcerned from this true ſpirituall deſire of the Elect.
               Firſt, by the continuance of it: for the deſires ofNotes of difference. the Reprobate are but like a flaſh of lightning, ſudden motions ariſing from hearing of the Word,1
                  
or ſome heavie judgement of God that lieth on them; as Herod heard Iohn Baptiſt gladly, and did many things; and had doubtleſſe many good motions, but all like the mornings dew 
                  Oſe. 6. 5.: if he be pleaſed with the dancing of a wanton Damſell, he will cut off the Baptiſts head 
                  Matth. 14. 9.. When the plague is on Pharaoh, hee will ſend for Moſes and Aaron, and crie, Pray, pray; but no ſooner the plague removed, but he is worſe than before 
                  Exod. 8. 15.. But the true deſire abideth and increaſeth, as the light unto a perfect day 
                  Prov. 4. 18..
               Againe, true faith is of an active and operative2 nature; according to the meaſure of it, it will work. He that hath the true deſire of peace, and reconciliation with God, by the merits of Chriſt, it will make him uſe the meanes, whereby the ſame is procured: he that doth truly deſire forgiveneſſe of ſins, and Gods favour, will hate his ſinnes, and whatſoever he knoweth doth offend God. The wicked cannot doe ſo. Herod reverenced Iohn, and heard him gladly; but his heart was ſtill ſet on Herodias, and boiled in filthy inceſtuous luſt 
                  Marke 6. 20.. Balaam would fain die the death of the righteous 
                  Num. 23. 10.; but careth not for their lives, nor will uſe the meanes, whereby ſuch a bleſſed death is procured, but his heart is ſtill ſet upon the wages of ungodlineſſe 
                  2 Pet. 2. 15.. If then thou haſt but the fore-named deſire; but thou feeleſt it powerfull within thee, to worke more and more an hatred of thy ſinnes, and of all the meanes and occaſions thereof; and to uſe carefully the meanes, which God hath appointed for the increaſe of faith and holineſſe; aſſuredly thou haſt received the good ſeed of faith into thy heart, and thou haſt the bud,

which will in good time bloſſome, knit, and beare. Thus that I have declared the leaſt meaſure of ſaving faith: let me, for their further comfort that have it, deduce a few moſt ſweet concluſions.
               The firſt is this; The leaſt and weakeſt true faith
                     
                        •
                     
                   doth as perfectly juſtifie, as the greateſt and ſtrongeſt. The poore weake beleeving man, that prayed Christ to helpe his unbeleefe 
                  Marke 9. 24., was as perfectly juſtified, as Abraham, that was ſo ſtrong in faith, that he ſtaggered not 
                  Rom. 4. 20..
               The Reaſon hereof is, becauſe faith doth notReaſon. juſtifie in reſpect of it ſelfe, as it is a gift, or action, or vertue, inherent in us; for then, as it is more or leſſe, ſtronger or weaker, ſo ſhould we be more or leſſe juſtified; but faith doth juſtifie, as it is the inſtrument, whereby we apprehend and receive the object. The object or matter of our juſtice is Chriſt, and Chriſt is not received more or leſſe, according to the meaſure or degree of faith; but Chriſt is either wholly received, or refuſed: and he that hath whole Chriſt, hath his righteouſneſſe; which is ſo perfect, (being the righteouſneſſe of God 
                  Rom. 3. 21.) as cannot receive any augmentation or increaſe. So that juſtification conſiſteth not in the ſtrength and quantity, but in the truth and quality of our faith. God hath a touchſtone to trie our faith, 1 Pet. 1. 7. but not weights to weigh with; regardeth the goodneſſe, not greatneſſe; heartineſſe, but not heavineſſe. The dimme and weake ſighted were as well cured by beholding of the brazen Serpent, as the cleare and ſtrong Iohn 3 24. Numb. 21. 9.: the old, poore, ſicke, weake and palſie, trembling hand, may receive a precious pearle, or a

peece of gold, as well as the young, ſteddie, and ſtrong.
               Oh, what a comfort may this be to ſuch asVſe. mourne and are grieved for the weakneſſe of their faith; that howſoever God may make a great difference, and they may diſcerne a great diſparitie betwixt themſelves and others, in regard of the graces of infuſion, knowledge, patience, zeale, wiſdome: yet if their faith be true (though never ſo weake or ſmall) they are equall to the beſt, in the greateſt bleſſings, of juſtification and adoption.
               This that I have ſaid, is not for encouragementPrevention. of the wicked, who turne the grace of God into wantonneſſe 
                  Rom. 6. 1.; reſting contented in the leaſt meaſure, and preſume of juſtification thereby; (for even thereby it appeareth, that their faith is not true, becauſe it doth not grow:) but this is ſpoken for the comfort of all ſuch, as doe carefully uſe the means, and even hunger and thirſt after the growth and increaſe of faith; but are fearefull and even out of heart with themſelves, becauſe they doe diſcerne their faith to be ſo little and weake.
               Secondly, the leaſt true faith ſhall never fully2 Cōfirmation. nor finally be loſt: this is Gods promiſe, I will put my feare into their hearts, that they ſhall never depart from me, all the daies of their life 
                  Ierem. 32. 39.. And Chriſt hath promiſed, He that commeth to me, ſhall never hunger; and he that beleeveth in me, ſhall never thirſt 
                  Iohn 6. 35.. Chriſt praied for Peter, that his faith ſhould not faile 
                  Luke 22. 31.. And ſo hath he prayed for all thoſe that beleeve in him 
                  Iohn 17 21.; and promiſed, that the gates of hell ſhall not prevaile against them 
                  Matth. 16. 18.. And Saint Iohn faith, Hee that is
                  
                  borne of God, doth not commit ſinne, neither can he, becauſe hee is borne of God, and his ſeed remaineth in him 
                  1 Iohn 3. 9.. Hence it is, that he that once truly beleeveth, is ſaid to have eternall life 
                  Iohn 3. 36.: To be paſſed from death to life 
                  Iohn 5. 24.: To be raiſed, and ſeated in heavenly places 
                  Epheſ. 2. 6.: Yea, to be alreadie glorified 
                  Rom. 8. 30.. From which, (and many ſuch places of Scriptures, which might be alledged) we doe infallibly conclude, and it is the doctrine of the Church of England, and of Orthodox Divines, even the concluſion of the whole late Reverend Synode at Dort, againſt Papiſts, Arminians, and whoſoever Heretiques, that deny it; That a true faith once had, is never fully, nor finally loſt.
               I doe not deny, but all the graces of the SpiritPrevention. are like to fire: if it be not nouriſhed with fewel, but have water caſt upon it, a great fire may be exceedingly ſlaked, and great brands come to ſome few embers, or ſparkes: So faith, through neglect of meanes, and falling into ſome great ſinne, the Spirit of God may be grieved, the power, vertue, and efficacie of faith, may be greatly cooled and abated, and the ſenſe of ſaving grace loſt. A true beleever may fall into a ſpirituall ſownd, but cannot die; he may demurre with himſelfe, whether he be living or dead, yea, may pronounce himſelfe dead; but (as the Apoſtle pronounced of Eutichus, after his fall) life is in him; his faith is as a ſparke of fire under an heape of aſhes, and as ſap in the root of the tree in Winter time. It was Peters caſe, whoſe fall did wound, but not kill; weaken, but not utterly deſtroy his faith; upon his Maſters looking upon

him, and hearing the Cock crow, his faith revived, He went out, and wept bitterly for his ſinne.
               Yea, true faith is ſo farre from being utterly loſt,Aſſertion. that by the uſe of good meanes, it doth out-grow the Muſtard-ſeed, yea out-grow Ionahs Gourd. Nichodemus, who was once ſo weake in the faith, that he came to Ieſus by night, for feare of the Iewes 
                  Iohn 3. 2.; yet his faith ſo grew, that when Chriſt was crucified, and all the Diſciples fled, hee went in boldly, and begged the bodie of Ieſus, embalmed, and honourably buried it 
                  Iohn 19. 39.. Peter ſo weake in faith, that at the voice of a ſilly Damſell, hee denied his Maſter 
                  Matth. 26. 70.: yet his faith ſo grew, that he boldly reproved the Princes to their faces, for murthering the Lord of life 
                  Acts 3. 15.. Thomas his faith was ſo weake, that he openly profeſſed, hee would not beleeve that his Master was riſen from death, unleſſe he did ſee the print of the nailes, and put his hand into his ſide 
                  Iohn 20. 25.; but it did ſo grow, when Chriſt appeared againe, and bade him ſee and feele, that he ſaid in a ſtrong faith, Thou art my Lord and my God 
                  Iohn 21. 18.. Yea, it is many times ſeene in daies of perſecution, and of great trials, that ſuch as in peace and proſperitie, have ſhewed a ſtrong faith and great zeale, abundance of graces, have in adverſity beene humbled with great feare, and bewrayed great weakneſſe of faith: Whereas ſuch as in times of peace have ſhewed ſmall knowledge, little faith, and weake zeale; yet in time of perſecution, in the ſtrength of knowledge, 
                     •
                  aith, and zeale, they have ſtood out againſt the enemies, and have ſealed the truth of God with their deareſt bloud: wherein is fulfilled that of the bleſſed Virgin in her Song, Hee
                  
                  putteth downe the mightie from their ſeats, and exalteth the humble and meeke; he filleth the hungrie with good things, and the rich he ſendeth emptie away. 
                  Luke 1. 52.
               
               And all this is, that ſuch as are ſtrong, and haveVſe 1. greateſt meaſure of graces, may not be proud and preſumptuous, but carry a low ſaile, thinke baſely of themſelves, and worke out their ſalvation with feare and trembling 
                  Philip. 2. 12.; praying God, not to tempt them, above that which they ſhall be able 
                  1 Cor. 10. 13..
               And ſecondly, that ſuch as are but weake inVſe 2. faith, may not be too much diſheartened and dejected, ſeeing the Lord is able to make them ſtrong 
                  Rom. 14. 4.. Yea that we thinke charitably, and walke lovingly towards even the weakeſt Semper bene ſperemus de eo, in quo cernimus aliquid Dei. Calvin.; & they that are ſtrong, beare the infirmities of the weake, Rom▪
                   15. 1. For if triall came, the Lord knoweth whoſe ſaith would be ſtrong. But be of good comfort, oh yee weake and tender ones; for if your faith be true, though never ſo weake, it ſhall never be fully nor finally loſt; yea if God have any great ſervice for you, he will furniſh you accordingly, his power ſhall appeare in your weakneſſe 
                  2 Cor. 12. 9.; and your bruiſed reed ſhall become as ſtrong as the Oake in Baſhan, ſo as no ſtorme or tempeſt ſhall be able to overthrow it.
               Yea, here let us with wiſe eyes behold, and withConcluſion. thankfull hearts give glory unto God, who (as in the firmament, one ſtarre differeth from another) in his Church, furniſheth his Saints with diverſitie of gifts 
                  1 Cor. 12. 11.; giving to ſome a great meaſure of knowledge, faith, zeale; to others, but a little of them; that ſuch as have greateſt meaſure, may be provoked to thankfulneſſe, and employ their gifts to the

comfort of others; and the weake may have cauſe both of humilitie and induſtrie, ſtriving to overtake ſuch as goe before them; but none have cauſe to envie or deſpiſe another: though through Satans malice, and our weakneſſe, it too often ſo fall out.
               The third and laſt deduction, for the comfort of3 weake beleevers, is; that God heareth and accepteth the prayers of the weakeſt beleevers, and graciouſly helpeth them. It was propheſied of Chriſt, hee ſhould not break the bruiſed reed nor quench the ſmoaking fl
                        •
                     x 
                  Eſay 42. 3.. Let the compariſons be well marked; and can the meekneſſe of Chriſt, towards poore ſinners, be more lively expreſſed? How tender a plant is a reed? yea at the ſtrongeſt, how doth it yeeld and bow with every puffe of wind? but much more when it is bruiſed, how eaſie a thing is it then to ſnap it aſunder? How weake is that ſparke of fire, which in fl
                     •
                  x doth but cauſe ſmoake? Now, whereas it is ſaid, he will not break the one, nor quench the other, his meaning is, he will no
                     •
                  iſh and cheriſh them, ſtrengthen the one, and kindle the other. Againe, He giveth power to the faint, and to them that have no might he increaſeth ſtrength 
                  Eſay 40. 29.: Chriſt was ſent to binde up the broken hearted 
                  Eſay 61. 1.; The Lord upholdeth all that fall, and raiſeth up all them that be bowed downe 
                  Pſal. 145. 14.: Chriſt hath called, Come to mee, all yee that travell and are heavie loaden, and I will refreſh you 
                  Matth. 11. 28.; hath promiſed, that he will caſt away none that come unto him 
                  Iohn 6. 37.; yea, that hee will give them eternall life, and none ſhall be able to plucke them out of his hand 
                  Iohn 10. 
                        •
                     8..
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
                  Indeed, Chriſt gave great commendation to ſuchPrevention. as have had great faith; as to the Centurion, Verily I ſay unto you, that I have not found ſo great faith, no, not in Iſrael 
                  Matth. 8. 10.: and to the woman of Canaan, hee ſaid, O woman, great is thy faith 
                  Matth. 15. 28.. But yet in all ages God hath witneſſed his loving acceptance of ſmall and weake faith, and of the firſt beginnings of Converſion.
               How weake a faith was that in the Ninivites,
                  Examples. 
                  Who can tell, if God will returne, and repent 
                  Ionah 3▪ 
                     
                        •
                     .? yet God did repent, and ſpare them. What a weake faith had the Leper, Lord, if thou wilt, thou canst make me cleane: he received him, and did make him cleane Matth. 
                        •
                     . 
                        •
                     .. How weake that fathers faith, who could ſcarce tell, whether he beleeved or no, and ceaſed to pray for his ſonne, and prayed for himſelfe, Lord helpe mine unbeleefe 
                  Marke 9. 24.; and he both helped his unbeleefe, and cured his ſonne. Our Saviour did but heare a young man make profeſſion of the practiſe of outward and civill righteouſneſſe, All theſe I have obſerved from my youth; and the Text ſaith, he looked upon him, and loved him 
                  Marke 10. 22.. And when he heard a Scribe utter but one good ſpeech, That to love God with all the heart, is above all ſacrifices; he ſaid unto him, that he was not farre from the kingdome of heaven 
                  Marke 12 34.. Oh now ſhould the Apoſtles faith have ſhone bright as a lampe, but the tempeſt had almoſt blowne it out, that it did but ſmoake; yet Chriſt quencheth it not▪ he reproveth, but accepteth of it; He aroſe, and rebuked the winds and ſeas.
               
               Theſe, and many ſuch Scriptures, both PoſitiveVſe. and Exemplarie, of propheſie and promiſe, are

written for the comfort of all ſuch as have but little, weake, and feeble faith: and we had need to have them in remembrance; for Satan is very skilfull in the Scriptures, and hath them readie to aſſault weake ones with all; as, Faith is the evidence of things which are not ſeene 
                  Heb. 11. 
                        •
                     .; And we are Gods houſe, if we hold faſt the reioycing of the hope, firme unto the end 
                  Heb. 3. 6.; and Faith is the anchor of the ſoule, both ſure and ſtedfaſt 
                  Heb. 6. tenult.
                  . Doth not S. Iames bid every one that prayeth, to pray in faith, without wavering or doubting? How canſt thou thinke thou haſt faith, or make account that ever God will heare thee, when thine heart is ſo full of wavering & doubting? Oh quench this fiery dart, and ſay, Avoid Satan: it is true, thou haſt preſented unto me a ſtrong faith (which I doe ſtrive after:) but the Apoſtles had but a little weake faith, yet were not rejected: and Satan thou ſhalt never bee able to quench that little ſparke, which God hath kindled in my ſoule; nor deſtroy that little graine of muſtard-ſeed, which is ſowen in the furrowes of mine heart.
               Laſtly note, that Chriſt ſaid, His Diſciples had but
                  Obſerv. [little] faith: and ſurely (as yet) they had but little knowledge, little honour, little wealth, and little of any thing that was eſteemed and accounted of in the world; being but poore Fiſher-men, Tole-gatherers, and men of meane condition; as Amos a great Prophet, was before but an Herdman. God many times bringeth greateſt things to paſſe, by weakeſt meanes▪ 
                  Paſsing by the noble, mightie, rich, and wiſe of the world, and chuſing the fooliſh, weake, and baſe, and deſpiſed things of the world 
                  2 Cor. 
                        •
                     
                     ▪ 26.,

that no fleſh may glory in it ſelfe. To which purpoſe S. Auguſtine hath an excellent ſaying Si eligeret Regem, di
                        ••
                     ret Re
                        •
                     , poteſtas mea; ſi Oratorem, eloquentia mea; ſi Philoſophum, ſapien
                        ••
                     a mea electa eſt, &c. Auguſt. de 
                        •
                     erbis D
                        •••
                     ni, Serm. 59.; If God had choſen Kings to bee his Diſciples, they would have ſaid, We are choſen for our power; If Orators, for our eloquence; I
                     •
                   Philoſophers, for our wiſdome; If Senators, for our dignitie; If rich men, for our wealth Si eligeret Regem, di
                        ••
                     ret Re
                        •
                     , poteſtas mea; ſi Oratorem, eloquentia mea; ſi Philoſophum, ſapien
                        ••
                     a mea electa eſt, &c. Auguſt. de 
                        •
                     erbis D
                        •••
                     ni, Serm. 59.. Wherefore he called Fiſhermen and Publicans, Follow me, you poore, ignorant, and ſimple, you that have little, or nothing worthy eſteeme, or admiration in your ſelves, that you may be all in me. Even ſo ſtill the Lord many times paſſeth by ſuch as are of great knowledge, learning, and wiſdome; of high degree, in Schooles; of eminent Bloud and Families, by birth; and calleth farre meaner men in theſe reſpects, by whom he is moſt powerfull in the miniſtery of the Word. So for the Church of God, Chriſt told Iohns Diſciples, The poore receive the Goſpell 
                  Matth. 11. 5.. And God hath choſen the poore of the world, that they may bee rich in faith, and heires of the Kingdome 
                  Iames 2. 5.. This is it was intended in the parable: where the great men, that had their Farmes, Oxen, and Merchandiſe to follow, were rejected, and the poore, maimed, halt, and blinde, who lay in the Streets and Lanes of the Citie, and High-wayes, and Hedges, were compelled to come in Matth. 22. 2. Luk. 14. 21. &c.. And this is it which the chiefe Prieſts and Phariſes objected to the officers, Doe any of the Rulers or Phariſies beleeve in him? But this people that knoweth not the Law is curſed 
                  Iohn 7. 48. Prevention.
                  . Indeed, it is not ſaid, no wiſe, no noble, no mightie are choſen; for Abraham, Iſaac, Iacob, Moſes, David, Solomon, Nicodemus, Lazarus of Bethaniah, Ioſeph of Arimathea,
                  
the two Centurions, the Proconſull, and many others; were ſome of them noble, ſome wiſe, ſome mightie, &c. But (as Andrew ſaid of the loaves) What are theſe amongst ſo many 
                  Iohn 6. 9.? to the end, that wee ſhould not looke upon Gods people and ſervants, with a carnall eye, wherein they may ſeeme baſe and contemptible; but behold them with a ſpirituall eye, as they are in Chriſt, and ſo moſt glorious.
               And thus much for the firſt part, in the performing of the calme, viz. The reprehenſion of his diſciples, for their exceſſive feare, and defective faith▪ It followeth.
               
                  Then he aroſe.] Chriſt having ſtilled the greater,2. Part. and more dangerous tempeſt, in the affections of his diſciples, and ſettled their ſoules in peace and tranquillity, patience, and comfort; hee now proceedeth to ſtill the roaring winds, and raging ſeas: which hee doth by powerfull and angry reprehenſion. Wherein two things are to be conſidered, viz.
                  Diviſion. A preparation [then hee aroſe▪
                  ] Secondly, the reprehenſion it ſelfe, [hee rebuked the winds, and ſeas.]
               
                  Then he aroſe.] That is, when by reprehenſion he1. Part. had decreaſed the feare, and increaſed the faith ofSenſe. his diſciples, and ſo prepared and fitted them to the fruitfull ſight of this enſuing Miracle, [then 
                  
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                      
                     
                        
                           •
                        unc.
                  ] hee aroſe. Which teacheth vs, That God is many times hindred from doing great works, by the indiſpoſitionDoct. lit. of his people▪ Chriſt could, as ſoone as ever he awaked, have ſtart up and rebuked the winds and ſeas: but his diſciples were in extreme paſſion,

which (as the wiſe heathen man hath truly ſaid) deſtroieth judgement and underſtanding Perit omne judicium, cum res tranſit in affectum. Scnec.. As the eye, which is exceedingly troubled with humours and theumes, cannot abide to looke on the Sunne, no more can a paſſionate and troubled minde behold with content and comfort the great and glorious sworkes of God.
               If then, wee thinke it long ere God helpe us, orVſe. his people, let us not murmure, and have thoughts of Belial, concerning God, and (as though he had caſt off all care and loving affection) complaine, That hee had forgotten to be mercifull, and would for ever ſhut up his loving kindneſſe in diſpleaſure, &c 
                  Pſal. 77. 7.. But let us looke into our ſelves, and know, that ſomething is amiſſe in us; wee want Faith, Repentance, or Patience; which when the Lord hath cured, then, he will ariſe and helpe us.
               
                  He aroſe. 
                  
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                      
                     Surgens.
                  ] Or, ariſing. To [ariſe] properly, doth ſignifie ſuch a geſture, or motion of the body, which hath ſate, or beene laied; whereby it doth prepare and addreſſe it ſelfe to ſome other poſirure, diſpoſition, or actiō; as ſtanding, walking, running, &c. So Peter ſaid to the Creeple, that was laid at the Beautifull Gate of the Temple, to aske almes of them that entred into the Temple, In the name of Ieſus Chriſt of Nazareth, riſe up, and walke 
                  Acts 3. 6.. So here it is taken properly. For (at the leaſt) Chriſt had laied downe his head on a pillow, and repoſed himſelfe; but now he (aroſe.) I leave the letter.
               To [ariſe] in Scriptures, is often uſed for preparationSenſe myſtic. to ſome buſineſſe, & doth not intend any bodily ſitting, or lying before, as God called, Ariſe
                  
                  Ionah, and goe to Ninivie 
                  Ionah 1. 2.; And to Ieremy, Truſſe up thy loines, ariſe, and ſpeake unto them 
                  Ier. 1. 17.; And to Ezechiel, Sonne of man, ſtand upon thy feet 
                  Ezech. 2. 3, 2.. All which intend no more, but, goe about that buſineſſe, I have appointed you unto. By figurative Tranſlation, of that which is proper unto man, to God, he is many times in Scriptures ſaid, To ſleepe, and wake, Lie downe, and riſe up. Where by (riſing) is meant nothing elſe, but Gods preparing of himſelfe, to declare viſibly his Mercy, or Iuſtice; Love, or Anger; Greatneſſe, or Goodneſſe; in the puniſhing of his enemies, or ſaving of his people. The Lord thus promiſeth his helpe, for the oppreſſion of the poore, and deepe ſighing of the needie, Now will I ariſe, and ſet him in ſafetie, from him that puffeth at him 
                  Pſal. 12. 5.. And elſewhere, with many moe words to this purpoſe; Now will I ariſe (ſaith the Lord,) now will I be exalted, now will I lift up my ſelfe 
                  Eſay. 33. 10.. Seeing then God is pleaſed thus to ſpeake of himſelfe, and in ſuch a▪ Metaphoricall phraſe to promiſe his helpe; his Church and people are bold, in the ſame phraſe, to crave his helpe; as, Ariſe, Lord, and let thine enemies be ſcattered 
                  Pſal. 68. 1., ariſe, O God, and judge the earth 
                  Pſal. 82. ult.
                  ; Ariſe, Lord, and ſave us 
                  Ierem. 2. 27.. So much for the ſenſe.
               Here for inſtruction we learne, That howſoeverDoct. Chriſt may ſeeme to ſleepe long, and then Satan and his inſtruments are buſie, and by God▪ great, but juſt permiſſion, bring the Church of God in generall, and many Gods faithfull ſervants in particular, into great extremitie and diſtreſſe: yet in that needfull and beſt time, when it ſhall bee moſt

for his glorie, and his peoples good, hee will not faile to awake, ariſe, and helpe them.
               This is it which David ſo plainly teacheth in theCōfirmation. Pſalmes, ſaying, He for ſooke the Tabernacle of Shiloh; he delivered his ſtrength into captivitie, and his beautie into the enemies hands: Hee gave his people over to the ſword, and was wroth with his inheritance: fire conſumed their young men, and their maidens were not given to mariage: their Prieſts fell by the ſword, and there were no widowes to make lamentation. Oh what havocke, enemies make of Gods Church and people, when God maketh as though he were on ſleep, and regarded not. But marke what followeth; when things were brought to this deſperate extremitie, then the Lord awaked as one out of ſleepe, and like a giant refreſhed with wine, he ſmote his enemies on the hinder parts, and put them to a perpetuall ſhame 
                  Pſal. 78. 60..
               The Lord ſeemed to ſleep long, when his ChurchExamples. and people ſojourned in Egypt, foure hundred yeeres 
                  Gen. 15. 13.. Oh then their enemies oppreſſed them, laid an iron yoke on their necks 
                  Deut. 28. 48., made them to tread in mire and clay 
                  Exod. 1. 11., gather ſtubble where they could finde it 
                  Exod. 5. 12.; and every day felt the laſh of the whip, being not able to do what was commanded Exod. 5. 14.. Yea then they tooke crafty counſell how to deſtroy them, by the drowning of all their male children 
                  Exod. 1. 10.. But at the laſt the Lord awaked, and roſe up to help them, met with Moſes at Horeb, and told him, I have ſeene, I have ſeene the affliction of my people 
                  Exod. 3. 7.; and then he brought out his people with ioy, and his choſen with gladneſſe 
                  Pſal. 105. 43., and ſent plague upon plague on their

enemies, till he utterly deſtroyed them in the Red Sea 
                  Exod. 24. 28.. The Lord ſeemed to ſleepe long, when wicked Haman obtained a decrce, that all the Iewes ſhould be deſtroyed. The Decree is written, ſealed, publiſhed, and day for execution appointed; but he was awakened, and raiſed up, with the prayers and teares of his people; and then the King could not ſleepe, readeth in the Chronicle of Mordocaies fidelitie, bethinketh how to honour and reward him, maketh Haman himſelfe the inſtrument therein: Heſter is promoted, Mordocat honoured, Haman and his ſonnes hanged, the Decree diſanulled, the people of the Land ſlaine by thouſands, and the Iewes have dayes of feaſting and ioy, for their deliverance Heſth. 9. 22.. The like might be ſhewed in many other Examples. The doctrine is moſt true, That howſoever God may ſeeme for a time to ſleepe, and wholly to neglect the eſtate of his people, and then they fall into great extremities; yet ever in his good time, he hath, and will awake, ariſe and helpe them.
               Oh let Gods people truſt in him, and awaken,Vſe. and raiſe him up by Faſting, and Prayer, and ſound Repentance. Yet know, that he is not eaſily awakened and raiſed. When God, for the ſinnes of his people, doth returne to his place 
                  Oſe. 5. ult., and as it were betaketh himſelfe to his chamber and couch, it is no eaſie thing to a waken him. It may coſt many a heavy ſigh, many a bitter teare, much ſmiting of thigh, and knocking of breaſt. It will coſt deare. Our mother Church may be an Example, who found the truth of this Doctrine by wofull experience;

at whoſe doore Chriſt knocking, and deſiring to enter, ſhee returning a ſluggiſh anſwer, I have put off my coat, how ſhall I put it on? but being better adviſed, and ariſing to open unto him, he was gone: and as Shee was hardly perſwaded to ariſe and open to him; ſo was He as hardly perſwaded to ariſe and helpe her, but ſuffered her to run up and downe in the ſtreets to ſeeke him, and could not finde him, yea to fall into the hands of cruell watchmen, who did ſmite and wound her Cant. 5. 3.. Oh ſee the bitter fuits of dallying, and late repentance! So his people having provoked him, and calling to be delivered out of the hands of their enemies, ſee what a cold anſwer he giveth; Where are your gods? the rocke wherein yee truſted? that did eat the fat of your ſacrifices, and drinke the wine of your drinkeofferings: let them riſe up, and helpe you, and be your protection 
                  Deut. 32. 37.. Oh, poore is the helpe that Idols can give to their worſhippers, having eyes, but ſee not; eares, but heare not; feet, but walke not 
                  Pſ. 115. 7.. The Prophet biddeth the people, that would raiſe God, to give him no reſt 
                  Eſay 62. 7.. Chriſt biddeth us aske, ſeeke, knocke 
                  Matth. 7. 7., and commendeth ſpirituall violence 
                  Matth. 11. 12.. The Apoſtle requireth a labouring, or ſtriving in prayer 
                  Rom. 15. 30.; and the King of Ninivie commanded his people, to cry mightily unto God 
                  Ionah 3. 8.. All which declare, that God helpeth not his people, till he be raiſed; he is not raiſed but with violence, and (as it were) by being pricked under the ſides, (as the Hebrew word ſignifieth Non excitatus niſi punctus & extimulatus, juxta Hebrae
                        •
                      vim verbi. Lorin. in Pſ. T. 2. p. 625..)
               Shall I conclude this point, with paralelling itParalell. with another? The people of God being perſecuted,

and much diſtreſſed by their enemies, David penned that moſt excellent Pſalme, the 68. wherein firſt he directeth them what to doe in their wofull caſe, viz. (as the Diſciples did here) to goe to Chriſt (for to him the Apoſtle applieth that Pſalme Eph. 4. 8..) And what muſt they intreat him to doe? To ariſe: Ariſe Lord, and let thine enemies be ſcattered. The Lord did ariſe, and went forth before his people, made Kings with their Armies to 
                     •
                  lie, rebuked the companie of ſpearemen, the multitude of Buls, and Calves of the people, and ſcattered them that delighted in warre. And what are Gods people taught to doe then? Even to praiſe God, and mutually provoke one another thereunto, Bleſſed be the Lord, even the God of our ſalvation; he that is our God, is the God of ſalvation, and to him belong the iſſues of death. Oh bleſſe yee God in the Congregations, oh ſing unto God, yee kingdomes of the earth, oh ſing praiſes to the Lord; even to him that rideth upon the heavens; the God of Iſrael is he that giveth ſtrength and power unto his people, bleſſed be God. And is this all? No, but when they have praiſed him for the good he hath done, they are alſo directed to pray unto him, to goe forward, and perfect his good worke begun; Strengthen, oh God, that which thou haſt wrought for us, for thy Temples ſake at Ieruſalem; ſo ſhall Kings bring preſents unto thee.
               
               Oh how fit that Comment, and this Theme, andApplication. both of them for this time! Many have beene the troubles of Gods people for theſe late yeeres, in many parts of the Chriſtian world, and Chriſt hath

ſlept long; but loe, by the importunate prayers of his people, he is at laſt awakened, his head is up from the pillow, he is riſen, and hath begun a gracious calme. Though I cannot ſay with the Pſalmiſt, Warres are ceaſed in all the world 
                  Pſal. 46. 9.; yet hath he beene marvellous, to breake the bow, knap the ſpeare aſunder, and create a glorious peace 
                  Eſay 4. penult., for ſo many thouſands and millions, of his worthy ſervants in France, and to give them the ſhadow of a great rocke in that weary land 
                  Eſay 32. 2.. Oh let the voice of gladneſſe be heard in righteous mens dwellings 
                  Pſ. 118. 15.; and let God be praiſed in the congregations of his Saints; and let all men pray the Lord to finiſh that good worke he hath begun, eſtabliſh that peace in all truth and ſincerity, and give like comfort and breathing to all his ſervants in Germanie, and elſe-where. Yea be aſſured, now he is riſen, he will in his good time doe ſome great worke, and cauſe (if his people now praiſe and pray) a great calme. I ſay then with Moſes,
                  Concluſion. 
                  Stand ſtill, feare not, and ſee the ſalvation of God 
                  Exod. 14. 13.: and with the Prophet Zacharie, Be ſilent, ô all fleſh, before the Lord, for he is now raiſed up out of his holy habitation 
                  Zach 
                        •
                     . ult.. So much for Preparation. The Reprehenſion followeth.
               
                  He rebuked the wind, and the ſea.] All the Euangeliſts2. Part. doe uſe one and the ſame word 
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     ., which in the native proprietie doth ſignifie to reprehend, and chide, and charge, yea charge ſtrictly, even with threatnings and menaces; and accordingly tranſlated in ſome Latine Copies 
                     
                        
                           〈◊〉
                         eſt. Bez. in Mat. 12. 16. C
                           •••
                        inatus eſt. Syr▪ in Mat. 4. 39. Eſt inc
                           ••
                        patu
                           •
                         dominorum 
                           ••
                         ſerves, cum commina
                           ••••
                        , imperium. Caſtro in Proph. Nah. 1. 4.: q. d. I charge you be ſtill and calme, upon your perill be it, I will make you rue it elſe. Which majeſticall threatning intendeth

three things, viz. firſt, Authoritie to command: ſecondly, Power to puniſh, if he be not obeyed: laſtly, An acknowledgment of that power. For in vaine it is to command, or threaten, if the parties, or creatures, doe not regard us. But as hee had power to command, and threaten, and puniſh; ſo winds, and ſeas, had eyes, and eares, and heart, to ſee, heare, feare and obey: he no ſooner commanded, and threatned, but preſently they obeyed, There was a great calme. Heare▪ 
                     
                        •
                      heaven, and hearken, ô earth, for the Lord ſpeaketh, Eſay 1. 2. If the Lord ſpeake, heaven and earth, and all creatures have eares to heare. O earth, earth, earth, heare the word of the Lord, Ierem. 22. penult. I ſay againe, let it be marked, that Chriſt did not pray, intreat, and beſeech, but with authoritie he commanded, Peace, and be ſtill; as if he were much provoked with their impetuous inſolencie. And no marvell. What? Winds and ſeas not know their Maker? What? Have they heretofore trembled, and fled at his preſence, and doe they now rage and roare, and conſpire to drowne him? What high treaſon againſt the Lord of heaven and earth is this? It is well they eſcape with a rebuke, that he doth not make them feele the power of his wrath, and give all poſterities occaſion to ſay with the Prophet, What ailed thee, oh thou ſea 
                  Pſal. 114. 3.? What didſt thou, Lake of Genneſareth, that the Lord was ſo angry, and diſpleaſed with thee? What was thy tranſgreſsion, ô ſea of Galile, for which the Lord powred out upon thee, the furiouſneſſe of his wrath 
                  Hab. 3. 8.? Oh let it be written, and let all poſterities note the meekneſie and gentleneſſe of the Lord

towards his creatures, who did no further puniſh ſuch a treaſonable conſpiracie againſt his life, but with a rebuke, Peace, and be ſtill 
                  Tace, obmut
                        •
                     ſce..
               Here, for our inſtruction, let us learne, what isDoct. lit. the ſoveraigne Regall authoritie of this great Lord Paramount, Chriſt Ieſus, over all creatures. He is the great King over all the world, though his kingdome be not of this world 
                  Iohn 18. 36.. Aske of me (ſaid God) and I will give thee the heathen for thine inheritance, and the uttermoſt parts of the earth for thy poſſeſsion 
                  Pſal. 2. 8.. And againe, I will ſet his hand in the ſea, and his right hand in the rivers, and I will make him my first-borne, higher than the kings of the earth 
                  Pſal. 89. 25.. And againe, He ſhall have dominion from ſea to ſea, and from the river to the ends of the earth 
                  Pſal. 72. 8.. Many Kings have had large and great Dominions, as Ahaſhueroſh, who reigned from India to Aethiopia, over an hundred and ſeven and twenty Provinces 
                  Heſt. 1. 1.. Some Kings have ſo far doted, and beene beſotted with admiration of their owne ſublimitie and excellencie, as to forget themſelves to bee but Lords Paravall, and in ſtomacke have asked, Who is the Lord? and have anſwered themſelves with ſcorne and contempt, I know not the Lord 
                  Exod. 5. 2.. But the ſea will know none but the Lord. There was a great ſtorme, when Ionah was in the ſhip, and the Mariners thought to have maſtered it, and with their oares did digge and delve into the ſurges; but the ſea wrought, and was troublous 
                  Ionah 1. 13., and would have drowned them all, if they had not caſt Ionah into it. For God had given the ſea a commiſſion to fetch in that fugitive Prophet, and it would

execute it with effect. There was a great ſtorme, when Paul was in the ſhip, and they caſt out both lading and tacklings, as if they would have bribed the Sea to be ſtill; but it would not, till it had broken the ſhip with violence of waves Acts 27. 41.. Some have beene angry with the Sea. That great Perſian Monarch, Xerxes, was in as great a rage, as Helleſpont it ſelfe, who threatned to be avenged for breaking downe of the Bridge which he had builded for the paſſage of his numberleſſe Armie; yea he commanded three hundred ſtripes to be given it, and ſo many fetters to be caſt into it; and others with hot Irons, as it were to ſet marks upon it: but Helleſpont felt no hurt by all this, nor cared for the Executioners words, The Lord hath inflicted this puniſhment upon thee, for the hurt thou haſt done him 
                  
                     Herodot. lib. 7. Valerius l. 
                     
                        •
                     
                     ▪ 
                     
                        •
                     
                     ▪ 2. Iuve
                           •
                        al. ſat. 10. Oroſius l. 2. c. 9. Diodor. Sic. Plut.
                  . Tuſh, Helleſpont knew not his Lordſhip, but raged ſtill; and if they had come within it reach, would have drowned both him and his. Canutus a Daniſh King in this Land, ſet his foot on the Sea ſhore, cloſe by the Sea, whilſt it was flowing, & commanded it not to riſe, and wet his feet or clothes; but the Sea kept his courſe, roſe, and wet both feet and thighes; whereupon the King ſtarted away, and ſaid, All men may know that the power of Kings is vaine, and meere vanitie, and none worthy to have the name of King, but he that hath all things ſubject to his command and lawes; and after this, never wore Crowne on his head, but ſet it on the head of a Crucifix at Wincheſter. Ex Huntington. Fox Martyrolog. 1. Tom. p. 147.
               But let the Lord, the great Iehovah come, who

is of man inviſible 
                  1 Tim. 1. 17.; and the Sea hath eyes to ſee him withall: The Sea ſaw thee and fled, Iordan was driven backe 
                  Pſal. 114. 3.. Let him rebuke, and the Sea hath eares to heare: let him ſay, Peace, and be ſtill, and there is as ſudden, and as great a calme, as there was a ſtorme. Let him be pleaſed to walke, and the Sea is as firme as a pavement Matth. 14. 25.
                  ▪ Let him be angry, and it hath an heart to feare Pſal. 77. 1
                        •
                     .; The waters ſaw thee, ô God, and were afraid. No winds doe ſo trouble it, as the blaſting of the breath of his noſthrils 
                  Pſal▪ 18. 15.. Yea let Moſes but take the rod of God in his hand, and the Sea divideth 
                  Exod. 24. 26.. Elijah with his cloke ſhal divide Iordan 
                  2 King. 2▪ 8, 14.; and if the ſpirit of Elijah reſt upon Eliſhah, he ſhall doe ſo too Ibid.: and ſo long as Peters faith holdeth, he ſhall walke on it Matth. 14. 29.; that as the evill ſpirit anſwered the ſonnes of S
                        •
                     evah, Ieſus I know, and Paul I know, but who are yee 
                  Acts 19. 15.? ſo the Sea may ſay, JESVS I know, and Elijah, Eliſha, and Peter, and all the ſervants of the moſt High God; but for Pharaoh, Xerxes, Canutus, and others, who are yee? We regard not your rebukes, wee feare not your threats.
               Oh what can be more uſefull, than to ſpeake,Vſe. and heare, and meditate, on the omnipotent ſoveraigntie of Chriſt over all creatures, and namely over that huge, boiſterous, uncontroulable and fearefull Element? And therefore, how often in the holy Scriptures is there mention made thereof? and ſpecially of the drying up of the Red Sea, and Iordan, giving paſſage to Gods people. God himſelfe asked, Who ſhut up the Sea with doores? Who ſet barres? and ſaid, Hitherto ſhalt thou come, and
                  
                  no further, and here ſhalt thou ſtay thy proud waves 
                  Iob 38. 8, 11.. And againe, Feare yee not me (ſaith the Lord) will yee not tremble at my preſence? who have placed the ſand for the bound of the ſea, by a perpetuall decree, that it cannot paſſe it; and though the waves toſſe themſelves, yet can they not prevaile; though they roare, yet can they not paſſe over it 
                  Ierem. 5. 22.. Holy David, as he was much given to devout meditation, and contemplation of the Heavens, Sunne, Moone, and Starres Pſal. 8. 3., Thunder, Lightning, Haile, Meteors: ſo very frequent in meditation of Gods power and providence in the creation, and diſpoſition, rule and government of the Sea; as, He gathereth the waters of the Sea together, as an heape, and layeth up the deepe as in ſtore-houſes: Let all the earth feare the Lord, let all the inhabitants of the world ſtand in awe of him 
                  Pſal. 33. 7.. And againe, It is God that ſtilleth the raging of the Sea, and the noiſe of it waves 
                  Pſal. 65. 7.. And againe, I will meditate of all thy works, and talke of thy doings: thou art the God that doſt wonders; the waters ſaw thee, ô God, the waters ſaw thee, and were afraid, the depths alſo were troubled 
                  Pſal. 77. 12.. Againe, O Lord God of Hoſts, who is a ſtrong Lord like unto thee? thou ruleſt the raging of the Sea, and ſtilleſt the waves thereof when they ariſe 
                  Pſal 92. penult.. And many ſuch like in the Pſalmes, and Prophets, whereof theſe are but a taſte.
               And leſt any Atheiſt ſhould object (for the ſtraitning of his dominion) that Gods power is but over ſome few and ſmall Lakes, as this was, (as if he were but Vice-Admirall of narrow Seas) note how Gods power hath appeared on many Seas, Streams,

and Flouds; yea when all the world was Sea at the firſt, by the power of his word, they were gathered into one place, and the dry land appeared 
                  Gen. 1. 9.. Whereof David thus rendreth the praiſe unto God, Thou laiedſt the foundation of the earth, that it never ſhould be removed at any time: thou coveredſt it with the deepe as with a garment. The waters ſtood above the mountaines; at thy rebuke they fled 
                  
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                      
                     Septuag.
                  , at the voice of thy thunder they haſted away 
                  Pſal. 104. 7.. Which alſo the blinde Heathen groped after, acknowledging the worke, though ignorant of the Worker Quiſquis fuit ille deorum: juſſit & extendi campos. Ovid. metam. 1.. The waters of Egypt had experience of his power, when Moſes lifting up the rod of God upon them, all their rivers, and ſtreames, and ponds, and pooles, became bloud Exod. 7. 19.. The waters of the Red Sea alſo felt his power, when Moſes lifting up the rod of God, they were divided Exod. 14. 21.; whereof David ſaith, He rebuked the red ſea, and it was dried up 
                  Pſal. 106. 9.. The river of Iordan felt his power, when no ſooner the Prieſts that bare the Arke of God came to touch it, but (though it was at ſuch a time of the yeere, when Iordan did overflow it banks) the waters which came from above ſtood upon an heape, the others failed and were cut off, ſo as the people paſſed on dry land, right over againſt Iericho 
                  Ioſh. 3. 15.. Whereof the Prophet demanded a reaſon in this glorying manner, What meant yee rowling and roaring ſtreams of Iordans floud to recoile backwardly 
                  Pſal. 114. 3.? And now the Sea of Galile acknowledgeth his ſoveraigntie, when being rebuked, there was a great calme.
               
               Yea, that we may further extend and inlarge his

dominion; know, that he hath all power and authoritie, in Heaven, Earth, Seas, and Hell it ſelfe. For himſelfe hath ſaid, I have the keyes of death, and of hell 
                  Rev. 1. 18.: and, All power and authoritie is given me in heaven and earth 
                  Matth. 28. 18.. And the Apoſtle ſaith, Every knee muſt bowe unto him, both of things in heaven, earth, and under the earth, and every tongue muſt confeſſe, that Ieſus Chriſt is Lord, to the glory of God the Father 
                  Philip. 2. 10, 11.. As he here rebuked the winds and ſea; ſo he rebuked his Diſciples, who would have had fire to come from heaven, and conſume their enemies Luk. 9. 55.. Yea he ſtraitly charged his Diſciples not to make him knowne 
                  Luk. 9. 21.. He rebuked diſeaſes alſo: he ſtood over Simon Peters wives mother, having a great Fever, and he rebuked the fever, and it left her 
                  Luk. 4. 39. 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     . Imperavit f
                           •
                        bri.
                  . Yea often he rebuked Devils, ſometimes to hold their peace 
                  Mar. 1. 24.; and ſometimes ſtraitly charged them not to make him knowne 
                  Mar. 3. 12.; and ſometime, to come out of ſuch as they poſſeſſed, which they did, ſo as all the people were amazed: With authoritie and power he commandeth the uncleane ſpirits, and they come out 
                  Luk. 4. 36.. Yea, an whole Legion of Devils fell downe proſtrate before Chriſt, and acknowledged his power over them, beſeeching him, not to torment them, nor ſend them out into the deepe, but ſuffer them to enter into the herd of Swine 
                  Luk. 8. 30, 31.. Wherefore Michael ſtriving with the Devill about the body of Moſes, durſt not bring againſt him any railing accuſation, but ſaid, The Lord rebuke thee 
                  Iude 9. 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     .. Thus Heaven, and Earth, and Sea, Men, Diſeaſes, yea Devils, and all Creatures, muſt heare and tremble, when this moſt high and ſoveraigne Lord

commandeth; as we ſhall further heare from the effect of this rebuke: There was a great calme.
               
               In the meane time, (for the uſe of that which weVſe. have alreadie heard) what a ſweet comfort and encouragement may this be to all the true diſciples of Chriſt, that where ever they become, they are within the dominion and juriſdiction of Chriſt; Whither can I flie (ſaith David) from thy preſence? Pſal. 139. 7. Of all ſorts of offenders, God hath no fugitives to puniſh: Indeed, Ionah fled from the land, but God met him in a ſtorme upon the ſea: and ſurely in his dominion, neither wind, water, fire, raine, haile, ſnow, ſickneſſe, diſeaſe, ache, paine, nor Devill, can hurt or vexe them, but according to his good pleaſure; 
                     •
                  or they are all but his ſervants▪ 
                  And if he ſay to one goe, hee goeth; to another come, and he commeth. Let then the world hate us, the Devill like a roaring Lion, ſeeke to devoure us; yea, if it were poſſible, for heaven, earth, hell, and all creatures, to conſpire our deſtruction, yet can they doe nothing againſt us, but what he will, and when hee rebuketh, all ſhall be calme and ſtill. And thus much for the Letter.
               
                  And rebuked the winds, and the ſea.] For the Myſtery:Senſe myſtic. hereby is ſignified, that God in his good time will ſtill the rage and fury of perſecutors againſt his Church. To which purpoſe the Prophet hath anConfirmatiō. excellent ſaying, Woe to the multitude of many people, which make a noiſe, like the noiſe of the ſeas, and to the ruſhing of Nations, that make a ruſhing, like the ruſhing of mightie waters; the Nations ſhall ruſh, like the ruſhing of many waters, but God ſhall rebuke them, and they
                  
                  ſhall flie farre off, and be like the rowling thing, or thiſtle-downe before the whirlewind 
                  Eſay 17. 12, 13.. Oh ſee how eaſie a thing with God, to ſtill all the enemies of his Church, be they never ſo mightie or malicious▪ As he needed not Moſes Rod, nor Eliahs Cloake, nor Xerxes his Fetters, to ſtill the Sea; only he ſpake the word, rebuked the winds, and ſeae, and there was a great calme; ſo, ſaith the Prophet, If the Lord doe but rebuke the Nations, they flie farre off, like thiſtledowne, from the face of a whirlewind.
               
               For the Illuſtration of which point, be pleaſedIlluſtration. to obſerve, That, for the procuring a peaceable calme unto his Church, God ſometimes diſableth great meanes; enableth ſmall meanes; yea, ſometimes worketh without meanes.
               For the firſt, becauſe the Lord is jealous of his1. Great meanes diſabled. owne glory, and man is fooliſh and prone to rob him of it, both by truſting in great meanes, and ſacrificing to his owne net 
                  A
                        •
                     ac. 1. 16.; arrogating the praiſe and glory of the action: Therefore doth God ſeldom doe any great thing, by great and eminent meanes, but pronounce a woe to ſuch as truſt in them; as, Woe to them that goe downe into Aegypt for helpe, and leane upon horſes, which truſt in chariots, becauſe they be many, and in horſemen, becauſe they be multiplied, but looke not to the holy one of Iſrael, nor ſeeke after Iehovah 
                  Eſay 31. 1.. When Iſrael upon juſt occaſion, and approved of God, went to fight againſt Benjamin; though the men of Iſrael were foure hundred thouſand▪
                   and the men of Benjamin but ſix and twentie thouſand and odde; yet the men of Iſrael received two foiles, and loſt fortie thouſand, til, in the end, they

                  went up to the houſe of the Lord, and there faſted and wept, and learned not to truſt in the multitude of an hoaſt, but in the Lord of hoaſts, and then they prevailed 
                  Iudg. 20. 26.. Wherefore David from his owne experience ſaith godly, A King is not ſaved by the multitude of an hoaſt; neither is any mightie man delivered by his much ſtrength; an horſe is counted but a vaine thing to ſave a man 
                  Pſal. 33. 15. 16.. After whom, Salomon his ſonne (a worthy graft of ſo Noble a ſtocke, heire of his Fathers Vertues, as well as of his Crowne) led by the ſame Spirit, ſaith in like ſort, The horſe is prepared againſt the day of battell, but ſalvation is from Ichovah 
                  Prov. 21. ult.
                  . And therefore let all Gods people looke unto the Mountaine, from whence commeth their helpe 
                  Pſal. 121. 1., in the needfull time of trouble 
                  Pſal. 46.; and ſay, in the name of our God, we will ſet up our banners; ſome put their truſt in chariots, and ſome in horſes, but wee will remember the name of the Lord our God 
                  Pſal. 20. 5. 7..
               Secondly, God enableth poore, weake, baſe, abject,2. Enableth weake means. and contemptible meanes, for the bringing of great and mightie things to paſſe. When Gideon came at the firſt with a great armie, to fight againſt the Midianites, the Lord ſaid unto him, This people, that are with thee, are too many, for me to deliver the Midianites into their hands, leſt Iſrael take to himſelfe glory over me, and ſay, mine hand hath brought me ſalvation. But when all were brought to 300. naked men, and without armes, only having trumpets, pitchers and lamps; By theſe (ſaith God) will I ſave you, and deliver the Midianites into thine hands: and he did ſo Iudg. 7. 2. 7.. Vpon this groud Ionathan perſwaded his Armour-bearer, even them two, to ſet upon a

whole Garriſon of the Philiſtims, There is no let to Iehovah, but that hee may ſave by many, or by few 
                  1 Sam. 14▪ 7.. That of the Prophet is moſt memorable, The Lord is his name, that ſtrengtheneth the ſpoiled againſt the ſtrong, that distreſſe it ſelfe ſhould be able to ſcale a Fort 
                  Amos 5. 9.. And the Prophet Ieremie biddeth the Iews not to deceive themſelves, becauſe they had a little prevailed againſt the Chaldeans, for if there were none left but wounded men, and thruſt thorow, yet ſhould they riſe, every man in his tent, and burne the City with fire 
                  Ierem. 37. 10.. Moſt commonly (if cauſe be good) victory goeth with weakeſt ſide.
               Thirdly, for the full manifeſtation of the glory3. Worketh without meanes. of his omnipotencie, God many times worketh greateſt things without meanes, ſo as in the effecting thereof, nothing can be looked on, but God. In the beginning, God gave light, before he made Sunne; and made plants and herbes to grow, before there was any raine: in the wilderneſſe, fed his people, with bread and fleſh from heaven: in times of warre, if God doe but riſe, his enemies are ſcattered 
                  Pſal. 68 1.; yea, if he doe but looke upon their hoaſts, they are diſcomfited 
                  Exod. 14. 24.. In the confidence whereof, King Aſa (ſeeing himſelfe oppreſſed with a multitude of enemies, even above a thouſand thouſands of Ethiopians comming up againſt him) he prayed to the Lord; Lord, it is nothing to thee, to helpe with many, or no power 
                  2 Chron. 14. 11.. If he had ſaid with many, or few, great, or ſmall power, it would have beene plaine; but to ſay, with many, or no power, bewrayed an excellent meaſure of faith, that if God did but rebuke all ſuch enemies, it was enough. The Prophet

giveth this glory to God, that hee createth peace 
                  Eſay 57. 
                        •
                     9▪ 
                     Hic digitus eſt Dei.
                  . He is a good Carpenter, that having crooked and rough timber put into his hands, can, with axe and plane, make it ſtraight and ſmooth; but the Creator can worke, having no matter at all, to work upon; creating light out of darkneſſe; peace out of warre; a great calme, out of a great ſtorme, only by a word of his mouth, hee rebuked the winds and ſea.
               
               For further manifeſtation of Gods glory, and our conſolation, ſeeing the Scriptures ſpeake expreſly of Gods rebuking of Kings, Princes, Spearemen, and perſecutors of his Church and people 
                  Pſal. 105. 14. Eſay 17. 13. Pſal. 76. 6.: let us ſearch the Scriptures, that wee may finde out Gods manner herein. How doth God rebuke Kings, who are as boiſterous and mightie winds, cauſing great tempeſts of perſecutions in the Sea of this world, (that when God doth it, wee may give him the glory of it?) And that, God doth, two waies, viz. Either inwardly, or outwardly. Inwardly,I. By inclining to peace.
                   by working upon their hearts; or outwardly, by working upon their bodies and eſtates. As God hath the hearts of all men in his hands; ſo ſpecially of Kings and Princes: and doth extraordinarily worke upon them, either by inclining them to peace; as we ſee in the example of Eſau (who threatning to kill his brother Iacob 
                  Gen. 27. 41.; and Iacob exceedingly feared to heare that he came out with foure hundred men againſt him 
                  Gen. 32. 6.) whoſe heart was ſo inclined to his brother, that when they met, he was ſo far from killing, or offering the leaſt wrong unto him in word or deed, that he embraced him, fell on his necke
                  
                  and kiſſed him 
                  Gen. 33. 4.; ſee, ſee, how inwardly God rebuked that boiſterous wind, and there was a great calme: or elſe, he inwardly doth terrifie them, ſo as they ſhall not dare to doe the evill which they would, and intended.
               Thus God rebuked Abimelech, King of Gerar, in
                  2. By terrifying. 
                  a dreame by night; Thou art but a dead man, for the woman, which thou haſt taken, for ſhee is a mans wife 
                  Gen. 20. 3.: whereupon he returned, to Abraham, his wife, and there was a great calme. So Laban purſued Iacob, and his wives and children, bluſtering and ſtirring up a great tempeſt: but God rebuked him, ſaying, Take heed that thou ſpeake not to Iacob, either good or bad 
                  Gen. 31. 24.; whereupon followed a great calme. So the Kings of Canaan intending to deſtroy the Iſrael of God, were rebuked with the report that came unto them, what God had done for them, Drying up the Red-ſea, and deſtroying the two Kings of the Amorites, Og and Sehon: whereupon their hearts did melt, and there was no courage in them, they grew very calme Ioſh. 2. 10. Exod. 15. 14.. Yea Kings aſſembling with their armies, purpoſely to beſiege Ieruſalem, At the very ſight of it, they marvelled, and were troubled, and haſted away, feare tooke hold on them, and paine, as on a woman in travell 
                  Pſal. 48. 4.. Thus (when they will not otherwiſe be inclined to peace) God doth cut off the ſpirit of Princes, and is terrible to the Kings of the earth 
                  Pſal. 76. ult.
                  .
               Or elſe God doth rebuke them outwardly: and2. Outwardly. that, either in their perſons, or powers: in their perſons, either by ſickneſſe, or death; By ſickneſſe, or1. In perſon. diſeaſes. Thus God plagued Pharaoh, and his houſe1. With ſickneſſe. with great plagues, becauſe of Sara, Abrahams
                  
wi
                     •
                  e; whereupon he reſtored her to her husband, and there was a great calme 
                  Gen. 12. 17. 2. Death. 1. Naturall.
                  . Or by death: and that is either naturall, or violent. Naturall: thus wicked and Idolatrous Ahaz ſlept with his fathers: and then goaly King Hezekiah reigned in his ſtead 
                  2 Kings 16. ult.
                  , who was an hiding place from the wind, a covert from the tempeſt, as rivers of water in a dry place, and as the ſhadow of a great rocke in a wearie land 
                  Eſa. 32. 2. Violent.
                  . Violent death, is either cauſed by themſelves, or others. By themſelves: thus Saul killed himſelfe, and then
                  1. By themſelves. 
                  there was a great calme 
                  1 Sam. 31. 4.. Or by others: thus that wicked King Amon, being ſlaine by his ſervants,2. By others. godly Ioſiah ſucceeded him, in whoſe daies the Church had a bleſſed calme 2 Kings 21. ult.
                  . And thus, in all ages, by the miſerable and wretched ends of cruell and bloudie perſecutors, God hath given peace to his Church. Or if God ſpare their perſons, he doth2. Their Powers. often rebuke them in their powers; and that chiefly three wayes: viz. By diverſion, diſſipation, and deſtruction.
               By diverſion: thus when David was in greateſt1. Diverſion. danger of Saul, (for they had even compaſſed him round, to take him,) there came a meſſenger and brought tidings to Saul, the Philiſtims had invaded his land 1 Sam. 23. 27.; whereupon he was forced preſently to divert his forces; ſo David eſcaped.
               Secondly, By diſperſion: Hee doth ſcatter the
                  2. Diſperſion. 
                  people that delight in warre 
                  Pſal. 68. 30.. Thus, God cauſed the Syrians beſieging Samaria, to heare a noiſe of Horſes and Chariots, even of a great hoaſt; they aroſe, and fled 2 Kings 7. 6.. When Gideon, and his three hundred blew with the trumpets, and brake

their pitchers, the huge hoaſt of the Midianites fled Iudg. 7. 22.
               
               Laſtly, God many times rebuketh perſecuting3. Deſtructiō. 1. By Sea. Princes, by marvellouſly deſtroying their powers: and that by ſea, and land. By ſea: ſo David ſpeaketh of God breaking the ſhips of Tarſhiſh with an Eaſt wind 
                  Pſal. 48. 7.. By land; either by themſelves, or others; by others; So God ſent an Angel, who in one night deſtroyed
                  2. By Land. 
                  an hundred foureſcore and five thouſand, in
                  1. By others. 
                  the hoaſt of railing Rabſhekah; whereby he was forced to returne, and not ſo much as ſhoot an arrow against the Citie 
                  2 Kings 19. 32.. Yea, rather then they ſhould not be deſtroyed, the enemies of Gods Church have deſtroied one another, as in that great army which came2. By themſelves. up againſt Iehoſhaphat and Iudah, The children of Moab and Ammon ſtood up againſt the inhabitants of mount Seir, and thus they deſtroyed one another 
                  2. Chron. 20. 23..
               The conſideration, whereof, ſerveth for theſe1. Vſe. vſes. Firſt, That ſeeing Chriſt hath ſo many wayes and meanes, whereby to rebuke even the moſt potent, and puiſſant, miſchievous and malicious enemies; not to be diſtractedly fearefull, though we ſee never ſo great conſpiracies, or the Church in likelihood to be in extreme perill and danger; but to commend us, and others, to God in faſting and prayer; being aſſured that God can, and (in his good time) will, rebuke the enemies of his people: They doe but kicke againſt the pricke, Act 9 5. Their owne hurt is ever the greateſt: Si ſtimulos pugnis caedis, manibus plus doles, Plaut. Who ever tried their ſtrength, in lifting at the ſtone, and were not broken in peeces? Zach. 12. 3.
               
                  Secondly, That when we ſee ſuch great comfort2. Vſe. and happineſſe to redound to the Church of God; partly, for that, Kings and Princes, (who threaten deſtruction,) of Wolves, become Shepherds; of perſecutors, become Patrons; of deſtroiers, defenders; of murtherers, nurſing fathers, and nurſing mothers; or that, by naturall, or violent death, God cutteth off mercileſſe Tyrants; or that, he doth divert by unlooked for occaſions; diſſipate by land or ſea, with wind, weather, or other meanes; or deſtroy, by fire, water, peſtilence, famine, their powers and forces: Oh, in all ſuch caſes, let the people of God give all the honour and glory hereof unto Chriſt: for it is he that ſo rebuketh the roaring winds, and raging ſeas. He that hath eares to heare, may heare him in this dialect, ſpeaking to the winds and ſeas, Peace, and be ſtill.
               
               Yea, howſoever it hath pleaſed God, for a longConcluſion. time, to ſuffer the wind to blow ſo loud and ſtrong, as if it would rent the mountaines, and breake the rocks in peeces 
                  1 Kings 19. 11., or diſcover the channels of the ſea 
                  Pſal. 18. 15.; and ſuffer the ſea to rage, as if it would not onely toſſe with tempeſt 
                  Eſa. 54. 11.; but even ſwallow up in furges, the poore ſhip of his Church: Yet Chriſt at laſt is awakened, hee hath begun to rebuke the winds and the ſea, (bleſſed be his name,) and if his people will beleeve and repent, they ſhall ſee his ſalvation, and he will rebuke them more. And ſo much for his Reprehenſion. The effects thereof follow.
               
                  And there was a great calme.] The effects of3. Gen. Part. Diviſion. Chriſt his rebuking of the winds and ſea, are two; the former the cauſe of the latter: The former, in

the winds and ſea, (There was a great calme:) The latter in the diſciples, who were hereby occaſioned to wonder and proclaime, What manner of man is this, that even the winds and the ſea obey him? For the firſt:
               
                  And there was a great calme.] Sweetly hath David,
                  1. Part. long ſince (as it were) commented on this ſtory, ſaying, They that goe downe into the ſea in ſhips, and occupie their buſineſſe in great waters, theſe ſee the workes of the Lord, and his wonders in the deepe: For he commandeth and raiſeth the ſtormie wind, which lifteth up the waves thereof. They mount up to the heaven, they go down again to the depths, their ſoule is melted, becauſe of trouble. They reele to and fro, and ſtagger like a drunken man, and are at their wits end. Then they cry to the Lord in their trouble, and hee bringeth them out of their diſtreſſes: hee maketh the ſtorme a calme, ſo that the waves thereof are ſtill. Then are they glad, becauſe they be quiet; ſo hee bringeth them to their deſired haven. Oh, that men would therefore praiſe him, and declare the wonderfull workes which he doth for the children of men, &c
                  Pſal. 107. 23.. Now then, we are come to the joyfull Cataſtrophe of this ſtory: danger is over, feare abated, faith increaſed, ſtorme ceaſed: And there was a great calme.
               
               Whereof firſt for the ſenſe of the words. TheSenſe lit. Hebrew word, in Munſters copie, doth ſignifie, To be ſtill 
                  Shethikah, à radice Shatha, in Kal. ſiluit. idem quod Shakat. Pag.
                  . I finde the ſame word, both in the forecited place, in the Pſalme, and is tranſlated, quiet; Then are they glad, becauſe they be quiet 
                  Ci 
                        •
                     iſhtokn, quia ſiluerunt. Mont.
                  ; and in the ſtory of Ionah, where the Mariners asked Ionah, What ſhall we doe unto thee, that the ſea may be calme
                  
                  unto us? or as the Hebrew ſignifieth) that the ſea may be ſilent from us 
                  Ionah. 1. 11. Iiſhtok haiam, Silebit mare.
                  . And indeed, the word is very proper, if either wee conſider the nature of a ſtorme, wherein winds and waves doe wonderfully roare Pſal. 46. 3., and lift up their voyce 
                  Pſal. 93. 3. Kolam, vocem ſuā.
                  , (as David unproperly calleth it,) ſo as their noiſe is heard afarre off; or conſider the context, for Chriſt bade the winds and ſea, Peace, and be ſtill: and their obedience anſwereth like an eccho to the voyce, and the winds and ſeas were ſtill. But the Greeke word, (which all three Euangeliſts uſe, but no where elſe in all the new Teſtament) is more ſignificant 
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     
                  ; which (as ſome would have 
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     , Lac: quaſi aer lactens. Euſtath. fortaſſe reſpiciens ad illud Homer. 
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     .) is derived from ſuch a Greeke word, as ſignifieth (milke) to note, that the aire was as white and cleere, as that in the firmament, in the cleereſt winters night, which is called, The milkie way 
                  Via Lactea.. But I rather ſubſcribe to thoſe, Henricus Stephanus, Scapula, Chemnitius, Piſcator, that derive it from ſuch a theme in the Greeke, as ſignifieth, to laugh, or looke marvellous cheerefully, or merrily 
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     , à ridendo. 
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     , Rideo. 
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     , quaſi 
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     .. The word then ſignifieth, that there was, upon Chriſt his rebuking of the winds, & the ſea, not only a marvellous calmeneſſe, ſtilneſſe, and quietneſſe, not ſo much wind ſtirring as would move a leafe, no riſing, or rowling, but ſea, as ſmooth and even, as one might caſt a die upon it, as wee ſay; but there was a wonderfull ſerenitie, the heaven and ſea did (as it were) ſmile and laugh upon them, which before did ſo frowne and threaten to drowne them.
               Yet, as if the word, in it owne native proprietie, were not ſufficient, here is alſo another added,

                  There was a [great] calme 
                  
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     , trāquillitas magna.
                  . It well beſeemed the great God, to doe a great miracle, and greatly to ſhew his power and authoritie, in turning a great tempeſt into a great calme Decet magnum magna facere, Orig.. Yea, as hee is a great God above all gods 
                  Pſal. 95. 3.; ſo he commonly doth great things, for his glory, and his peoples good: ſo as their enemies confeſſe, the Lord doth great things for them 
                  Pſal. 126. 2..
               Yea, laſtly, as there was a tranquillitie, ſtilneſſe, calmneſſe, a great one; ſo was it alſo ſudden 
                     Non paulatim ſedati ſunt fluctus. Barrad. T. 2. lib. 5. cap. 15. p. 319.. And herein lieth the greateſt part of the miracle: for the winds (though ſometime blowing ſtrongly, yet) by little and little falling; and ſea (raging extremely,) by little and little to grow calme, is no great wonder (being commonly ſeene.) But that, no ſooner the word of rebuke paſſed forth of Chriſts mouth, but the effect of it appeared, preſently, there was a great calme; hee no ſooner ſpake the word, but it was done; loe, herein lieth the miracle, and matter of wonder. And ſo much be ſaid for the opening of the ſenſe of the words. I now proceed to raiſe your doctrines. And firſt from the letter.
               The firſt may be raiſed from the context: Firſt,1. Doct. lit. A calme; then aroſe a great tempeſt; and now is made a great calme againe. Which repreſenteth unto us the mutabilitie, or changeable viciſſitude of all earthly, temporall, and ſublunary things: as, ſummer, and winter; day, and night; cold, and heat: ſo in mens bodies; health, and ſickneſſe; eaſe, and paine: and in mens eſtates; wealth, and povertie; gaine, and loſſe; honour, and diſgrace;

and impriſonment; peace, and perſecution; are oftentimes changed one for another. The world is like the Moone Rev. 12. 1., ever variable: nothing continueth in one ſtay 
                  Iob. 14. 2.; Vanitie of vanities, all is vanitie 
                  Eccleſ. 1. 2.. And as it is in theſe earthly, and outward; ſo in heavenly, and inward things, ſtate, and condition. The beſt of Gods children in this life, are well acquainted and exerciſed with changes, and alterations; ſtormes, and calmes; mirth, and mourning; laughing, and lamentation; ſinging, and ſighing; doe many times change, and keepe their turnes, and ſeldome are of any long continuance.
               Wherefore let not ſuch as are in beſt condition,Vſe. 1. preſume with David, Tuſh, my mountaine is ſo ſtrong, it cannot bee moved 
                  Pſal. 30. 6, 7.: but let every one walke in humilitie, and prepare for croſſes, afflictions, and temptations.
               And let ſuch as are under the rod, not be tooVſe. 2. much dejected, but in patience poſſeſſe their ſoules, and wait upon God: after a ſtorme commeth a calme; Heavineſſe may endure for a night, but ioy commeth in the morning 
                  Pſal. 30. 5..
               Our ſecond leſſon is, That even all, yea the moſt2. Doct. lit. ſenſleſſe creatures, (man excepted) doth heare, and obey the voice of God; and are in their kinds (as it were) zealous of his glory. If we looke up to heaven,Cōfirmation. we ſhall ſee thouſand thouſands, and ten thouſand times ten thouſand ſtand before him 
                  Dan. 7. 10.; even an innumerable company of moſt glorious Angels 
                  Heb. 12. 22., ſtanding about his throne 
                  Eſa. 6. 2., readie to doe what hee commandeth, moſt willingly, ſpeedily, and faithfully 
                  Pſal. 103. 20.. Deſcend by the Firmament, and the Sunne, which every

morning commeth as a bridegroome forth of his chamber, and reioiceth as a giant to runne his race 
                  Pſal. 19. 6.; yet at Gods command, it ſtood ſtill 
                  Ioſh. 10. 13.; yea went backe 
                  2 Kin. 20. 10, 11.; and at Chriſt his paſſion, it 
                     •
                  id it face, as if then God performed what he had threatned, I will cauſe the Sunne to goe downe at noone, and I will darken the earth in a cleare day 
                  Amos 8. 9.. And the very ſtarres fought againſt Siſerah 
                  Iudg. 5. 20.. God rained fire out of heaven to burne Sodom 
                  Gen. 19. 24.; and Aarons ſonnes Levit. 10. 2.; and Captaines with their fifties 
                  2 King. 1. 10, 12.; but the fire could not, would not ſo much as ſindge an haire on the heads of the three children 
                  Dan. 3. 27.. Deſcend lower, by the Regions of the Aire, and we ſhall ſee it is the glorious God that maketh the thunder 
                  Pſal. 29. 3.. It is his voice, which maketh the wilderneſſe of Cades to ſhake, and Hindes to calve 
                  Pſal. 29. 8.. Lightnings are Gods arrowes 
                  Pſal. 18. 14.; and when the Lord calleth for them, they anſwer, Here we are 
                  Iob 38. 35.. He is the father of the raine 
                  Iob 38. 28.. The clouds are his bottles 
                  Iob 38. 37.. He alſo bringeth the winds out of his treaſures 
                  Pſal. 135. 7.. Haile, Snow, Vapour, all fulfill his word 
                  Pſal. 148. 8.. The earth trembleth a
                        •
                      his preſence 
                  Pſal. 114. 7.: Mount Sinai ſhaketh, as if it would rent in ſunder Exod. 20. 18.; and openeth to ſwallow up Core, Dathan, and Abiram 
                  Num. 16. 31.. God ſent Lions to teare the Samaritanes in peeces 2 Kings 17. 25.; but they did not offer any violence to Daniel, being caſt into their Den Dan. 6. 22.. He did ſting the rebellious Iſraelites with Serpents Num. 21. 6.. He plagued Egypt with flies, and poore contemptible creatures Exod. 8. 6, 21.. He prepared a worme to bite Ionahs gourd at the root, that it withered Ionah 4. 7.. The Graſhoppers (when God ſendeth them) are called a ſtrong nation, mighty people, and an huge armie 
                  Ioel 1. 6. 2. 2. 2. 25.. The birds of

the Aire, at his command, feed his Prophet with bread and fleſh
                  1 Kings 17. 6.. He hiſſeth for the flies of Egypt, and bees of Aſsyria
                  Eſa. 7. 18, 19.; Devoureth Herod with liceActs 12. 23.. Yea, he doth ſit above the water flouds
                  Pſal. 93. 4.; and ruleth the Sea
                  Pſal. 29. 3.. At his pleaſure the waters muſt ſtand on an heape, to let his people paſſe
                  Exod. 14. 22.: and ſometimes muſt overflow, and drowne all creatures, in whoſe noſthrils is the breath of life
                  Gen. 7. 22.. The river Iordan muſt open, and let Iſrael paſſeIoſh. 3. 16.: but the ancient river Kiſhon, with a violent ſtreame, muſt ſweepe the Canaanites awayIudg. 5. 21.. Fiſhes ſwim in Sea at his pleaſure. He prepared a Whale to ſwallow Ionah
                  Ionah 1. ult.
                  ; and the great ſholes of Herrings faile not at ſuch a day to be on ſuch a coaſt. He calleth for a Famine, and deſtroyeth the proviſion of bread
                  Pſal. 105. 16.: and at another time, cauſeth the clouds to drop downe fatneſſe
                  Pſal. 132. 15., that the poore may be ſatisfied with bread
                  Ibid.. All diſeaſes goe and come at his pleaſure, as the Centurion intended, in Matth. 8. Hee puniſheth diſobedience with conſumption and burning feverLevit. 26. 17.; and when he rebuked it, Peters wives mother was curedLuke 4. 39.. He ſhutteth up the wombe
                  Gen. 20. ult.
                  ; and it is he that maketh the barren to beare, and become a ioyfull mother of children
                  Pſal. 113. ult.
                  . He formeth the light, and createth darkneſſe, maketh peace, and createth evill, even the Lord doth all theſe things
                  Eſa. 45. 7.. Yea, this great King carieth his Mace in Hell, the place of confuſion; ſo as the very Devils are ſubject, and obedient to him. He never threatned or commanded uncleane ſpirits to bee gone, but they went: whereat the people greatly wondredMar. 1. 27.. Yea, not only all creatures in Heaven, Firmament, Aire, Earth, Sea, and Hell are obedient,

but in their kinds zealous. See the zeale of the Angels, who are winged, and called Seraphims
                  Eſa. 6. 2., becauſe they burne with a zeale of Gods glorySeraphim, à Saraph, in kal, uſſit, combuſſit.
                  , & are as a flaming fire, when he uſeth their miniſteryPſal. 104. 4.. See the zeale of the Frogs, though breeding, feeding, creeping & croaking in mariſh grounds, and farre from houſes; yet being ſent of God to plague Pharaoh, they aſſaulted the Kings Palace, crept into his ovens and kneading troughes, yea could not be kept out of the Kings bed-chamber, nor his bedExod. 8. 3, 4., no nor from off the Kings owne perſon: as if they had ſaid (as Iehu did2 King. 10. 16.) Come ſee the zeale that we have to plague the Tyrant that thus oppreſſeth Gods people. Oh ſee the zeale of the Sea: when God gave it commiſſion to attach his fugitive Prophet, it wrought and was troublous, it wrought and was troublous
                  Ionah 1. 13.. The Mariners for their lives could not bring Ionah to ſhore: if they had not caſt him in, the Sea would have devoured them all. q. d. See the zeale we have to the Lord of hoſts, in purſuit of him, who is ſo diſobediently fled from the preſence of his God. The Apoſtle calleth the fire of hell, a zealous fire, devouring the adverſaries
                  Heb. 10. 27. 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     .; which Dives found by wofull experience, when hee complained that hee was tormented in that flame, and craved a drop of water to coole his tongue
                  Luk. 16. 24..
               But woe, and alas, that man is excepted out of the Catalogue of obedient, and zealous creatures! That man, endued with Reaſon, and ſhew of Religion, that the Lord of the creatures, ſhould be ſet to ſchoole, to learne of the poore PiſmireProv. 6. 6.; that

God ſhould ſo call and command, and he either doe nothing, but caſt his commandements behinde his backe
                  Pſal. 50. 17., or doe what he doth, to halfes
                  1 Sam. 15. 15.. Oh that man ſhould give God ſuch juſt cauſe to complaine of him, I have nouriſhed, and exalted children, and they have rebelled againſt me
                  Eſay 1. 2.: And, I have called, and yee refuſed; I have ſtretched out mine hand, and no man regarded; yee have ſet at nought all my counſels, & would none of my reproofe
                  Prov. 1. 25.. And, I have ſpread out mine hands all the day to a rebellious people
                  Eſay 65. 2. How did Chriſt complaine of the Iewes, Yee will not come unto me, that yee may have life
                  Iohn 5. 40.. And againe, O Ieruſalem, Ieruſalem, thou that killeſt the Prophets, and ſtoneſt them that are ſent unto thee; how often would I have gathered thy children together, even as an hen gathereth her chickens under her wings, and yee would not
                  Matth. 23. 37.. How did Steven at his death complaine, Yee ſtiffe-necked and uncircumciſed in heart and eares, yee doe alwaies reſiſt the Holy Ghoſt; as your fathers did, ſo doe yee
                  Acts 7. 51..
               Oh that man, created after Gods image
                  Gen. 1. 27., and little inferiour to the Angels
                  Pſal. 8. 5., ſhould not only be compared to the beaſts that periſh
                  Pſal. 49. ult.; but have the dulleſt and rudeſt of them preferred before him: The Oxe (ſaith God) knoweth his owner, and the Aſſe his maſters crib, but Iſrael doth not know, my people doe not underſtand
                  Eſay 1. 3.. Yea the Storck in the heaven, Turtle, Crane, and Swallow, know their appointed times, but my people know not the iudgement of the Lord
                  Ierem. 8. 7.. Oh let us now profit by this uſefull Doctrine.
               Firſt, let us learne ever to truſt in him, how extremely1. Vſe. deſperate ſoever things may be with us or

Gods people: it is an eaſie thing with him to remedie all. He needeth not ſend Legions of Angels, no nor muſter troops of men, and arme them with ſword and ſpeare; hee is the Lord of Hoſts, and there are not the meaneſt and weakeſt ſouldiers in all his band (not flies, lice, wormes excepted) but if Chriſt command them, they are armed with power, to quell the pride of the greateſt Monarchs, and Monarchies in the world.
               The ſecond Uſe is, that we feare this great God,2. Vſe. and commander of Sea and Land, who is able to cut us downe, like graſſe; to blow us away, like duſt; to ſweepe us away, as dung. Oh that men ſhould not feare that mighty God, but dare to blaſpheme his Name, being every where in the midſt of his Armie, and he able to make the leaſt duſt to be our death, and the baſeſt creature we ſee, or with contempt doe tread upon, to be our deſtruction! This Uſe God himſelfe preſſeth, Heare now this, ô fooliſh people, and without underſtanding, which have eyes and ſee not, which have eares and heare not. Feare yee not me, ſaith the Lord? Or will yee not be afraid at my preſence, which have placed the ſand for the bounds of the ſea
                  Ierem. 5. 21.? And againe, If I be your Lord, where is my feare
                  Malach. 1. 6.? The Sea ſaw God and fled. And David biddeth the earth to tremble at his preſence
                  Pſal. 114. 3. 7.. Shall Earth, and Sea, thoſe vaſt and ſenſleſſe creatures, ſo feare and tremble, and ſhall not man, a worme of the earth, ſtand in awe?
               The third and laſt Uſe is, that from the Example3. Vſe. of all creatures, in Heaven, Firmament, Aire, Earth, Sea, and Hel, we learne to obey the voice of Chriſt.

This is it David ſo urgeth, To day, if yee will heare his voice, harden not you hearts 
                  Pſal. 95. 7.. Be doers of the word, & not hearers only 
                  Iames 1. 22.. The Sea did roare in the ſtorme. And, even now that it is ſtill, it ſtil lifteth up the voice. He that hath eares to heare, may heare it call for obedience. Habent miracula linguam, ſi intelligantur: factum verbi, verbum nobis. Auguſt▪ in Iohan. tract. 24. A learned man hath an elegant fiction, of the world calling on man, to ſerve and obey God, in theſe words; See how God loved thee, that made me for thee; I ſerve thee, becauſe I am made for thee, that thou maieſt ſerve him, that made both thee and me; me for thee, and thee for himſelfe 
                  Vide homo quomodo amavit te, qui propter te ſecit me; ſervio tibi, quia factus ſum propter te, ut ſervias illi, qui fecit, & me, & te; me propter te, & te propter ſe. Hugo Cardm. Oh man, if thou be diſobedient, all creatures, even Devils will riſe in judgement, and condemne thee.
               For the myſterie. As by the ſtorme, perſecution;Myſt. ſo by the calme, the peace and tranquillitie of the Church is repreſented: and teacheth,
               Firſt, that in deſpight of Sathan, and all enemies1. Doct. myſt. which he can raiſe, Gods people, in the end, ſhall have a calme, peace, and quietneſſe.
               For illuſtration of which Doctrine, note, that theIlluſtration. calme is twofold, viz. externall, and internall. Externall is twofold, viz generall, or particular. Generall, concerning all, or many of Gods people: and particular, in regard of ſome one, or few mens perſons and eſtates.
               For the generall, ſee what gratious promiſes God1. Generall. hath made to his Church; The gates of hell ſhall not prevaile againſt it 
                  Matth. 16. 18.. It is Gods houſe built upon a rocke, though the raine deſcend, flouds come,

winds blow, and beat upon it, yet it falleth not Matth 7. 25.. This was typically repreſented in the buſh which burned, but conſumed not Exod. 3. 2.: In Noahs Arke, though the waters prevailed long, yet at laſt the Arke arrived ſafely upon Mount Ararat 
                  Gen. 8 4.; and the Dove returned with an Olive leafe in her mouth, an infallible token, that the waters were abated from off the earth 
                  Gen. 8. 11.. There hath beene a great tempeſt: but our ſhip hath out-rid it Illiditur fluctibus, non tamen alliditur ſcopulis. Stell., it liveth; and now there is a great calme.
               Which promiſes and types have in all ages beenExamples. verified. The children of Iſrael were greatly oppreſſed in Egypt, but could not be deſtroyed; the more they afflicted them, the more they multiplied and grew Exod. 1. 12.: they endured a great tempeſt, and in the end God ſent a great calme; when he brought forth his people with ioy, and his choſen, with gladneſſe, there was not one feeble perſon: and Egypt was glad, Pſal. 105. 37. The Church had a great ſtorme for 70 yeeres in Babylon, when they ſate by the rivers of Babylon, and wept to remember Sion, Pſal. 137. 1. but in the end a great calme, when they had leave to returne, then were their mouthes filled with laughter, and their tongues with ioy, Pſ. 126. 1. The Church had a great ſtorme in the daies of Ahaſhueroſh, when Haman had procured, they ſhould all be deſtroied, then was faſting and mourning; but in the end a great calme, when Haman and his ſonnes were hanged, and the Iewes had Purim. Great perſecution in the daies of the Apoſtles Acts 8. 1.; but in the end, God gave the Churches reſt throughout Iudea, Samaria, and Galilee, and the word of God increaſed, and the
                  
                  number of diſciples multiplied in Ieruſalem exceedingly 
                  Act. 9. 31. 6. 7.. The Eccleſiaſticall ſtory witneſſeth, that howſoever God hath ſometimes, yea for a long time, exerciſed his Church and people, with hot, cruell, and bloudy perſecutions: yet in the end, rebuking perſecutors, by death, or otherwiſe, (as you have heard) he hath given his Church peace, and turned the tempeſt into a great calme Alternant perſecutio, & pax in eccleſia. Lorin..
               For the outward eſtates of particular perſons, we2. Particular. have gracious promiſes, I will not faile, nor forſake thee 
                  Ioſhua 1. 5.. Which though particularly and perſonally made to Ioſhuah; yet the Apoſtle teacheth every man how to make it his owne by the application of faith Heb. 13. 5.; Call on me in the day of thy trouble, and I will heare, and deliver thee, and thou ſhalt glorifie me 
                  Pſ. 50. 15.. David ſaith, Many are the troubles of the righteous, but the Lord delivereth out of all, Pſal. 34. 19. And the Apoſtle ſaith, God is faithfull, who will not ſuffer his to be tempted above that they are able, but will with the temptation make a way to eſcape, that they may be able to beare it 
                  1 Cor. 10. 13.. And Chriſt promiſed to turne his diſciples ſorrow into ioy 
                  Iohn 16. 20.: which in all ages he hath moſt graciouſly performed to his ſervants, yea commonly in this life. As Ioſeph endured a great tempeſt, when his brethren ſold him, his impudent miſtreſſe falſly accuſed him, his maſter caſt him in priſon, he endured hunger and cold, and the iron even entred into his ſoule 
                  Pſal. 105. 18.: but there came a great calme, when the King ſent and delivered him, the Prince of the people let him goe free, made him ruler of his houſe 
                  Pſ. 105. 20, 21.; yea, ſet him over all the land of Egypt, and every one cried Abrech before him 
                  Gen. 41. 43.. Great was the

tempeſt that godly Mordochai endured, when proud Haman ſo deſpiſed, and intended miſchiefe againſt him, having ſet up gallowes, to hang him thereon Heſth. 5. ult.: but there came a great calme, when the King commanded Haman, to put on him royall apparell, which the King uſeth to weare, & to ſet him on the horſe, the King uſed to ride on, and ſet the crowne roiall upon his head, and proclaime before him, Thus ſhall it be done to the man, whom the King will honour 
                  Heſth. 6. 11.. Great was the tempeſt that David endured, in that long time that Saul perſecuted him, and by all meanes ſought to take away his life, hunting him, as a partridge upon the mountaines 
                  1 Sam. 26. 20.; that he confeſſeth, the flouds of ungodlineſſe made him afraid 
                  Pſal. 18. 4.; and he ſaid in his infirmitie, I ſhall one day periſh by the hand of Saul 
                  1 Sam. 27. 1.: but there came a great calme, when Saul being ſlaine 1 Sam. 31. 3, 4., David was anointed King 2 Sam. 2. 4., and died full of daies, riches, and honour 
                  1 Chro. ult. 28.. Iob endured a great tempeſt, when hee loſt all his goods, children, and health Iob 1. 14.: but there came a great calme, when all was reſtored double unto him againe Iob ult. 10.. Many a man hath endured a great tempeſt of povertie, ſickneſſe, ache, impriſonment, diſgrace; and God hath ſent a great calme of wealth, health, eaſe, liberty, honour. Oh that men would therefore praiſe the Lord, and declare the wonders that he doth for the children of men 
                  Pſal. 107. 15.! What great and grievous conflicts, have the learned Biſhops and Fathers in their times, had with Heretikes? Athanaſius and Hilarie, with Arrius; Baſil, with Eunomius; Tertullian, with Hermogenes; Origen, with Celſus; Auguſtine, with Fauſtus, Pelagius, Petilian;
                  
                  Cyprian, with Novatus: yet painfully rowing with the Oares of Gods word, theſe Doctors overcame all thoſe boiſterous and contrary winds and waves, and uſed it as a proverbe, After weeping commeth laughter; and after baniſhment commeth Paradiſe 
                  Poſt lachrymas riſus; poſt exilium Paradiſus: dixerunt veteres.. After a tempeſt, a calme.
               Great alſo are the Internall tempeſts, whereof2. Internall. Gods children have experience in their ſoules, mindes, and conſciences: but God hath promiſed moſt gracious calmes; For a moment in mine anger have I turned away, but with everlaſting compaſsion have I imbraced thee 
                  Eſay 54. 7.. Heavineſſe may endure for a night, but ioy commeth in the morning 
                  Pſal. 30. 5.. They that ſow in teares, ſhall reape in ioy 
                  Pſal. 126. 5.. Bleſſed are they that mourne, for they ſhall be comforted 
                  Matth. 5. 5.. Yea, the meeke ſhall be refreſhed with abundance of peace, Pſalm. 37. 11.
               And theſe promiſes God hath in all ages moſtExamples. graciouſly performed. David had a great tempeſt in ſoule, when hee complained, That all Gods waves had gone over him, and hee had beene vexed with all his ſtormes 
                  Pſal. 88. 7.: Yea, he had ſuffered, from his youth up, the terrours of God with a troubled mind 
                  Pſal. 88. 15.. But there was a great calme, when he ſaid, Now returne to thy reſt, O my ſoule, the Lord hath well rewarded thee 
                  Pſal. 116. 7, 8.; and againe, Thou haſt delivered my ſoule from death, mine eyes from teares, and my feet from falling 
                  Ibid.; awaked at midnight to ſing praiſes Pſal. 119. 62., and called for his Lute and Harpe to awake 
                  Pſal. 69. 30.. Iob had a great tempeſt in his ſoule, when hee complained, God did write bitter things againſt him 
                  Iob 13. 26., made him poſſeſſe the ſinnes of his youth 
                  Ibid.; and Gods terrours
                  
                  came in battell ray againſt him 
                  Iob 6. 4.; but he had a great calme, when hee k
                     〈…〉
                   Redeemer lived Iob 19. 25., and would truſt in God, though he killed him Iob 13. 15.; and God gave him double all that he had Iob 42. 10.. There was as great a tempeſt in Ionahs ſoule, as in the ſea, when he ſaid, I am caſt out of thy ſight 
                  Ion. 2. 4, 7., and his ſoule fainted within him 
                  Ibid.: but hee had a great calme, when the fiſh vomited out Ionah on the drie land, and hee paid his vowes, and ſacrificed unto God, the ſacrifice of thankſgiving 
                  Ionah 3. ult.. Oh, many and great are the trials of Gods children in this kinde, till the Lord rebuke Satan: fearefulneſſe, diſtruſt, heavineſſe, &c. and then ſweet are the mercies and comforts, wherwith the Lord refreſheth their ſoules.
               Oh then, Art thou full of heavineſſe, mourning,Vſe. and ſorrow in thy ſoule, which maketh thee as a Pellican, Owle in deſart, and Sparrow on houſe top alone Pſal. 102. 6, 7.; thou mingleſt thy drinke with teares Pſal. 80. 5.; thy conſcience doth rage, in ſight of ſinne, and ſenſe of divine anger; ſay, as David did, Oh, my ſoule, why art thou caſt downe? and why art thou ſo diſquieted within mee? ſtill truſt in God 
                  Pſal. 42. ult.; the ſtorme will over, and God will ſend a gracious calme.
               But marke, it was Chriſt that made this calme:Caution. none can comfort and quiet the troubled and tempeſtuous minde and conſcience, but onely Chriſt: till hee rebuke, it will rage, fome, and fume ſtill. Seeke not then thy peace from carnall meanes, as, merry company, paſtime, play, feaſting, drinking, &c. For if any good come hereby, it is but as deceitfull Surgeons heale the skin, but leave corruption

within. But ſay with David, I will hearken what the Lord God will ſay, for hee ſhall ſpeake peace to his people 
                  Pſal. 85. 8.. For till he ſpeake peace, there will be nothing but warre and trouble. So much for the firſt Doctine Myſticall, with the Illuſtration and Vſe thereof.
               Obſerve againe, that as there was a ſudden great2. Doct. myſt. ſtorme, ſo now there is as ſudden and great a calme 
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                      
                     Magnus motus, & magna tranquillitas.
                  : which in the myſterie affordeth us another leſſon, viz. That according to the meaſure of troubles, and perſecutions, God ſendeth peace and comforts; as David ſaith, According to the multitude
                  Cōfirmation. 
                  of the ſorrowes which I had in mine heart, thy comforts have refreſhed my ſoule 
                  Pſal. 94. 19.. And Saint Paul ſaith, As the ſufferings of Christ abound in us, ſo alſo our conſolation aboundeth by Chriſt 
                  2 Cor. 1. 5. Non aequatur conſolatio paſſionibus; ſed exuberat, & longe major eſt. Theoph.
                  . Hereof alſo Iob had comfortable experience, to whom, after his patient triall, the Lord reſtored double all he had 
                  Iob 42. 10..
               Now let us winde up what hath beene ſaid, withApplication. Application to our ſelves. How great a ſtorme and tempeſt hath beene in the Chriſtian world, and ſpecially in Germanie and France, who ſo ignorant, as knoweth not? But behold what a great calme the Lord hath made in France, wars are huſht and gone Pſal. 46. 9., and Gods ſervants reſtored to their former priviledges and liberties, in the profeſſion of the Goſpel: & let us all heartily pray God to ſtrengthen the good worke he hath wrought 
                  Pſal. 68. 28., and to confirme it under the broad ſeale of Heaven, that it may remaine inviolable, and that the Ieſuites (who are the beilowes of ſedition) be never able to raiſe ſuch a tempeſt againe: and let us alſo pray that Chriſt

would breake the bow, knap the ſpeare in ſunder, and burne the chariots in the fire, and grant to all Nations, unitie, peace, and concord, and bid them be ſtill 
                  Pſ. 46. penult.; and turne their ſwords and ſpeares into mattocks and ſythes 
                  Eſay 2. 4., or turne them againſt the common enemy, the Turke, who perſecuteth and blaſphemeth the name of Chriſt and his Goſpell. Amen.
               
               Let us looke home, what great ſtormes and tempeſts have beene in our Land, through bloudy perſecution, and unnaturall civill diſſention, our fathers have told us, and our Chronicles report to all poſteritie: but what a glorious calme have we enjoyed, (for almoſt ſo many yeeres, as his people endured captivitie Ierem. 25. 11.) without either hoſtile invaſion, or civill diſſention, the Lord making faſt the barres of our gates, and ſo eſtabliſhing peace in our borders, that there is no crying nor complaining in our ſtreets, no leading into captivitie, it being an harbour and ſanctuary to the afflicted ſervants of God. The Lord preſerve our tranquillitie, and rebuke them that would raiſe a ſtorme. Amen.
               
            
            
               
               
                  VERSE 27.
                  But the men marvelled, ſaying, What manner of man is this? that both the winds and the ſea obey him!
               
               WE have heard what effect Chriſt his rebuke2. Effects. had in the winds and ſea, thoſe ſenſeleſſe Creatures.
               Now let us ſee what effect it wrought in the men that heard and 
                     〈◊〉
                  , being endued with reaſon and underſtanding. The winds and ſea obeyed, But the men [admired:] being more excellent Creatures, it produced in them a more excellent effect; which Montanus expreſſeth by a diſcretive particle▪ [a
                        •
                     
                  ]Diviſion. [but] the men marvelled. Wherein two things are to be conſidered, viz. Admiration, and Interrogation. And in their Interrogation, two things; firſt a Subdiviſion. Queſtion [What manner of man is this?] Secondly, a Reaſon of that queſtion, [Even the winds and ſea obey him.] Their Admiration is the cauſe of the Interrogation; for therefore they doe mutually inquire, and ſearch to know his perſon; becauſe they wonder to ſee his bare word, to produce ſuch ſtrange effects. Of them in order. And firſt it is ſaid, The men marvelled.] Who is meant by [men] in1. Part. Senſe. this place, is much diſputed, and the learned in their opinions much divided. Some 
                     Origen. Beda. Drut
                           •
                        m
                           •
                        r. Tilm. Hilar. Canon. 8. ſay the Mariners, and others at that time on the ſea in other veſſels; or that from the ſhore, ſaw the tempeſt, and ſudden calme; but not the Diſciples. Others Ierom. Dionyſ. Carth. Cajetan. Victor. Antioch. Toll. in Luc. 3. Annot. 52., by [men] vnderſtand the diſciples as well as others; and hereunto

I ſubſcribe, as the truth. I doe not deny, but many others, on ſea and ſhore, might ſee and marvell: but the Text ſpeaketh ſpecially of ſuch as heard Chriſt rebuke the winds and ſea, (for they demand, Who is this? that even the winds and ſea obey him,) which none but ſuch as were in the ſhip with him, could do. And, that the Diſciples did marvell, ſeemeth to me very plaine, from the other Euangeliſts Marke 4. 40, 41. Luke 8. 25., who expreſſed it in one continued ſpeech, he ſaid unto them, Why are yee ſo feare full? How is it, that yee have no faith? And they ſaid one to another. Whence it is plaine, that ſuch as were fearefull, that were rebuked, even thoſe marvelled; and they were the Diſciples (at leaſt chiefly, if not only.) And truly, no marvell to us, to heare that the Diſciples marvelled (though ſome of them fiſhermen, and well acquainted with tempeſts▪) for it was a moſt marvellous thing; and no miracle that Chriſt wrought, did more declare his Divine Majeſty than this 
                     Opus revera omni admiratione dignum. Chemnit▪ concord. cap. 64.. But yet for the further opening of the ſenſe of the words, the word in originall, here tranſlated [marvell] hath a double ſignification. Firſt, verie1 earneſtly and intently, both with outward and inward ſenſes, to marke and obſerve a thing 
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     : à 
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     , video: unde 
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     , quaſi 
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     , viſu digna, invitant 
                           〈◊〉
                        
                        tium oculos.
                  : and ſo it fitteth this preſent place, they did moſt intently with eyes of bodie and minde, gaze upon the ſea. They did obſerve it well in the ſtorme, and it behoved them, for they looked to be drowned with every wave; but they never ſo obſerved it, as now it is calme. So the common people ſaid of other of Chriſts miracles, Doubtleſſe, we have ſeene ſtrange things to day 
                  Luke 5. 26..
               
                  Secondly, it ſignifieth to honour, reverence, and2. feare the perſon or thing, wherein we diſcerne any ſtrangeneſſe; and the more ſtrangeneſſe, the more reverence and feare: ſo the learned Septuagint tranſlate thoſe places of reſpecting, or regarding of the perſons of the mightie, and aged, in this word 
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     . Deut. 10. 17 2 Chron. 19. 7. 28. 50.. As alſo, where Naaman the Syrian is ſaid to be an honorable man 
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     . 2 King. 5. 1.. Which phraſe is alſo retained in the New Teſtament, and tranſlated, the having of mens perſons in admiration 
                  Iude 16. 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                      
                     Graecis idem eſt quod obſervantia, cultu
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         proſequi, ſuſpicere magni facere, in pretio habere. Budaeus, & Auctor Graeci Theſ.
                  . And in this ſenſe alſo, the Diſciples may here well be ſaid to marvel: for this miracle procured in them a great deale of reverend awe, honour and reſpect unto Chriſt. The other Euangeliſts ſay, They did exceedingly feare; and all ſay, They did aske one another, What manner of man is this? q. d. How glorious, honourable, and powerfull this man? whom even the winds and ſeas doe obey? And thus ſome will, that Chriſt himſelfe marvelled at the Centurions faith 
                  Matth. 8. 10. 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     , miratus eſt.
                  ; hee honoured, regarded, and reſpected (not his nobilitie, power, wealth, but) his faith Non nobilitatem, potentiam, opes, ſed fidem. Orig.. The word being thus opened, as ſignifying that the Diſciples did very intently behold and marke this great worke, and honour Chriſt the Worker; hence firſt from the Letter we learne:
               That Gods workes in the world are to be marvelledDoct. Lit. at, obſerved, and his great name to be glorified for them. This is the maine end of al his works, he doth all for him ſelfe 
                  Prov. 16. 4.. Thus David, with a divine eye, could ſee Gods glory, in the heavens, Sunne, Moone, Stars, Thunder, Lightning, Raine, Winds, Seas; yea, there is not the baſeſt and moſt contemptible

creature in the world, but beheld with a ſpirituall eye, doth declare the glory of the Creator, and would make a godly man exclaime with holy David, O Lord, our governour, how excellent is thy name in all the world 
                  Pſal. 8. 1. ult.
                  ! Yea, ſo great in the greateſt, as not leſſer in the leaſt 
                     Ita magnus in maximis, ut non minor in minimis. Auguſt. cont. Fauſt. Manich. lib. 21. c. 5.. Saint Baſil convinced the bragging of Eunomius, boaſting of his knowledge, with a few queſtions, concerning the poore Emmet 
                     Epiſt. 168. quae eſt ad Eunom. Tom. 2. fol. 121.; as, whether it did breath; how breed; how long live; whether it had an heart, liver, bones, muſcles, arteries? But why doe I wonder at her bodie? how much more may wee marvell at her endowments? She is very quicke and nimble in her path, ſee her diligence; ſhee layeth up in Summer againſt Winter, ſee her providence; if any of her fellowes be over-loaded, ſhee helpeth to beare the burthen, ſee her charitie; if her heape and neſt be ſtirred, ſhe firſt gathereth in her young, ſee her naturall affection; ſhee beareth a greater burthen than her ſelfe, ſee her ſtrength; ſhee keepeth a right path, ſee her order; Oh, is God ſo marvellous in this poore inſectrodden vnder foot! (that God hath ſet man to ſchoole to learne of her 
                  Prov. 6. 6.,) how much more in the Heaven, Firmament, Aire, Earth, Sea, and thoſe great creatures therein, Behemoth, Leviathan? So as every where, by ſea and land, in field and houſe, by day and night, if we had wiſe hearts, and cleare eyes, we might ſee, and marvell at Gods workes, and ſay, Oh what a glorious Creator is this! Oh what a wonderfull Governour is this!
               But alas, as God complained of old, of his people,Application. 
                  O fooliſh people, and without underſtanding, which
                  
                  have eyes and ſee not, eares and heare not 
                  Ierem. 5. 21.; ſo we are a fooliſh, blinde, and deafe people. It may be, if we ſaw the Vnicorne, or Behemoth in the wilderneſſe, which are the chiefe of the waies of God Iob 40. 10.: if we could dive into the ſea, and ſee how the fiſhes meaſure out their particular habitations Thalaſſi-metrae. Ambroſ., and keep their perfect paths; if we could ſee what paſtime the huge Whale maketh in the deepe 
                  Pſal. 104. 26.; making it to boile like a pot of oyntment 
                  Iob 41. 31.; the little Remora, but halfe a foot long, to be able to ſtay the greateſt ſhip under ſaile 
                     Plin. Nat. Hiſt. lib. 32. cap 1.; or if we ſaw the ſtrange motion, and ſpecially of ſome ſeas; or the ſtrange and hidden Sympathies, and Antipathies, diſcerned to be betwixt ſenſitive, vegetative, yea inſenſible things; it may be we would marvell a little. But at the motion, vertue, or Eclips of Sunne or Moone, different glory, ſituation, poſition, aſpect, or influence of Starres, Thunder, Lightning, Raine, Snow, Haile; the diligence and art of the Bee; the admirable ſtructure and frame of his owne bodie Pſal. 139. 14.; who marvelleth? Becauſe theſe things are ordinarily ſeene, we marvell not at them, God is not honored for them: though indeed, God is marvellous in all his workes, and ſought out of them that love him 
                  Pſal. 86. 10..
               Oh, let us, from this Example, learne to marvell,Concluſion. and praiſe God for his great works, leſt we become ſubject to that fearefull imprecation of David, Becauſe they regard not the workes of the Lord, nor the operation of his hands, destroy them, and doc not build them up 
                  Pſal. 28. 5.. But ſpecially, when God doth any great worke, contrary to the courſe and order of nature eſtabliſhed; either to declare his mercie in ſaving

his, or his juſtice in puniſhing his enemies; theſe are for all men (that come to the knowledge of them) to marvell; as the drying up of the Red-ſea 
                  Pſal. 106. 9.; dividing of Iordan 
                  Ioſhua 3 16.; feeding his people with Manna and Quailes from heaven 
                  Exod. 16. 13.; giving fountaines of water out of the rocke 
                  Exod. 17. 7.; preſerving the three children in the fiery furnace 
                  Dan. 3. 27.; and Daniel in the Lions den 
                  Dan. 6. 22.: On the other ſide, conſuming Sodom and Gomorrah 
                  Gen. 19. 24.; and Aarons ſonnes with fire from heaven 
                  Levit. 10. 2.; cauſing the earth to open, and ſwallow up Core, Dathan and Abiram 
                  Numb. 16. 31.; plagued Pharaoh and all Aegypt, with Flies, Frogges, Lice 
                  Exod. 8. 3.; and deſtroyed Herod with Wormes 
                  Acts 12. 23.. Theſe and many ſuch are regiſtred in the Booke of God, that when men heare or reade the ſame, they may marvell, and ſay, What a mercifull, or juſt God is this? who as he can arme all creatures, to take vengeance on the wicked, ſo alſo preſerve his, though as lambes in midſt of wolves; and his Church a poore ſhip in midſt of Pirats, and riding out all tempeſts. Oh, how marvellous is God in the ſubſiſtence of his Church!
               The Doctrine myſticall is, That God can turneDoct. myſtic. all ſuch things as the Devill or wicked men deviſe againſt him, or his people, to his glory, and his Churches good. Yea the greater is the aſſault and evill intended, the greater is his glory from deliverance. No ſooner is Chriſt on ſleepe, but the winds roare, and ſea rageth; now Satan beſtirreth himſelfe to drowne ſhip and paſſengers; to breake off the worke of Redemption by Chriſt, and utterly to deſtroy the poore and weake beleeving Apoſtles: But ſee how contrary the iſſue is to his expectation;

though the Apoſtles be troubled, and feare, yet Chriſt awaketh, rebuketh the winds and ſea; Chriſt is glorified, and the Diſciples faith confirmed. When Chriſt his houre was come, how did Satan beſtirre himſelfe, to have him put to death? How did hee tempt Iudas to betray him 
                  Iohn 13. 27., the Iewes to preferre Barabas before him Matth. 27. 26., Pilate to condemne him Iohn 19. 16.; Souldiers to execute him Luke 23. 33.? But ſee how he was confounded! for even herein Gods Councell tooke effect, for by death, he deſtroyed him that had the power of death, that is, the Devill 
                  Heb. 2. 14.; turned the croſſe into a chariot of triumph, ſpoiled Principalities and Powers, and openly triumphed over them upon the croſſe Coloſſ. 2. 5.. That which Satan intended for Chriſt his greateſt ſhame, to crucifie him betwixt two theeves, was his greateſt glory; the Croſſe being as his Throne, and ſome, on his right-hand, abſolved, ſome, on his left, condemned. When Chriſt was buried, then Satan no leſſe beſtirred himſelfe to keepe him there, provoking the chiefe Prieſts and Phariſies to move Pilate, to make the Sepulchre ſure: and ſo it was; for beſides the great ſtone which Ioſeph rolled to the doore of the Sepulchre, it was alſo ſealed, and a watch ſet to keepe it Matth. 27. ult.
                  . But herein the malice and ſubtiltie of Satan and his limbes were confounded; for the ſurer that the Sepulchre was made, the greater was the truth and glory of his Reſurrection; yea ſuch as were ſet to watch, did publiſh it, Matth. 28. 11. So, the greater is the power, and the more violent the aſſaults, which enemies make againſt the Church of Chriſt, the greater is Gods glory in their

deliverance; which the people confeſſe in the Pſalmes, If the Lord had not beene on our ſide, now may Iſrael ſay, if the Lord had not beene on our ſide, when men roſe up againſt us, they had even ſwallowed us up quicke, when they were ſo wrathfully diſpleaſed at us, the waters had overwhelmed us, the deepe waters of the proud had even gone over our ſoule. But praiſed be the Lord, who hath not given us for a prey to their teeth: Our ſoule is eſcaped, even as a bird out of the ſnare of the fowler, the ſnare is broken, and we are delivered 
                  Pſal. 124. 1. &c.. The greater the danger of Gods people at the Red-ſea, the greater their deliverance: the greater the evill by Ieſuits intended againſt the Proteſtants in France, the more glorious their peace: the greater miſchiefe intended by the Gunpowder treaſon, and the nearer to execution, the more marvellous our deliverance: in all which caſes, the Church is taught to praiſe God, and ſay, The Lord hath done marvellous things; with his owne right hand, and with his holy arme, hath he gotten himſelfe the victory 
                  Pſal. 118. 15..
               Oh truſt in God, be the ſtorme, and threatnedVſe. hurt to the Church, never ſo great, for all ſhall worke for good 
                  Rom. 8. 28.; There is no wiſdome, counſell, or ſtrength againſt the Lord 
                  Prov. 21. penult.
                  : But he will turne the rage of man to his praiſe 
                  Pſal 50. 22.. When all that ſee and heare, ſhall marvell, and ſay with reverend awe, Who is this?
               
               
                  What manner of man is this 
                  
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     ; qualis eſt hic?
                  ?] The Greeke2. Part. word is very emphaticall, and of greater ſignification, than another, which is thus tranſlated; 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                   
                  qualis. For though this be often uſed in the New Teſtament; yet ever tranſlated, what, & which, (one

place only excepted 1 Pet. 1. 11..) Neither are they derived from the ſame root; for 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                   is from 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  ; but 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , from 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                   
                  pavimentum, as if it were written, 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , pro 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     , cujas: as if they had fully expreſſed the word thus, What Countrey-man is this? Which queſtion bewrayeth their ignorance, tendeth to the begetting of knowledge, and is an effect of their admiration, (which may thus be deſcribed, according to the rules of Philoſophie) Admiration is a painfull ſuſpenſion of the minde, proceeding from the knowledge of ſome great effects, whereof the cauſes are unknowne. I call it a painfull ſuſpenſion, becauſe all men naturally deſire knowledge 
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     . Ariſt. Metaph. lib. 1. cap. 1.; and the more generouſly minded any are, the more painfull it is for them to be ignorant. Some ſay, that Ariſtotle (the Prince & touchſtone of Philoſophers Princeps & lydius lapis Philoſophorum.) was ſo grieved, that hee could not finde out the cauſe of the ebbing and flowing of the Sea, that he died on it 
                     Caelius Rodiginus antiq. lect. lib. 29. cap. 8. 
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        . Iuſtin. Mart. ad Graecos cohort. pag. 34.: yea, ſome ſay, that he caſt himſelfe into the Sea, ſaying, Seeing I cannot comprehend thee, thou ſhalt comprehend me Quoniam ego non poſſum capere te, tu capies me.: but the other ſeemeth more probable Ke
                        •
                     kerm. Syſth. Log. plenior. in T. 1. c
                        •
                     ll. 1164.. Now admiration proceeding from ignorance of cauſes, doth wonderfully provoke to the ſtudie of cauſes, that ſo they may be eaſed of that ſorrow, paine, and griefe: whereupon, admiration is ſaid to be the ſoule and life of Philoſophie 
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                      
                     Ariſt. ſupercitato loco.
                  . And Pythagoras, being demanded, what was the end of Philoſophie, anſwered, To marvell at nothing Nihil admirari.: intending that herein, a learned Philoſopher, knowing the cauſes of things, did not marvell; whereas an ignorant ruſtick doth marvell at his owne ſhadow.

As in Philoſophie; ſo, much more in Divinitie, ignorance is a painfull thing to the godly diſpoſed; and therefore, the more they admire the word and workes of God, the more they enquire and ſearch into the cauſes thereof: as the Diſciples here, marvelling, ſaid one to another, What manner of man is this? Whoſe queſtion intendeth three things, viz.
               
               Firſt, That Chriſt is true man; having a true ſoule1 and bodie, in regard of their ſubſtance, and their eſſentiall properties; as, in the ſoule, will, underſtanding; in body, true dimenſions, as length, bredth, thickneſſe; yea, taking alſo the generall, and blameleſſe weakneſſes and infirmities, of both, as ignorance of ſome things, feare, ſorrow, weariſomeneſſe, hunger, thirſt, ſleepe, ache, paine, ſickneſſe; ſuch as accompany the generall nature of man, and are not repugnant to the perfection of ſcience and grace, as was more largely ſhewed from his being on ſleepe.
               This is it, was anciently promiſed, The ſeed of the woman ſhall breake the Serpents head 
                  Gen. 3. 15.; And, In thy ſeed ſhall all the Nations of the earth be bleſſed 
                  Gen. 12. 3.; And afterwards propheſied, A Virgin ſhall conceive, and beare a Sonne 
                  Eſay 7. 14.; A Childe is borne, a Son is given 
                  Eſay 9. 6.; A woman ſhall compaſſe a man 
                  Ierem. 31. 22.. Which promiſes and propheſies have bin moſt truly fulfilled, (as this day doth witneſſe to the Chriſtian Churches Sermon in the Queere, on Chriſtmas day morning, 1622.) For the fulneſſe of time being come, God ſent his Sonne, made of a woman 
                  Gal. 4. 4.; The word was made fleſh, Iohn 1. 14.
               Oh what a ſweet comfort is this to us miſerableVſe. ſinners, that our bleſſed Saviour and Redeemer is

not a ſtranger to our nature, but tooke upon him the forme of a ſervant 
                  Philip. 2. 7.; did partake, with his, in fleſh and bloud 
                  Heb. 2. 14.; became that propheſied Shiloh 
                  
                     Gen. 49. 10. Pet. Galat. de occultis Cathol. verit. lib. 5. cap. 4.; wrapped in the Tunicle skinne, or Secundine; our kinſman, (as Iob calleth him Iob 19. 25. Goel.
                  .) If the Baptiſt did ſo ſpring for joy in his mothers wombe, when Mary the Mother of Chriſt ſaluted his Mother Luke 1. 41.; and if the Angels did ſo rejoyce and ſing at the birth of Chriſt Luke 2. 14.; what cauſe have we to rejoyce and ſing? yea our very ſoules to ſpring for joy, that wee doe celebrate this Feſtivitie in commemoration of our Saviours birth?
               Yea, that our comfort may be full, he hath notAmplificatio. only taken upon him our nature, but our infirmities alſo, that he might become a mercifull and compaſſionate High Prieſt 
                  Heb. 2. 14.; So as we may boldly goe to the Throne of grace, and be aſſured, we ſhall finde mercie and grace, to helpe in time of need 
                  Heb. 4. ult.
                  .
               The ſecond thing avouched by the proprietie of2 the word, in this queſtion, (as you have heard in opening the ſenſe of it) is, That this true man is a ſtranger Alienigena.; they aske whence he is 
                  
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     ; cujas.
                  ? whereunto Chriſt returneth a perfect anſwer, Hee deſcended from heaven 
                  Iohn 3. 13.. Saint Paul ſaith, He is the Lord from heaven 
                  1 Cor. 15. 47.. Not that he brought his humanitie from heaven, which paſſed thorow the Virgins wombe, as water thorow a conduit, (as divers Heretiques have dreamed Marcionites, Gno
                     
                        •
                     lici, Manichaei, & Valentiniani.;) for he was made of a woman and had the materials of his body from the bleſſed Virgin: but he had not his beginning here on earth, as men have; but God came downe from heaven 
                  De Coelo dicitur, reſpectu divinae perſonae.; and was manifeſted in the fleſh 
                  1 Tim. 3. ult.
                  : and as he came, ſo

here he lived, but as a ſtranger, not having where to be borne, or buried; or whilſt he lived, whereon to reſt his head 
                  Matth. 8. 20.. And as quickly was he gone againe: he did but ſojourne, or (as the word ſignifieth Iohn 1. 14. 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                      
                     quod in tabernaculis habitare ſignificat.
                  ) pitch his Tent among us, for the ſpace of 33 yeers; which compared with eternitie, or long lives of the Patriarchs, is nothing. He was but as a Traveller; which, as for a nights lodging only, turned in unto us 
                  Ierom. 14. 8.: and as a ſtranger he was uſed; for his owne would not receive him 
                  Iohn 1. 11., but did lade him with all wrongs and injuries, preferre a murtherer before him Acts 3. 14., and moſt diſgracefully crucifie him, betwixt two notorious malefactors 
                  Luk. 23. 33.. But it ſhall ſuffice only to touch theſe things.
               The third and laſt is more largely to be handled3. (as moſt fitting the Text, the day, & the inſuing ſervice of this day Communion., whereunto with ſome few words to that purpoſe, I would prepare you) and is this, This man is a ſtrange man, wonderfully qualified. For they propound the queſtion, in way of admiration, What manner of man is this? q. d. Oh what a wonderfull man is this? And well might they ſo marvell, and demand, for there was never ſuch a man on earth, before, or ſince, or ſhall be. The Church ſaith, Her beloved is the chiefeſt of ten thouſand 
                  Cant. 5. 10. Electus ex millibus.
                  ; a finite number being put for an infinite. All the thouſands and millions of glorious Angels in heaven, or men on earth, cannot afford ſuch another. He is the only Standard-bearer (as the word ſignifieth. 
                     
                        
                           •
                         Heb. dagul, Vexillarius eſt è myriade. Trem.
                  ) He is anointed with the oile of gladneſſe above his fellowes 
                  Pſal. 45. 7.. He received not the ſpirit by meaſure 
                  Iohn 3. 34.. In him were hid all the treaſures of
                  
                  wiſdome and knowledge 
                  Coloſſ. 2. 3.; yea all that fulneſſe of the Godhead dwelt in him bodily 
                  Coloſſ. 2. 9.; that they may well marvell, What manner of man is this? For Chriſt hath ſaid of himſelfe, he is a wonder 
                  Eſay 8. 18.; and the Prophet maketh this one of his glorious titles, He ſhall be called wonderfull 
                  Eſay 9. 6.. And never any creature ſo anſwerable to his name, as Chriſt to this. For what he was, ſaid, did, ſuffered, ordained, was all moſt marvellous. Let us retaile theſe things. For wherein can I more edifie you, than by provoking you to marvell, which is the whetſtone of knowledge?
               And firſt, let us conſider his perſon, and it will1. His perſon. make us marvell, yea, be aſtoniſhed with marvelling. He that is true God from everlaſting, in time became true man; not ceaſing to be what he was before, but beginning to be, what he was not before; aſſuming true manhood, to ſubſiſt in the word by hypoſtaticall or perſonall union; neither nullifying the Deitie, nor deifying the Humanitie, but reſerving the eſſentiall properties of each nature ſeverall and diſtinct, without mixture or confuſion 
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     . Sic Concil. Gen. Epheſ. & Calcedon. contra haeret. Neſtor. & Eutych. decrev.
                   The Apoſtle ſaith, This is a great myſterie, and to be much marvelled at, God manifeſted in the fleſh 
                  1 Tim. 3. ult. 
                  The word made fleſh 
                  Iohn 1. 14.. Manhood aſſumed into perſonall union with Godhead; that ſo Godhead and Manhood make the perſon of one Redeemer, as ſoule and body doe one man; that ſeeing as God hee could not die, (which God hath threatned Gen. 2. 17.) and as man, not overcome death; being God and man, he could both ſuffer and overcome; the one ſuffered, and the other enabled 
                     Anſelm. Cur Deus home, lib. 2. cap 18. This is the kiſſe the Church anciently ſo deſired. Foelix oſculum, in quo nō os ori 
                           ••
                        
                        primitur, ſed Deus homini unitur. Bern. in Cant. ſerm. 2..

By reaſon of which union, and (as I may call it) aſſociation of divers natures, a kinde of mutuall commutation there is, whereby thoſe concrete Titles, God and Man (when we ſpeake of Chriſt) doe take interchangeably one anothers roome, and in the Concrete it is moſt holy and true, which in the Abſtract were horrible and helliſh blaſphemie to affirme. We cannot ſay, the Humanitie made the world, or Deitie ſuffered: but we may truly ſay, the man Chriſt made the world, and the God Chriſt ſuffered Ea quae humanae ſunt naturae, non poſſunt de divina, in abſtracto praedicari. Aquin. ſunt. 3. part. quaeſt. 16.. The Apoſtle ſaith, The Iewes did crucifie the Lord of glory 
                  Acts 2. 15., 1 Cor. 2. 8. and that God hath purchaſed his Church with his bloud 
                  Acts 20. 28.: and Chriſt being on earth ſaid, at the ſame inſtant, The Sonne of man was in heaven 
                  Iohn 3. 13.. Where you ſee a bloudy death is attributed to God, and Lord of glory; and ubiquitie to manhood, which humane nature admitteth not. Therefore by God, and Lord of glory, wee muſt underſtand the whole perſon of Chriſt, who died, and ſhed his bloud, but not in that nature, for which he is called God, and Lord of glory: and in the other place, by Sonne of man, we underſtand the perſon of Chriſt, who was in heaven, as well as on earth, though not in that nature 
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     , ſecundùm aliud. Dr. Fi
                           •
                        ld de Eccleſ. lib. 5. cap. 13. Bez. in Ioh. 3. 13. Sicut in Trinitate, eſt alius & alius, non aliud; ita in Chriſto, aliud & aliud, non alius.
                  , for which he is called, the ſonne of man. Yea, without this caution, the Fathers who were both ſound in the faith, and unanimous in defenſe thereof, will ſeeme to be both corrupt, and contrary. For Theodoret diſputeth with great earneſtneſſe, that God cannot be ſaid to ſuffer; but he meant in the Abſtract, againſt Apollinarius, who held the Deitie to be paſſible. And Cyrill is as earneſt, ſaying, Whoſoever
                  
                  doth denie very God to have ſuffered death, doth forſake the faith; but he meaneth, in the fleſh, and not in that ſubſtance, for which the title God is given him. But why doe I goe about to expreſſe and make cleare ſuch a myſterie, as is unconceiveable. The ſtrength of faith appeareth in thoſe things, wherein our wits and capacities are weake, and therefore I muſt leave you reverendly and religiouſly, to marvell at the perſon of your Redeemer, and ſay, What manner of man is this? who is truly God-Man, and Man-God 
                     Hook. Eccleſ. polit. lib. 5. parag. 52. pag. 108.. And ſo I proceed to ſpeake of his humane nature, wherein he is more familiar unto us, yet therein moſt marvellous alſo. And firſt,
               His conception is marvellous: which was not2. Conception. according to the courſe of nature, and by carnall copulation, (as Ebion blaſphemed 
                     Auguſt. de Haereſ. cap. 10.) but as the holy Goſpel teacheth, and we profeſſe to beleeve, he was conceived by the Holy Ghoſt 
                  Luk. 1. 35.; that as he was God of his Father, without mother; ſo he might become man, of his mother without father; and ſo be a Prieſt for ever, after the order of Melchizedech 
                  Pſal. 110. 4., who is ſaid, to be without father and mother 
                  Heb. 7. 3..
               And this comming of the Holy Ghoſt upon the Virgin, effected a threefold worke.
               Firſt, the faſhioning of the body, of a part of Maries
                  1. ſubſtance, that ſo he might be the true ſonne of Adam, Abraham, and David, according to the fleſh; and alſo, the creating and infuſing of the ſoule into the body; which at the firſt was organized, and fit to receive it (which other bodies are not.)
               Secondly, the ſanctification of that matter, that2.
                  
it had not the leaſt ſtaine, or blemiſh of any originall ſinne, uncleanneſſe, contagion, or corruption.
               Thirdly, the union of the Godhead & Manhood.3. Ludolph. de concept. Salvat. in 1. part. fol. 8. col. 4. All which were wrought at the ſame inſtant of time. Of all which, the perſonal union is moſt marvellous, That, as in the Trinitie, three perſons are united in eſſence; ſo in Chriſt, three ſeveral and diſtinct ſubſtances, viz. Deitie, Soule, and Fleſh, are united in one perſon. And therefore the humanitie of Chriſt his ſoule and body, did not make a perſon, (as in other men) but ſo ſoone as they were, they did ſubſiſt in the perſon of the Word. So were there at once two great unions, admirably ſingular, and ſingularly admirable, viz. 1. Manhood and Godhead. 2. Motherhood and Maidenhood Mirabilia ſingulariter, & ſingularia mirabiliter, Deus & homo, mater & virgo. Bern. ſerm. 3. in vigil. nativit.. But becauſe the wombe is a darke ſhop, wherein every man is marvellouſly and fearefully made Pſal. 139.; much more was Chriſt; the Virgins wombe being called the ſhop of miracles Officina miraculorum. Damaſc. ſerm. 1. de nativit.. Neither did it want myſterie, that the Holy Ghoſt is ſaid to overſhadow her. We will alſo beleeve with our hearts, what we cannot fully comprehend with our mindes, much leſſe expreſſe with our tongues. We will alſo religiouſly marvell at this, and ſay, What manner of man is this? that was even conceived by the Holy Ghoſt? and proceed to that was more viſible, and patulous, viz.
               
               
                  His birth] S. Iohn ſaith, He ſaw a great wonder
                  3. Birth. 
                  in heaven, a woman clothed with the Sunne, and the Moone under her feet, and upon her head a crowne of twelve ſtarres, and ſhee was with childe, and cried
                  
                  travelling in birth 
                  Rev. 12. 1.. He may well call it a wonder, a great wonder; it is the wonder of wonders, and comprehendeth many wonders. What! the inhabiter of eternitie 
                  Eſay 57. 15., ſubject to time, and after certaine moneths in the wombe (as this day) borne into the world Luk. 2. 11.! The everlaſting Father 
                  Eſay 9. 6., a young childe! The Word 
                  Iohn 1. 1., an Infant which cannot ſpeake! Wiſdome it ſelfe Prov. 8. 12., not know good from evill 
                  Eſay 7. 16.! He that beareth up all things by his omnipotencie 
                  Heb. 1. 3., borne in the armes of a woman! He that is inviſible in his owne nature, whom no man ever ſaw, nor can ſee 
                  1 Tim. 6. 16.; now to be ſeene of any in our nature, even of the country Shepherds 
                  Luk. 2. 17. Invisibilis in ſuis, viſibilis in noſtris. Leo ſerm. 2. de nativit.
                  ! He that hath heaven for his throne, and the earth his footſtoole 
                  Eſay 66. 1.; borne in the ſtable of a common Inne, and laid in a cratch 
                  Luk. 2. 7.! He that filleth heaven and earth too Ierem. 5. 22., finde no roome in an Inne! He that hath girt the ſea ſand, himſelfe wrapped in ſwadling clothes 
                  Luk. 7.! Hee that openeth his hands, and feedeth every living creature 
                  Pſal. 145. 16.; doth he ſucke the breaſts 
                  Luk. 11. 17.? He that is Davids Lord 
                  Matth. 22. penult., is he become Davids ſonne 
                  Ibid.? He that was before Abraham 
                  Iohn 8. penult., is he ſo long after him in the fleſh, and deſcended from his loines 
                  Gen. 22. 18.? He that is the Lord of all 
                  Rom. 10. 12., is he become a ſervant unto all 
                  Philip. 2. 7.? Whereas man in the nonage of the world was made after the Image of God 
                  Gen. 1. 26.; now, in the dotage of it, will God be made after the ſimilitude of ſinfull man Rom. 8. 3. Sicut in principio factus eſ
                           ••
                         homo. Aug. de temp. hom. 13.? He that made woman of Adams rib 
                  Gen. 2. 22.; will he now be made of a woman 
                  Gal. 4. 4.? and ſhall his mother be a Virgin? Well ſaid God, when he propheſied, that the Lord will create a new thing in the earth, a woman ſhall compaſſe a man 
                  Ierem. 31. 22.. He may well

call it a new thing, for there was never ſuch a thing before, nor ſince; and he may well call it a Creation 
                  Chi barah Iehovah kodaſhah; Creavit Dominus novum.
                  . Yea, ſome Divines hold the worke of Incarnation, when God was made like man, to be greater than the worke of Creation, when man was made like God Franciſc. Mayro, illuminat. Doct. Pariſ. ſerm. de Annunciat.. I am ſure, the greateſt miracles, that every eye ſaw, may be ſeene of the ſpirituall man, in the birth of Chriſt. The Sunne in the Firmament hath beene ſeene to ſtand Ioſh. 10. 13., to be retrograde, and goe backe divers degrees 
                  2 King. 20. 11., to be eclipſed, or darkned, at a plenilune 
                  Matth. 27. 45.; and theſe were great miracles. But in the birth of Chriſt, thou ſhalt ſee the Sunne of righteouſneſſe 
                  Malach. 4. 2. come downe from heaven, and the moſt glorious Sonne of God emptie himſelfe, and deſcend from the boſome of his Father into the wombe of a Virgin Philip. 2. 7. 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                      
                     Exinanivit ſeſe.
                  . Moſes ſaw the viriditie of a buſh, burning with fire, preſerved Exod. 3. 2.; and in Chriſts birth, we may ſee the virginitie of a mother preſerved, Eſay 7. 14. Aarons dry rod did bloſſome, and beare fruit Numb. 17. 8.: and in the birth of Chriſt, we may ſee the withered ſtock of Ieſſe flouriſh, and beare fruit Eſay 11. 1.: Manna fell out of the clouds Exod. 16. 13.: Chriſt came from the boſome of his Father 
                  Iohn 1. 18.. Elijah was taken up into heaven 
                  2 Kings 2. 11.; but a greater than he came now downe from heaven Iohn 3. 13.. The conſideration whereof, made that learned and devout Father to breake out into admiration, O Lord, I doe not admire the ſtature of the world, the ſtabilitie of the earth, waxing and waning of the Moone, perpetuall motion of the Sunne 
                  Non mundi 
                        •
                     ujus ſtaturam admiror, non terrae ſtabilitatem. Cypr. ſerm. 3. de Nativitate. ``Deum in utero Virginis, omnipotentem in cun
                        •
                     bulis.: but I wonder to ſee God in the wombe, the omnipotent in the cradle``: Theſe things doe aſtoniſh me, and make me
                  
                  ſay with Abacuck, I have conſidered thy works, and was afraid 
                  Hab. 3. 2.. With whom let us marvell, and ſay with theſe Diſciples, What manner of man is this? who (as this day) was borne of a pure Virgin. Surely, this is a new and ſtrange thing indeed, which Iehovah himſelfe hath created, and it is marvellous in our eyes. Oh rejoyce in this day, which the Lord hath made 
                  Pſ. 118. 24.: yea, rejoyce in this day, wherein the Lord was made. Rejoyce great grandfather Adam, for (as this day) thy wife Evah hath brought forth the promiſed ſeed, which ſhall bruiſe the ſerpents head 
                  Gen. 3. 15.. Rejoyce grandfather Abraham, This is the day, thou ſo longedſt to ſee 
                  Iohn 8. 56.. Now is thy ſeed borne, in which, all nations of the earth ſhall be bleſſed 
                  Gen. 22. 18.. Rejoyce father David, this day thy Lord is become thy ſonne 
                  Matth. 22. 45., which ſhall ſit upon thy throne 
                  Pſal. 132. 11.. Rejoyce all yee Prophets, for God hath fulfilled what he hath ſpoken by your mouthes 
                  Luk. 1. 70.. Rejoyce yee men, for the Sonne of God is now made man 
                  Gal. 4. 4.. Rejoyce yee women, for a woman is become the mother of God, and all generations ſhall call her bleſſed 
                  Luk. 1. 48.. Rejoyce yee Virgins, for a Virgin hath conceived and borne a ſonne 
                  Eſay 7. 14.. Rejoyce yee children, for the Sonne of God is become a childe 
                  Eſay 9. 6.. Rejoyce yee that ſit in darkneſſe, for the day ſpring from on high hath viſited 
                  Luk 1. 78.; yea, the Sunne of righteouſneſſe is riſen unto you 
                  Malach. 4. 2.. Rejoyce, yee that hunger, for the bread of life is come from heaven Iohn 6. 41.. Rejoyce, yee that mourne, for the conſolation of Iſrael is come 
                  Luk. 2. 25.. Rejoyce, yee that are ſicke in your ſoules, the Phyſitian is come Matth. 9. 12.. Rejoyce yee ſinners, for a Saviour is borne 
                  Luk. 2. 11.. Let all that feare the Lord rejoyce, and

ſing, Glory be to God on high. And ſo much for his birth.
               He hath many & moſt glorious, high & honourable4. Titles. titles given him; as, Ieſus, Chriſt, Son of the moſt high, Lord of glory, Emanuel, Wonderfull, Counſeller, Mighty God, everlaſting Father, Prince of peace, Angel of Covenāt, Redeemer, Way, Truth, Life, Reſurrection, Peace, Firſt & laſt, Firſt begottē of the dead, Firſt fruits of them that ſleepe, Prince of the Kings of the earth, Bright morning ſtarre, Amen, Faithfull and true witneſſe, The beginning of the Creation of God, Prince of Life, The true Light, Good Shepherd, Vine, Doore, Lambe of God, Only begotten Sonne of the Father, Image of the inviſible God, ſecond Adam, Sonne of Man, The true God, Great God, Mighty God, The only God, God over all, King, Everlaſting Prieſt, Doctor, Reconciliation for the ſinnes of the world, Mediator, Advocate, Wiſdome, Righteouſneſſe, Sanctification, Redemption, Our Maſter, Prophet, Servant of God, Our hope, Our brother, Bread of life, Rock, Stone cut out of the mountaines without hands, End of the Law, Spouſe, and Head of the Church, Chiefe corner ſtone, Righteous branch, Seed of Abraham, Sonne of David, King of glory, Lord of all, the Righteous one, Hope of glory, Heire of all things, Iudge of quicke and dead, The Prieſt after the order of Melchizedech, The conſolation of Iſrael. Who doth not marvell at theſe things, and ſay, What manner of man is this; to whom ſo many glorious and honourable titles are given?
               When he was but a childe of twelue yeares of5. Diſputation in the Temple. age, and loſt in Ieruſalem, after three dayes, his Parents

found him in the Temple, ſitting in the midſt of the Doctors, hearing them, and asking them queſtions, and all that heard him were aſtoniſhed at his underſtanding and anſwers, and his Parents were amazed Luk. 2. 46. Ad oſtendendumſe hominem, humiliter audiebat: ad probandum ſe Deum, ſublimiter reſpondebat. Chryſ.
                  . And when ye heare the ſtory, will ye not marvell, and ſay, What manner of childe is this; that diſputed ſo learnedly with the Doctors?
               
               When he was baptiſed of his ſervant in Iordan,
                  6. Baptiſme. 
                  the heavens were opened, God the Father pronounced, This is that my welbeloved Sonne, in whom I am well pleaſed; and the Holy Ghoſt deſcended in the likeneſſe of a Dove, and reſted upon him 
                  Matth. 3. 16, 17.. And doe you not marvell what manner of man he is, at whoſe Baptiſme ſuch ſtrange things hapned?
               When Peter in the name of himſelfe, and the reſt7. Offices. of the Apoſtles, did make that excellent confeſſion of faith, which Chriſt ſo commended, he ſaid, Thou art the Chriſt, or that Chriſt 
                  Matth. 16. 16. 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     .. Chriſt is a Greeke word, and anſwereth to the Hebrew Meſsiah, as is expounded in the Goſpell, Wee have found the Meſſiah, which is, by interpretation, the Chriſt 
                  Iohn 1. 41.. And both doe ſignifie in Engliſh, Anointed: and yet S. Peter at another time ſpake more fully, Thou art the Chriſt, or anointed of God 
                  Luk. 9. 20. 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     .. Three ſorts of perſons were Legally anointed with Materiall oile, viz. Kings, as Saul 
                  1 Sam. 10. 1.; Prieſts, as Aaron 
                  Levit. 8. 12.; and Prophets, as Eliſha 
                  1 Kings 19. 16.: and theſe were Chriſts of God, for that he did ſet them apart, and furniſh them with gifts for thoſe functions (whereof that externall anointing was the Symbole) which God acknowledged, Touch not mine anointed 
                  Pſal. 105. 25.; and whereof David made conſcience, though Saul was a wicked man,

and he was much tempted thereunto (when opportunitie was offered:) yet he repelled the temptation, ſaying to Abiſhai, Who can ſtretch his hand againſt the Lords anointed, and bee guiltleſſe 
                  1 Sam. 26. 9.? Yea, his heart did ſmite him, for comming ſo neere him, as, to cut off the lap of his garment
                  1 Sam. 24. 5.. But never any one before, or ſince, The Chriſt, or, That Chriſt, but the bleſſed Sonne of the Virgin: who onely received all fulneſſe of grace; and in whom onely all thoſe offices did meet and concurre.
               They have doubled in divers, who were his types, as David was both a King and a Prophet; Melchizedeck, a King and Prieſt; and Samuel, a Prieſt and Prophet: but all three, never, but in him alone, and therefore, worthily ſtiled, That Chriſt, or Anointed of God; That King and Prince of all the Kings of the earth, to whoſe Scepter, Lore, and Law, all muſt ſtoope in obedience; and all ſhall bee deſtroyed, that will not have him to reigne over them 
                  Luc. 19. 27.: That great Prophet, to whoſe doctrine all muſt hearken 
                  Deut. 18. 19.: That High Prieſt, who onely, and once for all, hath offered the propitiatory ſacrifice 
                  Heb. 7. penult., for the ſinnes of the Elect. Doe you heare theſe things, and doe you not marvell, and ſay, What manner of man is this? who onely diſchargeth ſuch great offices.
               Againe, whileſt hee was here on earth, he tooke8. Transfiguration. three of his beloved diſciples, and led them up to the top of Mount Thabor, and there was transfigured before them, his face did ſhine as the Sunne, his raiment was white as the light, and as ſnow, ſo as no Fuller on earth can white them; and there appeared

                  Moſes and Elias talking with him, and there was alſo a bright cloud, and there was heard the voyce of God the Father, giving to his Sonne honour and glory, from that excellent glory 2 Pet. 1. 17.; ſaying, This is my beloved Sonne, in whom I am well pleaſed, heare him. With which voice and ſight, the diſciples, that heard and ſaw, and ſpecially S. Peter, was ſo raviſhed, that he forgot himſelfe, and the redemption of the Elect, by the death of Chriſt at Ieruſalem, and deſired no other heaven, but to abide there, though without a Tent Matth. 17. 2. Mar. 9. 2. Luk. 9. 28.. Oh, marvell you alſo, and ſay, What manner of man is this?
               
               Againe, whileſt he was here on earth, what excellent9. Doctrine. doctrine did hee preach and deliver? pronouncing, the poore in ſpirit, the meeke, ſuch as mourne, and hunger, and thirſt after righteouſneſſe, and ſuffer perſecution for righteouſnes ſake, Bleſſed 
                  Matth. 5▪ 3, 4.; requiring every diſciple of his, to deny himſelfe, take up the croſſe and follow him 
                  Matth. 16. 24.; to love our enemies, bleſſe them that curſe us 
                  Matth. 5. 44., overcome evill with good 
                  Rom. 12. ult.; If we be ſmitten on one cheeke to turne the other
                  Matth. 5. 39.; yet promiſing great reward in heaven 
                  Matth. 5. 12.; calling all to him that travell and are heavie laden 
                  Matth. 11. 28.; promiſing he will not caſt away any that come unto him 
                  Iohn 6. 37.; that hee will not breake the bruiſed reed, nor quench the ſmoaking flax 
                  Matth. 12. 20.; that whoſoever beleeveth in him ſhall not periſh, but have everlaſting life 
                  Iohn 3. 16.; yea, he is paſſed from death to life, and ſhall not come into iudgement 
                  Iohn 5. 24.; that he knoweth his ſheepe, and will give unto them everlaſting life 
                  Iohn 10. 27, 28.; that of all thoſe his Father hath given him, he will not loſe one, but raiſe him up at the laſt day 
                  Iohn 6. 39.; that ſuch as for his ſake, forſake
                  
                  father, mother, brother, ſister, goods, houſes, or lands, ſhall in this world receive an hundred fold more, and in the world to come, everlaſting life 
                  Matt. 19. penult.
                  ; that ſuch as now follow him in the regeneration, ſhall ſit upon thrones 
                  Matth. 19. 28.; that ſuch as for his ſake hunger and thirst, ſhall ſit at his Table, and eat and drinke with him in his kingdome 
                  Luke 22. 30.; ſuch doctrine, for matter and manner of deliverie, as the Church truly ſaid, Hony and milke were under his tongue 
                  Cant. 4. 11., and his lips were full of grace 
                  Pſal. 45. 2.. Yea, all the Synagogue wondered at the gracious words which proceeded out of his mouth 
                  Luke 4. 22.. A woman could not containe her ſelfe, when ſhee heard him, but pronounced, Bleſſed is the wombe that bare thee, Luke 11. 27. His very enemies were aſtoniſhed, and ſaid, Never man ſpake like him 
                  Iohn 7. 46.. And the rude multitude marvelled, and queſtioned amongſt themſelves, What thing is this? What new doctrine is this 
                  Marke 1. 27., and whence hath this man this wiſdome? Is not this the Carpenters ſonne? from whence then hath this man all theſe things 
                  Matth. 13. 55.? And will not you alſo (when yee reade in the Goſpell) marvell and ſay, What manner of man is this; that hath preached ſuch new, true, holy, humble, heavenly, charitable, and comfortable doctrine?
               As was his doctrine, ſo was his life and converſation10. Converſation. moſt holy: for he never did ſinne 
                  1 Pet. 2. 22.; nor knew ſinne 
                  2 Cor. 5. ult.
                  ; his very enemies could not rebuke him of ſinne 
                  Iohn 8. 46.: He came not to breake, but to fulfill the Law 
                  Matth. 5. 17.; And, he fulfilled all righteouſneſſe indeed 
                  Matth. 3. 15.; His righteouſneſſe farre exceeded the righteouſneſſe of the Scribes and Phariſies 
                  Matth. 5. 20.; For it was the righteouſneſſe of God
                  Rom. 3. 21.. Now was that fulfilled, though hee lay among
                  
                  pots, yet had he ſilver wings, and his feathers like gold, Pſal. 68. 13. He did converſe with ſinners 
                  Matth. 9. 11.; and yet was ſeparated from them 
                  Heb. 7. 26.; he touched pitch 
                  Eccleſ. 13. 1., and yet was not defiled 
                  Luke 7. 39.. As he was most holy; ſo, most meeke: he did not ſtrive nor crie, nor lift up his voice in the ſtreets 
                  Matth. 12.: moſt patient; being led as a ſheepe to the ſlaughter, and as a lambe dumbe before the ſhearer, he opened not his mouth: moſt humble; he did not ride into Ieruſalem like an earthly Emperour, in Skarlet, Purple, gliſtering roabes, cloth of gold, not mounted on a luſtie Palfrey, with ſtately ſaddle, and Princely trappings, attended on with great troopes and guard, in ſoft garments, and with chaines of gold; but he rode on an Aſſe uſed to the yoake, a poore, baſe, contemptible, and ridiculous beaſt; in his poore ſeameleſſe coat: and in ſtead of any rich ſaddle, ſate upon ſome poore garments, that his Diſciples had ſpread under him; attended by a few fiſher-men, and others of baſe qualitie in the world; yet all the Citie was moved, and ſaid, who is this 
                  Matth. 21. 5. 10.? And when you heare theſe things, will yee not alſo marvell, and ſay, What manner of man is this? ſo holy, harmeleſſe, meeke, patient, and humble.
               Againe, How glorious were his miracles, in11. Miracles. the eyes of the beholders, which hee wrought? Giving ſight to the blinde, hearing to the deafe, ſpeech to the dumbe, ſtrength to the lame, cleanſing Lepers, caſting out devils, raiſing the dead 
                  Matth. 11. 5.; Rebuking Fevers 
                  Luke 4. 39.; healing all manner of ſickneſſes and diſeaſes 
                  Matth. 4. 23, 24.; rebuking winds and ſeas; whereat the beholders were aſtoniſhed. And when you heare it, wil not ye

alſo marvell and ſay, What manner of man is this? for even the winds and the ſea obey him.
               
               How marvellous alſo in the Sacraments, which12. Sacraments. he hath ordained and inſtituted, for the uſe of his new Teſtaments Church? Did the Iewes ſo marvell at their Paſſeover, when but the bloud of a Lambe was ſhed, ſaying, What meane you by this ſervice? Exod. 12. 26. And will not you marvell at the Sacrament of the body and bloud of the Sonne of God? Did they at the Type; and will not you at the Truth? Did they at the ſhadow; and will not you at the body? Oh marvell, inquire, and I will informe you. I purpoſe not to ſound the Trumpet to warre, and perplex your minds with intricate queſtions, and fruitleſſe diſputes, which are endleſſe about this ſubject. Chriſt ordained them for the comfort of our ſoules, and not for the exerciſe of our curious and ſubtill wits; to ſeale up a ſweet union with Chriſt, and communion one with another, not to occaſion diviſion and contention: yet, through Satans malice, and our weakneſſe, it is come to paſſe, that in nothing are Chriſtians more divided, nor have more bitter conflicts, than about theſe things. I will briefly lay downe the poſitive truth, according to the Scriptures, and the Tenet of our Church, and labour to prepare you to the worthy receiving thereof. And firſt, let mee provoke you to admire the love of Chriſt, and his deſire of our ſalvation; who not contented to ſpeake unto our eares, in his word, doth adde Sacraments, as the ſeales thereof, for confirmation of our faith; and let us ſee with our eyes, what we heare with our

eares, the Sacraments being a viſible word 
                     Quid aliud ſunt Sacramenta, niſi quaedamquaſi verba viſibilia? Auguſt. tom. 6. contr. Pauſt. Manich. l. 19. c. 16.; yea, whereas the Word conveyeth grace to the heart, but by the one ſenſe of hearing; the Sacrament of the Lords Supper conveyeth grace, by ſeeing, handling, taſting; that as David ſaith, We may ſee and taste, how good the Lord is 
                  Pſal. 34. 8.; and with the Apoſtle, That which wee have heard, and ſeene and handled 
                  1 Iohn 1. 1.. Theſe Sacraments (properly ſo called) are but two; as ours, and the other Reformed Churches doe truly teach: I ſay (properly ſo called) becauſe the Greeke word, Myſterie, (by ſome tranſlated Sacrament) is of larger extent in the Scriptures 
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     : Sacramentum. Epheſ. 1. 9. 3. 3. 5. 32. Coloſſ. 1. 27. 1 Tim. 3. 16.; and the Fathers in their writings, call all Articles, which are peculiar to the Chriſtian faith, and all duties of Religion, containing that, which ſenſe, or naturall reaſon cannot of it ſelfe diſcerne, [Sacraments;] but none are properly called Sacraments, but ſuch as have theſe three things, viz. Firſt, an outward and viſible ſigne: Secondly, an inward and inviſible grace: Thirdly, the word of Inſtitution 
                     Sacramenta conſtant, verbo, ſignis, & ſignificatis. Confeſſ. Helvet. cap. 19. & Triſag. l. 1. c. 85. Accedit verbum ad elementum, & fit Sacramentum. Aug. Serm. de Cataclyſmo. tom. 9. coll. 987. & in Iohan. Tract. 80. coll. 445.: all which doe onely concurre in the New Teſtament, in two, viz. Baptiſme, and the Lords Supper 
                     Aug. de Doctrina Chriſtiana, lib. 3. cap. 9. tom. 3. 
                        
                           •
                        oll. 50. A. Articles of Religion 25.: both inſtituted of Chriſt, both having outward ſignes; in Baptiſme [Water;] in the Lords Supper [Bread and Wine;] and both of them one and the ſame inviſible grace; Chriſt being the inviſible grace, repreſented and exhibited in the Sacraments, both of the Old and New Teſtament; For they did eat the ſame ſpirituall meat, and drinke the ſame ſpirituall drinke, that wee doe 1 Cor. 10. 3.. Yet have the Sacraments ſome things peculiar to themſelves; for by Baptiſme we once receive Chriſt, to

new birth, and Regeneration; but in the Eucharist, wee receive Chriſt to continuall nouriſhment of that ſpirituall life wee received in Baptiſme; and therefore that but once, as we are but once borne; this often, as our bodies are often fed.
               The outward Elements in the Lords Supper, areElements. but few, and poore to the eye of fleſh and bloud: common and ordinary bread; and wine, (in ſome Countries, as common as bread, and in all places of the knowne world, to be had;) bread made of graine, and wine without mixture of water, (a great corruption, though ancient 
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     . Iuſtin. Mart. Apolog. pro Chriſtian. 2. pag. 97.:) & theſe continuing in their naturall ſubſtance to the end; though the Papiſts in their metaphyſicall faith, beleeve, Chriſt to be preſent, I will not ſay really, (for that our learned Divines acknowledge 
                     Hooker. Eccl. Polit. lib. 5. parag. 67. pag. 176. Doctor Airie on Philip. 1. 23. Lect. 19. pag. 225.; and in candide conſtruction, as [Reall] is ſynonimall with truth and veritie Spiritually, and therefore truly and really., I will not deny, it may be warily and ſoberly uſed;) but corporally, and that by Tranſubſtantiation, of the ſubſtance of bread and wine, into the very fleſh and bloud of Chriſt, ſo as, after words of Conſecration, there remaine not the ſubſtance of bread and wine, but only the Accidents, colour, and taſte. No, no, the words of Conſecration doe not change the nature or ſubſtance of the ſignes, (which once deſtroyed, the Sacrament ceaſeth) but changeth the qualitie, in ſeparating them from a common, to an holy uſe. S. Paul, to make that out of queſtion, doth in one Chapter, after the Conſecration, thrice call it Bread 
                  1 Cor. 11.. Neither, indeed, is there any need that there ſhould bee ſuch a change, as if Chriſt could not feed us, or our ſoules

be nouriſhed, without orall manducation: for did the woman, by her faith, finde ſuch good, in touching but the hemme of Chriſts garment 
                  Matth. 9. 20.? and ſhall not we much more, from this holy Sacrament, of his owne ordinance and inſtitution? Oh let me eat, and it ſufficeth. Diſpute thou of the manner, I will beleeve.
               But theſe outward ſignes and Elements beingVſe. conſecrated by the word and prayer, are of moſt wonderfull ſpirituall uſe, and efficacie, to every beleeving and worthy receiver; which to expreſſe, (and that they may not be baſely eſteemed of, as common and ordinary things) the Scriptures doe commonly ennoble (as others, ſo) this Sacrament, with giving to the ſigne, the name it ſelfe of the grace ſignified; This is my bodie 
                  Matth. 26.; And, This is my bloud of the New Testament 
                  26. 28.: And the Apoſtle ſaith, The bread which we breake, is it not the Communion of the bodie of Chriſt? And the cup of bleſſing, which we bleſſe, is it not the Communion of the bloud of Christ 
                  1 Cor. 10. 16.? The Ancient Fathers alſo have exceedingly magnified this Sacrament, As that Chriſt dieth againe in this myſterie Gregor.; the Prieſt holdeth Chriſt betwixt his hands Chryſoſt.; the bread, over which thankes is given, is the bodie of the Lord Iren.. Which figurative ſpeeches are warrantable by the Word. And they gave hyperbolical and exceſſive praiſe to this Sacrament, in moſt thankful and godly minds, to ſtirre up godly care and devotion in the Receivers; but did not fore-ſee how thereby they occaſioned many hereticall Concluſions, and Idolatrous adoration, whereof wee having lamentable

experience, it behoveth us warily to uſe their phraſes; not thinking it ſufficient, that from Scriptures, and Fathers, ſuch phraſes may be uſed for truth; but cautelouſly, and with expoſition, leſt we harden the wilfull Heretike, or ſcandalize the weake beleever. For as we muſt take heed, that we make them not idle ſignes, wee muſt alſo take heed, wee make them not Idoll ſignes: they are but ſignes ſtill; and though grace be conueyed by them, yet it may be ſeparated from them; ſo as all that receive the grace of Sacraments, doe not receive grace by the Sacraments 
                     Hooker. Eccleſ. Polit. lib. 5.. Though they be holy, honorable, & glorious veſſels, for the conveyance of Chriſt, and all his bleſſings and graces; yet they are not phyſicall veſſels and inſtruments, as a nutritive power and vertue is in bread and drinke; or tied to them by inevitable neceſſitie, as if God were tied to give Chriſt and eternall life to all ſuch as doe the work, and receive the outward Element. They are only morall inſtruments and veſſels; to the fruitfull uſe whereof, is required ſomething alſo in the Receiver: For as the Word profiteth not them, in whom it is not mixed by faith 
                  Heb. 4. 2.; no more doth this Sacrament profit ſuch as receive it not by faith: yea, many do eat and drinke unworthily, to their owne condemnation 
                  1 Cor. 11. 29.: but God is tied by covenant and promiſe, to convey and exhibite the inviſible grace, to all that doe faithfully, duely, and devoutly receive the viſible and holy Sacrament.
               Oh then prepare your ſelves to the receiving ofVſe. this holy Sacrament: prepare not the teeth and belly, but the heart Crede & manducaſti. Auguſt.; for it is not the food for teeth,

but minde Non cibus dentis, ſed mentis eſt.; and let Faith worke. When you ſee but the leaſt graine of muſtard-ſeed caſt into the ground, though there it ſeeme to rot, yet you beleeve1. Faith. it will become a great tree for birds to build in. If you ſee a cunning work-man take, though a rugged and crooked tree in hand, you beleeve he will doe ſome exquiſite and curious worke. Will you thus rely on Art and Nature; and not rely on God the Author of both 
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     : Abſurdū 
                        
                           •
                        ſt, credere naturae, de naturalibus; & arti, de artificialibus; Deo autem non credere de divinis. Iuſtin. Mar
                           •
                        . Quaeſt. & Reſpon. numb. 32. pag. 214.? You will not beleeve, how your ſoules can be fed and nouriſhed by bread and wine, unleſſe he acquaint you with his waies, and lay open the ſecret of his skill before you. Where God doth ſpeake ſuch things as are for height and ſublimitie of matter; or promiſe ſuch graces, by ſuch meanes, as for ſecrecie of performance, we are not able to reach unto, it behoveth Gods children to ſubmit themſelves in the ſimplicitie of faith, and not curiouſly diſpute; which commonly chilleth the warmth of zeale and devotion, and ſo diſtracteth the minds of men, that they know not what to beleeve: Examine your ſelves therefore whether yee be in the faith 
                  2 Cor. 13. 5..
               Examine your ſelves, whether you have unfainedly2. Repentance. repented of your ſinnes; which appeareth by a perfect hatred and deteſtation of them, and all of the meanes and occaſions leading unto them, with a reſolute purpoſe of minde, for ever to avoid them, & to become obedient unto God. The people of God were commanded to eat the Paſſeover with bitter herbes 
                  Exod. 12. 8. gual merorim, cum amaris.
                  ; which word I finde elſewhere uſed to expreſſe the bitter ſorrow of heart 
                  Lament 3. 15.; and verily, hee ſhall never worthily eat of our Paſſeover
                  
                  Chriſt 
                  1 Cor. 5. 7., in the Sacrament, whoſe ſoule is not filled with bitter ſorrow for his ſinnes, for which Chriſt Jeſus ſuffered the torments of death, and ſhed his precious bloud, whereof that Sacrament putteth him in remembrance. What is it? but even a deſpiſing of the bloud of Chriſt, and the accounting of it, as an unholy thing, for a man to receive, having a purpoſe to continue in his ſinne, and (at the moſt) but hanging downe his head like a bulruſh for a day 
                  Eſay 58. 5.. Wherefore, purge your hearts yee ſinners, and cleanſe your hands 
                  Iames 4. 8.; Waſh them in innocencie, and then come to his Table 
                  Pſal. 43. 4.. As the Phareſies would not eat before they had waſhed 
                  Matth. 15. 20.; eat not before thy conſcience be purged from dead workes, to ſerve the living God. 
                  Heb. 9. 14..
               Examine your ſelves, whether yee be in love and3. Love. charitie, and whether, where offenſes have beene given, there bee a free forgiveneſſe, and all good meanes of reconciliation uſed, that ſo it may be indeed, as it is called, a Communion, whereby all the members, being knit together in the bond of love, may partake in one Sacrament, and have a ſweet fellowſhip one with another, and with Chriſt their Head. This Sacrament muſt be eaten with the unleavened bread of ſinceritie and charitie, 1 Cor. 5. 8.Exhortation.
               
               If by examination, you finde your ſelves thus in1. Come. ſome meaſure (but truly) prepared, then Wiſdome calleth to you, as to her gueſts, Come eat of my bread, and drinke of my wine 
                  Prov. 9. 5.; and alſo ſendeth forth her ſervants, calling and inviting, All things are readie, come to the Supper 
                  Luke 14. 17.; and beware of idle excuſes, left thou alſo heare the ſame doome denounced

againſt thee, Not one of thoſe that were bid, ſhall taste of my Supper.
               
               Oh come, come whilſt you may; theſe (if everApplication. any) are the happie daies of the Sonne of Man, wherein Chriſt, in his Word, truly preached, and Sacraments ſincerely adminiſtred, is even crucified in our ſight▪
                   
                  Gal. 3. 1.
                  ▪ Oh happie daies, when wee may ſo ſafely feaſt together at Gods Table, and our owne; but let us feare, leſt Chriſt beholding our negligence, and offended with our frivolous excuſes, ſay, as ſometimes he did to his owne people, for the like faults, The daies come, in which you ſhall deſire to ſee one of the daies of the Sonne of Man, and ſhall not ſee it 
                  Luke 17. 22.. Come then, come I ſay, whileſt yee may, and thanke God, that ye may come, and goe ſafely; and pray for them that faine would, and cannot.
               Come, but come not alone, bring your companie,2. Not alone. ſay one to another, Come let us goe up to the Mountaine, the houſe of the Lord
                  Eſay 2 3.: ſay with Ioſhuah, I and mine houſe will ſerve the Lord 
                  Ioſh. 24. 15.. Bring thoſe with thee to Gods Houſe, who are with thee in thine owne houſe Adduc 
                        •
                     os ad domum Dei tecum, qui ſunt in domo tuatecum. Auguſt.. Your owne good Example, who have charge of families, is full of power; and the more eminent yee are in ſtate and degree, the more inducing is your good Example. The Reaſon why the Lord hath prepared, his table ſpred, his ſervants invite, & ſo few gueſts come, is, becauſe ſo few of the chiefe come, and they come alone, neither care they, whether wives, children, or ſervants come at all, or no. Oh come, bring yours with you, and come often; yea, the oftner, the more welcome to Gods Table. This the Apoſtle intended, when

he ſaid, As [often] as yee eat this bread, and drinke this cup 
                  1 Cor. 11. 26.; Enjoyning all ſuch as live in a viſible Church, ſo often, as the cuſtome of the Church is to adminiſter it, and hee hath no lawfull impediment to hinder him, (as abſence from home, ſickneſſe) ſo often to receive it; if hee doe not, it is a great neglect, if not contempt, of the holy Ordinance of God. And how juſt were it, in time of ſickneſſe and adverſity, ſuch an one ſhould be weak in faith, and void of comfort, ſeeing he neglected the meanes, when he might have enjoyed them?
               Give me leave then, to reprove a common fault,Reprehenſiō. even in this renowmed Mother Church, where the holy Sacrament (at leaſt every month) is religiouſly and reverendly adminiſtred, how few are there that come, for all our calling? As if to receive the Sacrament, were but a thing arbitrarie; once a yeare, at Eaſter, may ſuffice; thrice a yeare, a largis; to what purpoſe oftner? Thus in Paradiſe, with eating of the forbidden fruit, wee ſurfetted, have quite loſt our appetite, and loath heavenly food, as the Iſraelites did the Manna 
                  Numb. 11. 6.. But let me tell you, the only way to recover our appetite, is, to come and eat; none have leſſe ſtomack, than ſuch as eat leaſt; none more, than they that eat moſt. They that make their meat their God, the more they eat, the leſſe appetite: but they that make God their meat, the more they eat the more they hunger. This appeareth from the worthy examples of the Saints in Ancient times. It appeareth from Saint Auguſtine, That ſome faithfull did receive every day, and make the Lords Supper their daily bread Panem quotidia 
                        •
                     um: Auguſt. a
                        •
                      verbis Dom
                        •••
                     , Ser. 2
                        •
                     . & Ho
                        •
                     . 2.; which

though he neither reprehend, nor commend; yet he earneſtly exhorted all to receive every Lords day 
                     Quotidie Euchariſtiae communionem percipere, nec laud
                           •
                        , nec reprehendo; omnibus tamen Dominicis diebus communicandum ſuadeo & hortor. Auguſt. Tom. 3. lib. de dogmatibus Eccleſiaſt. cap. 52. col. 205.: and our Church hath godly appointed, a ſpeciall exhortation to be read, when people are negligent in this kinde.
               But me thinketh, I heare ſome ſay: Indeed, my departure, and ſeldome comming, doth not proceed from neglect and contempt, but the reverend reſpect I have to that heavenly and holy Sacrament, fearing that if I ſhould ſo often receive, IO ectb. ſhould not receive it with that care, conſcience, and preparation, that is meet. I anſwer; If thine owneSol. heart condemne thee not, neither doe I, Goe in peaceIlle honorando, non audet quotidie ſumere; & ille honorando, non audet ullo die praetermittere. Aug. Tom. 2. epiſt. 118. col. 558.. The reverend reſpect that the Centurion had to Chriſt, made him refuſe to entertaine him, I am not worthy thou ſhouldst come under my roofe 
                  Matth. 8. 8.. But Zacheus his reverend reſpect of Chriſt, made him come downe haſtily, and receive him ioyfully Luk. 19. 6.. See the contrary effects of the ſame affect, and both approved of Chriſt. Some out of reverence come to every Sacrament, and ſome out of reverence come ſeldome; Charitie hopeth the beſt of all 1 Cor. 13. 7.. But take heed Sathan tempt you not 
                  1 Cor. 7. 5.: and take heed that your owne conſciences condemne you not; if they doe, God is greater than they
                  1 Iohn 3. 20., and he is not mocked 
                  Gal. 6. 7..
               But now Communicants being prepared, andIn time of receiving. come to the Lords Table, what is more to be done? Our Church godly preſcribeth in a very ſhort rule, Lift up your hearts; though knee be on ground, let▪ the heart be in heaven; and the minde intently exerciſed in comparing the ſignes and ſpirituall

things together. When we ſee bread and wine, which are for full refection of our bodies; let us thinke what a perfect Saviour we have. When we ſee them ſet apart for this uſe; let us thinke, how Chriſt the Sonne of God became man for our ſakes, and ſalvation. When we ſee the bread and wine bleſſed and conſecrated, and (as it were) made fit for ſo holy and heavenly an uſe; let us thinke, how Chriſt his humanitie, being united perſonally to the Word, received all fulneſſe of grace, for the worke of Redemption. When we ſee the bread broken, and wine powred out; let us thinke of the bitter paſſion of Chriſt, the renting of his holy bodie, and ſhedding of his moſt precious bloud for our ſinnes. When the Miniſter offreth theſe, let us thinke how lovingly God offreth his Sonne to be our Saviour. And as the Receiver, taketh, eateth, and drinketh the bread and wine, and it turneth into his ſubſtance: ſo by the hand of faith, we muſt receive, and apply Chriſt unto us, to dwell in our hearts, who hath given himſelfe for us.
               Laſtly, let God have moſt hearty thanks and praiſe, for all his mercies, repreſented and exhibited to us in his holy Ordinances, in regard whereof, the Greekes call it, an Euchariſt. Thus from a marvelling Text, I have taken occaſion to provoke you to marvell at the inſtitution of this day, and at the ſervice of this day. I deſire that God may have the glory of all, and that ye would ſay one to another, Doubtleſſe, we have heard, and ſeene, and received ſtrange things to day, and the Lord make us thankfull. Amen.
               
               
                  His Paſſiō, moſt marvellous; to ſay nothing of his13. Paſsion. hunger, thirſt, weariſomneſſe, dangers, perſecution, deriſion; his whole life being a continuall paſſion; yet can you reade and heare of his Agonie, how without any violent exerciſe, or bodily paine, in an open Garden, in a freſh aire, in the moiſt dew, and proſtrate on the cold earth, yet was in ſuch an Agonie, that his ſweat was like drops of bloud, trickling downe to the ground 
                  Luk. 22. 44.; And doe yee not marvell? Himſelfe did marvell; Is there any ſorrow like my ſorrow, wherewith the Lord hath afflicted me in the day of his fierce anger 
                  Lament. 1. 12.? Doe you reade and heare of the deſperate and inſolent behaviour of wicked men, preferring a notorious murtherer before the innocent Sonne of God Matth. 27. 21., crying out to have him crucified 
                  Matth. 27. 22., and let his bloud be on them and their children 
                  Matth. 27. 25.; crowning that head with thornes Matth. 27. 29., which is higher than the heavens; ſpitting in that face 
                  Matth. 27. 30., which the Angels doe delight to behold; nailing thoſe hands to the Croſſe 
                  Mar. 15. 24., which made heaven and earth; piercing thoſe feet 
                  Pſal. 22. 6., which have walked on the ſea 
                  Matth. 14. 25., but never ſtood in the way of ſinners; yea pierced that heart with a ſpeare 
                  Iohn 19. 34. Auguſt. ſerm. de nat. Dom. Bern. bomil. 2. ſuper miſſus eſt.
                  , which deviſed all good for man; And doe yee not marvell? Doe you reade, that the fountaine of living water thirſteth, the light of the world put out; Truth, oppreſſed by falſe witneſſes; Diſcipline, ſcourged; He that beareth up all things, faint under the Croſſe; He that is Iudge of quicke and dead, judged by a mortall man; Juſtice, condemned; Foundation, hanged on a Tree; Salvation, wounded; and Life, killed; and doe yee not marvell? But alas, theſe were lamentable

things, and in the eye and wiſdome of fleſh and bloud, baſe and contemptible. Behold then ſuch things, as are full of glory and majeſtie. The Sunne aſhamed of their doings, pulled in his beames, covered it face Math. 27. 45. 51. 54., and refuſed to give light, to ſuch a work of darkneſſe: The earth trembled Math. 27. 45. 51. 54., as not able to beare the weight of ſuch a ſinne: The vaile of the Temple rent aſunder, from the top to the bottome 
                  Math. 27. 45. 51. 54., in deteſtation of ſuch wickedneſſe. The Centurion confeſſeth truly, This was the Sonne of God 
                  Math. 27. 45. 51. 54.. Pilat, whoſe hands were embrewed with his bloud, writeth his inſcription, and publiſheth his glory to Hebrewes, Greekes, and Latines, This is Ieſus of Nazareth, King of the Iewes 
                  Iohn 19. 19, 22.: And will you not marvell at it? Yea, open the eyes of your mindes, and you ſhall ſee the benefits hereof. He was apprehended, that we might eſcape; ſcourged, that we might be ſpared; bound, that we might be looſed; diſgraced, that we might be honoured; wearied with the burthen of the Croſſe, that wee might be eaſed of the burthen of the Curſe; fainted, that we might be refreſhed; thirſted, that we might be ſatisfied; wounded, that we might be healed; humbled to the Croſſe, that we might be exalted to Thrones; died amongſt Theeves, that we may live amongſt Angels; condemned, that we may be juſtified; killed, that we may live: And doe yee not marvell, and ſay, What manner of man is this?
               
               Moreover, when Chriſt was truly dead, and buried,14. Reſurrection. and all made ſure, (as they thought,) the wicked triumph, and rejoyce, and his Diſciples full of

ſadneſſe, and ſorrow, Luk. 24. 17. loe, he that had power to lay downe his life, had alſo power to take it up againe, Ioh. 10. 18. Hee looſed the ſorrowes of death, whereof it was impoſsible for him to be holden, Acts 2. 24. having thorowly conquered death, even in the grave, it ſtrongeſt hold, fortreſſe, or caſtle. It was not the great ſealed ſtone could keepe him in, Matth. 27. ult. but Sampſon-like, carrieth on his ſhoulders the braſen gates, Iudg. 16. 3. and declared himſelfe mightily to be the Sonne of God, by his riſing from the dead, Rom. 1. 4. Death and Grave confeſſe their weakneſſe, and his dominion; they are weary of their prey, and haſten with the Whale to caſt up this Ionah: they are oppreſſed with an intolerable burthen, and have ſwallowed ſo bitter a morſell, as they would faine be rid of; the earth is in travell till it be rid of him.
               Moreover, after that he had beene converſant15. Aſcenſion with his Diſciples, for the ſpace of forty daies after his reſurrection, and had inſtructed them concerning his kingdome 
                  Acts 1. 3., he was received up into glory, from the top of Mount Olivet, in the ſight of his Apoſtles, he aſcended into heaven 
                  Luk. 24. 51.; that is, his humane Nature, by the power and vertue of his Godhead, was truly and locally tranſlated from earth into the higheſt heavens of the bleſſed; where he is ſaid, to ſit on the right hand of God 
                  Mar. 16. penult, to make continuall interceſsion for his Elect Rom. 8. 34.; from whence he ſent the Holy Ghoſt in likeneſſe of cloven tongues of fire within ten daies 
                  Acts 2. 3., (according to his promiſe Acts 1. 5.) from whence, he powreth out his ſpirit on all fleſh 
                  Epheſ. 4. 8.; (and ſpecially on ſuch as he hath called to the work

of the Miniſterie Eph. 4. 11.) doth gather and protect his Church, bridle and confound his enemies, and at the appointed time 
                  Acts 17. 31., ſhall come from thence in his owne glory, and the glory of his Father, and of the holy Angels 
                  Mar. 13. 26., to iudge both the quicke and dead 
                  Acts 10. 42., when all his Saints ſhall be gathered from the foure corners of the world 
                  Mar. 13. 27., ſhall meet him in the aire, and be with him in happineſſe for ever 
                  1 Theſſ. 4. penul., whoſe kingdome ſhall have no end 
                  Eſay 9. 7..
               Oh moſt marvellous Redeemer! Oh moſt gloriousConcluſion. myſteries of the Goſpell! How are we bound for ever to that good God, who hath revealed them by his word and Spirit unto us! How poore, and ſimple, beggerly, baſe, and contemptible, are all the Religions in the world, compared with this? What is Moſes, and all the Legall ſervice and worſhip? though ordained of God; yet the time of Reformation being come Hebr. 9. 10., the Apoſtle calleth them, weake and beggerly elements 
                  Gal. 4. 9.. What is that Impoſtor Mahomet with his Alcaron, though a Religion ſo generally received and profeſſed, how carnall, filthy, and obſcene? What are his beſt promiſes, but ſuch as a godly minde would deſpiſe & abhorre? How many great Kingdoms do worſhip Sunne, Moone, Starres, yea foure-footed beaſts, and creeping things 
                  Rom. 1. 23.? And ſome worſhip the Devil himſelfe. How, in Poperie, are poore people deprived of the Scriptures, nuſled in ignorance, and implicite faith? taught to beleeve lying Legends, counterfet miracles; fed with old wives fables, and abuſed with coſening tricks of deceitfull men? Oh ſtand faſt in the faith; marvell, and praiſe God,

who hath made knowne the Saviour, and the way of ſalvation unto you.
               You have marvelled at many things, but I prayObſerv. you forget not that which is the burthen of all, What manner of (Man?) It is (Man) yea true (Man) that is ſo marvellous, in birth, life, doctrine, death, reſurrection, aſcenſion. Oh how highly hath God exalted humane nature 
                     Excelſum locum habet humana natura; quod hominibus, in vero homine, Deus apparuit. Auguſt. de vera Religione, cap. 16.! Some love their fleſh, for the beauty of it; and ſome, for the comely ſhape and proportion; ſome, for the ſtrength. Here is the ground of true love, to love it, becauſe in Chriſt, it is the fleſh of God; and herein exalted above the nature of Angels Heb. 2. 16.. It was a great honour was given to man at the Creation, when he was made after Gods Image 
                  Gen. 1. 26.; but it is a far greater honour given in Redemption, God himſelfe becomming man 
                  Gal. 4. 4.; fleſh of our fleſh, and bone of our bone. Oh Chriſtian, acknowledge thy dignitie, and doe not defile, with a lewd converſation, what God hath ſo highly honoured Agnoſce, ô Chriſtiane, dignitatem tuam. Leoſerm. 1. in nativit. Dom..
               But me thinketh, I heare ſome object, this is aObiect. matter of offenſe, that Chriſt was a man, yea a weake and poore man. I anſwer: Indeed, it isSol. true; if we behold him with a carnall eye, and looke upon no more but his bare humanitie, and wrapped up in great infirmitie, it is a matter of offenſe; and therefore Chriſt hath pronounced, Bleſſed is he, whoſoever ſhall not be offended in me 
                  Matth. 11. 6.. The Prophet foretold, hee ſhould be a ſtone to ſtumble at, and a rocke of offenſe 
                  Eſay 8. 14.. And the Apoſtle ſaith, We preach Chriſt a ſtumbling blocke to the Iewes, and fooliſhneſſe to the Gentiles 
                  1 Cor. 1. 23.. But, whoſo well obſerveth the

Goſpell, ſhal ſee, in the great wiſdome of God, glory & ſhame, power and weaknes, majeſtie & infirmitie ſo twiſted & mingled together, that if the one trouble and offend, the other may comfort and content. He was borne; but it was of a Virgin 
                  Eſay 7. 14. Matth. 1. 23.. He was borne in a ſtable, and laid in a manger; but the Angels proclaimed him Luk. 2. 11, 12.. Herod ſought to kill him; but Kings came from the Eaſt to adore him Matth. 2. 2.. He was baptiſed of his ſervāt; but his Father gave teſtimonie Matth. 3. 16, 17., and the Holy Ghoſt deſcended from heaven, in likeneſſe of a Dove, and reſted upon him 
                  Herodes perſequitur, ſed adorant Magi: baptizatur à ſervo, ſed vox deſuper Dei intonantis auditur. Hieronym. in Epheſ. cap. 3.. He was hungry in the Wilderneſſe; but rebuked Sathan Matth. 4. 2, 10.. He ſate on Iacobs Well weary, but told the woman of Samaria, that came to draw water, all that ever ſhee did 
                  Iohn 4. 6, 29.. He wept for Lazarus; but bade him come forth of the grave, and he did ſo Iohn 11. 35, 45.. He did ſpit on the ground, and made clay; but with it he cured a man that had beene borne blinde 
                  Iohn 9. 6.. He hanged on Croſſe betwixt two theeves; but the Sunne was darkned, and the earth trembled Matt. 27. 38, 45.. He ſlept; but rebuked the wind and ſea. Remember your queſtion, What manner of man is this? A man; but an extraordinarie man. Remember your anſwer, This man is the Sonne of God; and that doth the reaſon of the queſtion ſhew, which commeth now to be conſidered, viz.
               
               
                  That even the winds, and the ſea obey him] In2. Part. which words, the Reaſon, both of their Admiration and Interrogation (as the cauſe and effect) is rendred. To which purpoſe, the words in the OriginallSenſe. are very ſignificant. For firſt, there is a double particle, which in the former place is augmentative,

tranſlated, even, etiam: as elſe-where alſo, With authoritie commandeth he, even the uncleane ſpirits,
                  Mar. 1. 27. Imperat etiam ſpiritibus impuris.
                   
                  and they doe obey him. q. d. What manner of man is this, that not only men, women, children, birds, beaſts; but even the very uncleane ſpirits, and even winds and ſea obey him? The word in the Hebrew copie, tranſlated [obey] doth alſo ſignifie, to hearken diligently, to intend earneſtly, and to obey readily and perfectly 
                  iiſhamgnu, à radice ſhamang, exaudivit, attendit, obtemperavit. S. P.
                  . The Greeke word alſo ſignifieth no leſſe 
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     , ex 
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                      
                     & 
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     , Auſculto, ſubauſculto.
                  , that winds, and ſeas, did heare, intend, and ſpeedily and faithfully obey the voice of Chriſt.
               Here then is repreſented unto us, the ſoveraigneDoct. dignitie, power, and authoritie, that Chriſt hath over all creatures, and which all creatures (though never ſo ſturdie, rebellious, or ſenſleſſe) doe acknowledge. It is a Doctrine I have already handled; but ſuffer me, ſuffer me willingly, I beſeech you, to inlarge my meditations, and ampliate my diſcourſe. What ſweeter Argument can I handle, or you heare? What Subject doth not delight to ſpeake of the majeſtie, dominion, power, wealth and glory of his King? And can I ſpeake of any Argument, more pleaſing and delightfull, than of his kingdome, majeſtie, dominion, glory? ſeeing all theſe he hath for our good. Oh that my tongue were as the pen of a ready writer, to indite his honour Pſal. 45. 1.; yea, that I had the tongue of an Angell, to ſpeake of the glory of thy kingdome, and to talke of thy power, to make knowne to the ſonnes of men thy mighty acts, and the glorious majeſtie of thy kingdome; Thy kingdome is an everlaſting
                  
                  kingdom, and thy dominion endureth throughout all generations 
                  Pſal. 145. 11.. Yea, I ſhould have an hand to write, & a tongue to ſpeake, if (with Solomon) I had an heart as large as the ſand 
                  1 King. 4. 29.; for of the abundance thereof, both hand doth write, and tongue doth ſpeake Matth. 12. 34.. Oh that I could ſay with the Apoſtle, Mine heart is inlarged, and my mouth opened: but alas I am ſtraitned in mine owne bowels 
                  2 Cor. 6. 12.. Oh that I had the ſpirit of David, when hee penned that moſt excellent, curious, Alphabetical, and Encomiaſticall Pſalme 
                  Pſal. 145.. How did he abound in zeale, when he ſaid, I will extoll thee, my God, ô King, and I will bleſſe thy name for ever and ever. Every day will I bleſſe thee, and praiſe thy name for ever and ever. Great is the Lord, and greatly to be praiſed, there is no end of his greatneſſe. One generation ſhall praiſe thy works to another, and declare thy mighty acts. They ſhall abundantly utter the memoriall of thy goodneſſe. Oh that I had the ſpirit of S. Auguſtine, when he wrote upon that Pſalme, (wherein, if ever, he exceeded himſelfe Tractat hunt Pſalmum Auguſtinus, ſi quem alium, egregre. Lorin.) Shall Chriſt, in ſuch a famous miracle, ſet forth his glorious majeſtie, and dominion; and ſhall wee thinke and ſpeake ſo little of it? We muſt be content here to wiſh and deſire; hereafter we ſhall enjoy: here to ſerve God according to the weakneſſe of the fleſh; hereafter according to the perfection of ſpirit: here to praiſe God in briefes, and ſemibriefes; hereafter in larges and longs: here but to tune our Harps and inſtruments, when ever and anon a ſtring breaketh, or ſtarteth, and cauſeth an harſh jarre; ſweet ſhall be the muſick in the Quire of heaven, when Angels and Saints ſhall, without weariſomneſſe or end, praiſe him, whoſe glory and

dominion hath no end. As there is no end of his greatneſſe, number of his wiſdome, nor meaſure of his bounty 
                     Non finis magnitudinis, numerus ſapientiae, nec menſura benignitatis. Auguſt. Soliloquijs cap. 21. Tom. 9. col. 773.: ſo ſhall there be no end, number, or meaſure of our praiſe. But now, alas, our ſpirit is ſtrait; wit, dull; ſpeech, dumbe Spiritus arctus, ingenium hebes, & ſerno mutus est. Hill.; that we may juſtly complaine with the Apoſtle, when we take even the beſt dutie in hand, To will is preſent with me, but how to performe that which is good, I finde not 
                  Rom. 7. 18.. As Chriſt ſaid of his Diſciples, it is moſt true in the beſt of us, Though ſpirit be willing, fleſh is weake 
                  Mar. 14. 38.. Wherein this is our comfort, that we ſerve ſo good a Maſter, as accepteth of that we have; and ſo there be a willing minde, it is accepted 
                  2 Cor. 8. 12.. Let me then expreſſe my willingneſſe, ſtriking once againe upon the ſame ſtring for a cloſe, but varying in the deſcant, from that you have heard already.
               
                  Herein, Lord Ieſu, leade me with thy good ſpirit; as
                  A Prayer. 
                  thou art the King of Maieſtie, as well as of mercy, untie my ſtammering tongue, that thy name may be glorified by thy weakest creature; and a worme of the earth may ſpeake wiſely of thy Maieſtie, who art King of Kings, Prince of the Kings of the earth, and haſt on thine head ſo many Crownes, yea the winds and ſeas obey thee. Amen.
               
               Firſt, let us ſee, how this great King of heavenDoct. lit. hath commanded all creatures, to ſerve for the temporall good of his children, according to his gracious promiſe, They that feare the Lord, ſhall want nothing that is good 
                  Pſal. 34. 9.: they that ſeeke the Lord and his kingdome, ſhall have all earthly things, even caſt upon them 
                  Matt. 6. penult.. Bleſſed are the meeke, for they ſhall inherit the earth 
                  Matth. 5. 5.. Being Chriſts, all is theirs 
                  1 Cor. 3. ult.
                  .

All will helpe, nothing hurt them. Doe they want bread, or fleſh? The clouds ſhall raine it Exod. 16. 12.. Do they want water? The rocke ſhall be a fountaine Exod. 17. 6.. Doe they want apparell? Sheepe with fleece and skin ſhall clothe them Gen. 3. 21. Doe they want gold or ſilver? God hath laid it up in veines of the earth for them Iob 28. 1.. Doe they want Pearles, and Iewels? The rivers and ſtreames ſhall afford them. Are they heavyhearted? The Vine ſhall glad them with wine Pſal. 104. 15.. Have they cauſe of mirth and feaſting? Oile ſhall make their faces to ſhine 
                  Ibid.. Are waters caſt out of the Dragons mouth? The earth ſhall ſwallow them up Rev. 12. penult.. Doe winds and waves roare, and threaten to drowne? If Chriſt doe but bid, be ſtill, they are calme, and obey him. A point of Doctrine, which one of the Ancient Fathers hath abundantly confirmed, and illuſtrated by poſitive and exemplarie Scriptures Chryſoſt. Tom. 5. homil. Nemo laeditur niſi à ſeipſo., if I would inlarge it.
               Oh let us thankfully admire, and extoll the mercyVſe. and goodneſſe of God, who is ſo bountifull, in the donation of good, condonation of the evill of guilt, and preſervation from the evill of puniſhment; that hath ſaved us from ſo many, and ſo great evils of bodie, ſoule, eſtate, by water, and land, and hath given us all good things abundantly to enioy 
                  1 Tim. 6. 17., pertaining to life and godlineſſe; ſendeth us daily manifold comforts from Heaven, Aire, Earth, Sea, Sunne, Moone, Starres, Light, Birds, Beaſts, Fiſhes, Fruits, Herbes. And if he have ſo liberally provided for us in the wilderneſſe; what ineſtimable good things are provided for us in our owne Countrie? If ſo great things in the priſon; what in the Palace Si tanta in carcere, quid in palatio? Aug. ſoliloqu.? If ſuch a calme in this world;

what in heaven? If ſuch varietie of comfort in this vale of teares, and in Chriſt his abſence; what at the mariage-feaſt? Oh when your tables are richlyVſe. furniſhed with varietie of good things from aire, earth, ſea; praiſe him, whom winds and ſea obey, and let your harts be lifted up, to meditate on thoſe future and ineſtimable good things prepared in heaven, for them that love him.
               Our Doctrine from the Myſtery is, That all creatures,1. Doct. myſt. at Chriſt his command, are readie to ſerve his Church and people, though never ſo contrarie to their nature. If the Lord rebuke; the winds will not blow, nor waters flow, nor fire burne, nor hungrie Lions devoure, nor Sunne move. If all things were not thus at command, it were impoſſible for the poore Church of Chriſt to ſubſiſt on earth, to endure ſuch cruell conſpiracies, and bloudie perſecutions of mightie Tyrants; for his poore little flocke, to dwell in the midſt of ſo many ravening Wolves; for this little Cock-boat to ride out ſuch grievous ſtormes and tempeſts: but our God, who was then in the ſhip, and rebuked winds and ſea, and they obeyed, he is now in heaven, and doth whatſoever he will 
                  Pſal. 115. 3.; and he hath promiſed to be with his, to the ends of the world 
                  Matth. 28. ult.
                  ; and that the gates of hell ſhall not prevaile against them 
                  Matth. 16. 18..
               And therefore, if in times of trouble and diſtreſſe,Vſe. 1. when it pleaſeth Chriſt to ſcourge, and fanne his Church, we be too weake in faith, and too ſtrong in feare, and bewray puſillanimity and cowardize; let us with David ingenuouſly confeſſe, This is our infirmitie 
                  Pſal. 77. 10.; not regarding the Scriptures, nor the power of God 
                  Matth. 22. 29.. Let us be aſhamed of it, and learne more

ſtedfaſtly to truſt in the Lord; as David counſelleth, Let the houſe of Iſrael trust in the Lord, hee is their helper and defender: O houſe of Aaron truſt in the Lord, he is their helper and defender; yee that feare the Lord, trust in the Lord, he is their helper and defender: he will bleſſe the houſe of Iſrael, he will bleſſe the houſe of Aaron; hee will bleſſe them that feare the Lord, both ſmall and great 
                  Pſal. 115. 9, 10..
               Yea, let this Doctrine be remembred, and it willVſe 2. wonderfully comfort, and ſtrengthen our faith in the reſurrection. For as winds and ſea obeyed Chriſt now; at the laſt day, earth and ſea ſhall heare and obey the voice of Chriſt, & yeeld up al the dead which they have received 
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                      
                     Divinae authoritati nihil immorigerum. Iuſt. Mart. quaeſt. & Reſpon. numb. 33.. Marvell not at this, for the houre is comming, in the which all that are in the graves, ſhall heare the voice of Chriſt, and ſhall come forth 
                  Iohn 5. 28.. Whereof he hath given us aſſurance, in the raiſing of Lazarus, Rulers daughter, and widowes ſonne, only with his word, Lazarus come forth, Damſell ariſe, Young-man ariſe. This was of old moſt lively repreſented to the Prophet in viſion; hee was caried by the Spirit of the Lord, and ſet downe in the middeſt of a valley, which was full of dead mens bones, and very drie; and he was commanded to propheſie upon thoſe bones, which he did, ſaying, Oh yee drie bones, heare yee the word of the Lord; and immediatly there was a noiſe, and behold a ſhaking, and the bones came together, bone to his bone, and ſinewes, and fleſh, and skinne, came upon them, and covered them 
                  Ezech. 37. 1, 2.. This (as one of the Ancient Fathers ſaith) was a moſt lively picture of the Reſurrection of the dead, which ſhall at the end of the world be effected, by the omnipotent voice of the

Sonne of Man 
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                      
                     Iuſtin. Mart. Quaeſt. & Reſp. ad Orthodox. quaeſt. 45. Auguſt. de Geneſi ad lit. lib. 10. cap. 5.. Yea, ſcarce any of the Fathers have written of the Reſurrection, but have made ſingular uſe of that Viſion. If at any time then our faith ſhall ſtagger at that Article, which (as a Divine ſaith) is ſo farre above, though not contrary, to naturall Reaſon 
                     Perkins on the Creed.: let us ſtrengthen our faith with that excellent Viſion. Yea, this was alſo repreſented to Saint Iohn in viſion, The ſea gave up the dead which were in it, and death and hell gave up the dead which were in them 
                  Revel. 20. 13.. No matter then, where we die, by ſea or land; or where we bee buried, in earth or water; theſe are all but Gods Gaolors, and ſhall faithfully bring forth all ſuch as have beene committed unto them, at that generall Aſſiſes. If thy faith ſtagger, let it reſt upon the omnipotent power of Chriſt 
                     Nulla difficultas impediet, quominus & terrae, & aquis, & igni, imperet, ut quod videtur abillis conſumptum, reddant. Pet. Bulling. Trecenſ. in Apoc. 
                           •
                        ol. 612.; and for ever remember what you have heard from this ſtorie, Chriſt rebuked the winds and the ſea, and they obeyed him. And therefore ſay, I will lay me downe, and take my rest, for the Lord ſustaineth mee 
                  Pſal. 4. ult.
                  : I know my Redeemer liveth, and I ſhall riſe againe 
                  Iob 19. 25..
               Our ſecond leſſon, from myſterie, is, That the2. Doct. myſt. maine and principall end of all Gods word and workes, is, that from conſideration thereof, man may be provoked to admire, and ſet forth the praiſe and glory of Chriſt, What manner of man is this, that hath done ſuch things? The Lord hath made all things for himſelfe (ſaith the Wiſe-man Prov. 16. 4..) And the perpetuall exerciſe of the glorified Saints in heaven, is, day and night to praiſe Chriſt for the great worke of Redemption: Thou wast ſlaine, and hast redeemed us unto God by thy bloud, out of every kindred, and tongue, and people, and nation; and made us Kings and Priests unto God 
                  Revel. 5. 9, 10..
               
                  Here then is an infallible touch-ſtone, wherebyVſe. to trie all Doctrines: and I would to God, with charitie and ſobrietie, all the matters in queſtion, betwixt the Papiſts and us, were, with meekeneſſe, brought to this touch-ſtone. Thoſe Doctrines are ever ſoundeſt, which doe give glory to Chriſt, and provoke men to admire & praiſe him, What manner of man is he! But whatſoever Doctrine, how plauſible ſoever, (yea ſuch Doctrines are moſt pleaſing to our corrupt nature) which doth ſooth up man in his owne free-will, workes, and righteouſneſſe, to make him ſtrout it, and pride himſelfe, and ſay, What manner of man am I, that have this power, and have done theſe & theſe workes! it is earthly, carnall, & ſenſuall. Heareſt thou then any doctrine delivered, which thou art not able fully to examine for the truth of it, nor to unty the knots of intricate queſtions? Yet aske, Doth this Doctrine advance the glory of Chriſt? It is good then. Doth it make man proud and haughty in himſelfe? It is naught then. And I need not any other Argument to make me reject it. As the moſt points of Popery doe: as their doctrine of Free-will, workes of righteouſneſſe meritorious, of congruitie, or condignitie, obedience to Councels, Auricular Confeſſion, Penance, and workes of ſatisfaction, the Propitiatory Sacrifice of the Maſſe, mediation of Angels and Saints, Popes Pardons, and Indulgencies, Purgatorie, &c. all draw from Chriſt, to admire themſelves, or the Pope. This rule our Saviour himſelfe hath given, He that ſpeaketh of himſelfe, ſeeketh his owne glory; but he that ſeeketh the glory of him that ſent him, he is true, and there is no unrighteouſneſſe in
                  
                  him 
                  Iohn 7. 18.. Saint Paul examined his doctrine by this touch-ſtone, and found it currant. Doe I now perſwade men or God? Doe I ſeeke to pleaſe men? Then I were not the ſervant of Chriſt. And therefore confidently pronounced, If an Angell from heaven ſhall preach otherwiſe, let him be accurſed 
                  Gal. 1. 8, 9, 10.. What doctrine ſoever doth rob Chriſt of his glory, and draw away the hearts and minds of men from marvelling, and praiſing of him (as moſt points of Popery doe 
                     Haec nota eſt Antichriſti. Aug. tom. 9. in Iohan. tract. 29 coll. 246. B.
                  ) it is accurſed, and woe to them that preach and beleeve it.
               We are now (at the laſt) come ſafely to ſhore,Concluſion. bleſſed be Chriſt our Pilot, who hath brought us thorow the tempeſt, to the haven where we would be, and hath viſibly commented from heaven, and confirmed the truth of that hath beene delivered, in the preſent ſtate of his Church. All I am, or have; what I have delivered, & you have received, I dedicate to his glory. And let every thing that hath breath, in all the parts of his Dominions, praiſe the Lord. He alſo bring us, l and all his, thorow all the ſtormes and tempeſts of this world; that in the end, (in deſpight of Satan, and all contrary winds and waves) we may ſa
                     •••
                  y arrive at the bleſſed haven of eternall happineſſe. To him, with the Father, and the holy Spirit, of us, and his whole Church, even of al the Angels and Saints in heaven, moſt gloriouſly triumphant; and all Chriſtians, men, women, and children on earth militant, be rendred (as is moſt due) all Honour, Glory, Majeſtie, Wiſdome Thankes, and Dominion▪ 
                  
                     ••
                   ever and ever. Amen.
               
            
            FINIS
            
         
      
   