
      
         
            
               
               
               Judah muſt into Captivitie. SIX SERMONS On IEREM. 7. 16. LATELY PREACHED in the Cathedrall Church of Chriſt in CANTERBVRIE, and elſewhere, by Thomas Iackſon Doctor in Divinitie, and one of the Prebends of the ſaid Church.
            
               1. COR. 10. 6.
               
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  .
            
            
               
                  AVGVST:
               
                Illa eſt poena peccati juſtiſſima, ut amittat unuſquiſque illud, quo bene uti noluit, cùm ſine ulla difficultate poſſet, ſi vellet; id eſt, ut qui ſciens recta, non facit, amittat ſcire quid rectum ſit; & qui rectum facere cùm poſſet, noluit, amittat poſſe, cùm velit.
            
            
               Optimum, aliena frui inſania.
            
            LONDON, Printed by I. Haviland for Godfrey Emondſon and Nicholas Vavaſour, and are to be ſold at their ſhop at the ſigne of the Crane in Pauls Church-yard. 1622.
            
         
         
            
            A GENERALL VIEW of the principall Doctrines, raiſed, confirmed, illuſtrated, objections removed, queſtions anſwered, Vſes made; with Application of all, to theſe times, for the benefit of Gods children.
            
               
                  Doct. 1 GOD commonly giveth faire warning, before he bring any iudgement, ſpecially on his Church and people.
            
               
                  Doct. 2 Gods people, when they ſee evident tokens of his anger, and perceive ſome great iudgement comming, doe take it to heart, and, by all good meanes, labour to pacifie him.
            
               
                  Doct. 3 Gods faithfull ſervants are very powerfull with God, and as his deare favourites, by their ſupplications and praters, to prevent, and turne away iudgements and calamities, from themſelves and Gods people.
            
               
                  Doct. 4 Such may be the ſinnes of Gods deare Church and people in generall, and of his faithfull ſervants in particular, that he will bring ſome temporall iudgement upon them, and will not heare themſelves, nor others for them, in this kinde.
         
         
            
            
            TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFVLL, AND MINE HONOVRAble friend, Sir ISACK SYDLEY, Knight Baronet, Grace, Mercy, and Peace, be multiplied.
            
            
               WOrthy Sir, I can truly ſay, my greateſt, and (in effect) only joy, in this world, is, either to be preaching, or preparing for it; fiſhing, or mending my net. That which to many is a great paine and weariſomneſſe, is to me greateſt pleaſure and content. I finde that ſaying of Saint Auguſtine moſt true; Wherein a man delighteth there is no labour; or, that labour is loved 
               In eo quod amatur, aut non 
                     〈◊〉
                  ; aut labor ipſe amatur. Auguſt.. It is a true ſaying, that Printing is a kinde of Preaching 
                  Ambo verbum praedi
                        •
                     ion, hic quidem ſcripto, ille vero voce. Clem. Alex. Stromat. lib. 1.; and though not Euangelizo, manu, & ſcript
                     ••••
                  e. Reinold. praeſat. in lib. de Rom. Eccleſ. Idolat. ſo plauſible and effectuall to perſwade;

(wanting the habit and geſture of a living man, the life of Oratorie Solet acceptior eſſe ſermo vivus, quā ſcriptus. Bern.) yet is it both of larger extent, (ſeeing a man may preach to moe with his penne, than he can with his tongue, and be further heard out of the Preſſe, than the Pulpit) the matter delivered more memorable, (affording greater leave to pauſe and conſider) and alſo of longer continuance; for a dead man may live in his bookes, and by them preach to the living, though unborne, when he dieth. I would account it a double happineſſe, if I could doe good both waies, and could truly ſay with that bleſſed and prime Apoſtle, I thinke it meet, as long as I am in this Tabernacle, to ſtir you up: Moreover I will endevour, that you may be able, after my deceaſe, to have theſe things alwaies in remembrance 
               2 Pet. 1. 13.. Oh, now is the time (if ever) for Miniſters of the Goſpell inſtantly to preach the Word 
               2 Tim. 4. 2.; and now (if ever) to preſſe the practiſe of repentance: Gods judgements are abroad in the world 
               Eſay. 
                     ••
                  . 9., and can no other way be prevented Matth. 3. 7, 8. Luke 13. 5..
            
               
As I am bound by mine office to preach the word, (and woe be to me if I doe it not 
               1 Cor. 9. 16.) ſo hath my loving maſter (whom I have now ſerved, in foure full apprentiſhips) well deſerved, that I ſhould faithfully lay out, and trade with ſuch gifts, as he hath committed to my truſt 
               1 Tim. 1. 11.; as may be for his greateſt advantage Matth. 25. 27..
            The deſire of my ſoule, is (the evening of my life drawing on, and the ſhadowes thereof ſtretching out 
               Ierem. 6. 4.) not only to be found well doing 
               Matth. 24. 46.; and to have my gray haires a Crowne, being found in the way of vertue 
               Prov. 16. 31.; but that I may bring forth more fruit in mine age 
               Pſal. 92. 14.; and my laſt workes be moe than the firſt 
               Rev. 2. 19.; that when I ſhall lay downe this earthly Tabernacle 
               2 Pet. 1. 14., (whoſe Keepers begin to tremble 
               Eccleſ. 12. 3.) and ſhall come to render an account of my Stewardſhip 
               Luke 16. 2., I may receive ſuch commendation and reward, as he hath gratiouſly promiſed Luke 19. 17..
            I doe humbly commend theſe few Sermons to your Worſhip, as a ſupply of my needfull and allowable abſence 
                  Alterius Eccleſia neceſſitatibus evocatus, minimè vobis ſolitum ſtudium dependiſſe videor. Amb. Serm. 28., from that part of the Church, to which my

goodwill is, not only to deale the Goſpell of God, but even mine owne ſoule alſo 
               1 Theſſ. 2. 8.. Accept them, both as a fruit of my love, to the good things I have obſerved in you, and deſire the increaſe of; and alſo, as a teſtification of my ſervice, and thankfulneſſe, for all ſuch manifold curteſies and encouragements, as I have received from your worthy ſelfe, and the reſt of your Chriſtian and religious family Read them at your leaſure, regard, remember, and practiſe; and Chriſt bleſſe your hearing and reading, to the furtherance of your ſalvation: to whoſe bleſſed direction and protection, I commit you and yours; and remaine ever,
            
               At your Worſhips command, THOMAS IACKSON.
            
         
         
            
            To the Reader.
            
               CHriſtian and courteous Reader, how I was affected at the appearance of the blazing Star Nov. 11. 1618.; and with the Sermon of that ſtately tongue of Heaven, and ſhaking of that fiery Rod, God and mine owne conſcience know. What I ſaid of it in my next Lecture In Chriſtchurch Cant. (being ſo iuſtly oceaſioned by the ſequell of mine ordinary Text Mat. 2. 2.) they that then heard me can teſtifie (whoſe memories I helped by reducing the effects, to theſe ſixe words; Death, Drought, Dearth, Winds, Wonders, Warres.) How anſwerably things have fallen out, may lamentably be read in the face of Chriſtendome: and how I have ever ſince endevoured (by handling of penitentiall Scriptures) to worke Repentance, the only way to prevent eminent and imminent Iudgements, they can beſt witneſſe, where (by Gods providence) I have exerciſed my miniſtery.
            Having lately, in divers Sermons, handled this excellent portion of Scripture, out of the Prophet Ieremy. 
               Ier. 7. 16. (one of thoſe whom God extraordinarily raiſed after the Captivity of the tenne Tribes, and ſent him to Iudah and Ieruſalem, to reprove them for their

ſinnes, exhort to repentance, admoniſh them to be warned by the example of their brethren, elſe to threaten them with the like Captivity) howſoever they were delivered to many, yet me thought, the matter doth ſo fitly concerne theſe daies and times, as there aroſe a great conflict in my boſome, and I could not have peace till I was reſolved, to communicate them further: that (by Gods bleſsing) I might helpe to awaken moe out of ſecurity, and provoke them, by faſting and prayer, to make up the hedge and ſtand in the gap, for the Land, that he ſhould not deſtroy it Ezech. 22. 30.. Thus, by Gods providence, theſe Sermons are come to thine eyes to read, who (it may bee) waſt farre off when they were preached by word of mouth. Regard the matter, and be not offended at the manner, though ſimple, plaine and popular: a plaine iron Key may vnlocke the doore of a golden treaſure; the evidence of the ſpirit is moſt ſeene in plainneſſe 1 Cor. 2. 4.; the Spiders web is curiouſly wrought, but unprofitable 
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  .; curious delivery well pleaſeth itching eares; my deſire is to profit, and to have the praiſe of teares, rather than of tongue Lachrymae auditorum ſint laudes tuae. Ierom. ad Nepot.: though I had never ſo great leaſure, I cannot ſtudy for words & phraſes: If I could, yet now I had no leaſure; being often, thrice in one weeke, in the Pulpit In Ch. Church, and Saint Georges Canterb. Aug. 11. 1622.. My deſire was, rather to worke upon the affections than the underſtanding; there being much more knowledge than devotion. Our forefathers diſeaſe, was ignorance; ours, impiety; they ſicke in the braine; but we, at the heart: therefore I am briefe in the Doctrines, and larger in Vſes, with Application and Exhortation.
            If it ſhall pleaſe thee to accept them kindly, read them devoutly, cenſure them charitably and lovingly,

correct ſuch errours, as may have eſcaped Author, or Printer, being ſo farre aſunder; I ſhall be encouraged, to communicate ſome of my Lectures, wherein I have taken greater paines. But if thou ſhalt read, with a purpoſe to finde matter of diſlike and reproofe, I ſhall forbeare to proceed any further in this kinde; a duty neither ſo directly commanded, nor hath the like bleſsing promiſed where it is performed, nor the like woe threatned where it is omitted; yet I friendly adviſe thee, reprehend not theſe, till thou haſt publiſhed better of thine owne Carpere vei noli noſtra: vel ede tua. Martial.. If otherwiſe, if, in Cynicall diſpoſition, thou loveſt to ſpeake all ſuch words as may doe hurt Pſal. 52. 4., and, like an idle drone, canſt not afford that others ſhould bring any honey to the Hive: I leave thee to the iudgement of the great day, and only complaine, Many diſlike, few doe like Vndique 
                     〈◊〉
                   adeſt, undique miu
                     ••
                   abeſt.. Farewell, and helpe him with thy prayers, who will not ſpare any paines to helpe thee forward in the waies of life and ſalvation.
            
               
                  From mine houſe in Chriſt-Church. Cant.
               Thomas Iackſon.
            
         
      
      
         
            
            
            Iudah muſt into Captivitie.
            SIX SERMONS LATELY PREAched in the Cathedrall Church of Chriſt in Canterbury, and elſe where, by THOMAS IACKSON, Doctor in Divinitie, and one of the Prebends of the ſaid Church.
            
            
               IEREMY 7. 16.
               Therefore pray not thou for this people, &c.
            
            
               BEſides the ordinary and ſetled Office of teaching Prieſts, whoſe lips preſerved knowledge, & the people were to ſeeke the Law at their mouthes Mal. 2. 7.; and who did every Sabbath day preach the Law in their Synagogues Act. 15. 21.; God extraordinarily raiſed

up others, and ſometimes endued thoſe Prieſts with extraordinatie revelation, whereby they were able to foreknow, and foreſhew things memorable to come, good or euill, to Gods people or ſtrangers, friends or enemies; in regard of which excellent gift and facultie, they were called Prophets: i. foretellers of things to come, or Seers 
               1 Sam 9. 9. Amos 7. 12.: both becauſe God was ſeene of them in viſions and dreams, as God himſelfe ſaid, If there bee a Prophet among you, I the Lord will make my ſelfe knowne unto him in a viſion, and will ſpeake unto him in a dreame 
               Numb. 12. 6.; and alſo, becauſe they foreſaw things to come: which gift of prophecie was given in the old Teſtament, as well as the New; and in both, to women as well as men; ſo that there were in both Teſtaments as well Propheteſſes as Prophets, though they much more rare Only five in the old, and foure in the new, or at moſt but ten in both, if the bleſſed Virgin be numbred for one. Dan. fore-notes, pag. 44.. This gift of propheſie in the old Teſtament, began with the world Luke 1. 70., for the firſt man was a Prophet, (and is regiſtred in the Catalogue 
                  Dan. ſup. p. 86.) and ended with Iohn the Baptiſt: ſo ſaith Chriſt, The Law and the Prophets continued untill Iohn the Baptiſt 
               Mat. 11. 13.; and the gift of Propheſie vnder the new Teſtament began with Chriſt, the chiefe of Prophets, and ended with Iohn, who wrote the Revelation, containing all memorable things to befall the Church of God, or enemies there of to the end of the world: For how ſoeuer I will not tye the ſpirit of God, but hee may ſtill at his pleaſure endue with this gift; and Iuſtin Martyr ſpeaketh of Prophets in his time (who lived ſome fortie yeares after the writing of the Revelation 
               
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  . Dialog. cum Tryph. p. 308.,) yet it

may ſeeme, that Iuſtin Martyr by Prophets meant but ſuch as did open and expound the ancient Prophets of God; as Saint Paul calleth the preaching of the Goſpell propheſie 1 Cor. 14.. It is true that Bellarmine doth hold, that this is the twelfth note of the true Church 
                  Lumen Propheticum, Bellar. T. 1. lib. 4. cap. 15. de not is Eccleſiae.
               ; and to that end alledgeth the Propheſies of Benedict, Bernard, Francis, forged and fabulous things. If wee ſhould joyne iſſue with him, I might better alledge from true and authentike ſtories the wonderfull propheſies of Iohn Hus, Ierome of Prague, Luther, Walter Brute, Hooper, which indeed came to paſſe; yet I take it the ordinary gift of Propheſie ceaſed in the Church with Iohn. Brocard and ſome others who profeſſed themſelves Prophets, and by written Propheſies foretold many things, the ſequell hath proclaimed them for fooles, liers, and deceivers, and that they never had any ſuch gift of God.
            For the Prophets of the old Teſtament, in ſome ages God raiſed up many, in ſome very few, in ſome none: From the time of Malachie untill Chriſt we have no writings nor knowledge of any, which was about 400. yeares at the leaſt. 
                  D. will. Synop. Cont. 2. Quaeſt. 3.. Then might the people of God complaine indeed, wee ſee not our ſignes, there is no more any Prophet 
               Pſal. 74. 9.. And this was to ſtirre up in Gods people a greater longing for Chriſt, and his forerunner Iohn the Baptiſt, of whom Malachie had ſo plainly propheſied. The times in the old Teſtament which moſt abounded with Prophets, were the times before the captivities of Iſrael & Iudah, to reprove them for their ſinnes, threaten them

with judgements, comfort the godly, and make the wicked excuſeleſſe, who contemned God and his word; this being often and moſt heavily laid to their charge, that he did riſe up early and late, ſending all his Prophets, but they would not heare Ier. 11. 7. 35. 15..
            Concerning our preſent Prophet, hee was an excellent man of God, ſanctified in his mothers wombe, and abundantly furniſhed with extraordinarie graces and gifts of God: his name was Ieremie, about the Etymon whereof, the godly learned are ſomewhat divided in opinion; two of them are good, you may chuſe whether yee will: One deriveth his name from ſuch rootes in the Hebrew tongue, as ſignifie an excellent man of Iirmijah. Ram. Jah. excelſ. Dom. Ieron. God; and ſo was he indeed in regard of ſanctifying grace and propheticall gifts, and is by a learned man propoſed to Preachers of the Goſpell, as being an admirable Preacher Concionator admirabilis. Keckerm. de Rhetorica Eccleſiaſtica cap. ult.. Another deriveth his name from ſuch a roote as ſignifieth to caſt off; Iirmijah, ramah Iah, the reject of the Lord Projectio Domini. Iſidor. Pel
                     •
                  uſiot. Chryſoſt. diſcipulus.; and ſo he was in regard of his condition, for of all the Prophets of God hee ſuffered moſt, and was moſt calamitous 
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  . Caſtro Iſag. in Ier.
               . Me thinketh when I reade his Storie and Propheſie, hee is even another Paul, and might ſay of the Prophets, as hee did of the Apoſtles; Are they Hebrewes? ſo am I: are they Iſraelites? ſo am I: are they of the ſeed of Abraham? ſo am I: are they the Prophets of God? I am more: in labours more abundant, in ſtripes above meaſure, in priſons more frequent, in deaths often 2 Cor. 11. 22.. So much concerning his name. His Tribe Levi; his father Hilkiah a Prieſt; his

countrie Anathoth, one of the Cities allotted to the Levites in Beniamin 
               Ioſh. 21. 18.; his Propheſie one of the greateſt; and his continuance long, for the ſpace of forty yeares 
                  Dan. fore-notes, cap. 11. pag. 60..
            But that which is preciſely regiſtred, and The whole time betwixt the captivity of the ten Tribes, and of Iudah, was 130. yeares, towards the latter end whereof our Prophet was ſent, and ſo continued till the captivity. Joſep. Ant. lib. 10. cap. 11. moſt materiall for you to take knowledge of, is the time when he propheſied, which is ſaid to begin in the thirteenth year of Ioſiah King of Iudah, and to hold on in the dayes of Iehoiachim and Zedekiah, to the carrying away of Ieruſalem into captivitie Ier. 1. 1, 2, 3.. So then this Prophet was raiſed of God, and ſent to Iudah and Ieruſalem, after that the ten Tribes were carried away into captivity 2 Kin. 17. in the dayes of Hoſheah, by Shalmanaſ
                        •
                     r.
               , in a loving deſire to ſave that Citie and Temple, yet withall to reprove them for their ſinnes, yea & to threaten them with captivitie alſo, if they repented not. In which his Miniſterie he was ſeconded by Ezechiel, Ioel, Sophonie, Habacuk, and others who alſo labored in the ſame argument with him.
            Oh ſee the goodneſſe of God, that by ſo Vſe. many his Prophets did thus plainly foreſhew their miſerie, reprove their ſinnes, the cauſe thereof, that by repentance they might have repented and prevented it. But ſee the obſtinacie of the Iewes, who being thus fairely and roundly dealt withall, and warned by the example of Gods judgement on their brethren the ten Tribes, now carried into captivity; they would take no warning, nor be reformed, but proceeded from evill to worſe, extremely abuſing Gods Prophets, and ſpecially our Prophet Ieremie: wherefore at the laſt God ſware he would make them deſolate,

revealed unto Ieremie, and bade him propheſie their carrying into captivity, that God would do to Ieruſalem as he had done to Shiloh, and ſerue Iudah as he had done Ephraim, in the verſe immediately before: yea and to aſſure him that it ſhould be, to remove the peoples odiū
                from him, and to Conſiderations prevent diſcouragement in him, in the words of my text he giveth a ſtrait and expreſſe charge, not to pray for them, Therefore pray not for them, for I will not heare thee▪  q. d. Oh my ſervant, ſonne of man, thou ſeeſt how wicked and ſinfull this people The ſum of it. is, how neither my judgements on their brethren, nor thy Miniſtery doth them any good, but they grow worſe and worſe; I therefore let thee know, that I am ſtedfaſtly purpoſed to puniſh them, and in the ſame kind I haue done their brethren, and lay this houſe waſte wherein they ſo vainly truſt: and leſt thou ſhouldeſt thinke this ſentence mutable, I bid thee goe not about to hinder me or croſſe me by thy prayer, for it ſhall ſtand: yea leſt they ſhould conceive a great fault in thee, that thou art wanting in love, and the teſtification thereof by prayer, let them know, and write it downe, that I have forbidden thee to pray for them; yea laſtly, leſt thou ſhouldeſt poure out many prayers and ſupplications, and cry to me for them, with ſighes, and grones, and teares, and be diſcouraged becauſe I heare thee not: for theſe conſiderations, and to prevent all theſe inconveniences, take knowledge of it, I charge thee, pray not, nor cry, nor make interceſsion for them, for I will not heare thee.
            
            
               
Oh an heavie charge: I know not how it moved them, Application. but I am ſure to reade it is enough to caſt us all into a Balthazars fit, make our countenance pale, looſe the joynts of our loynes, and make our knees knocke one againſt another Dan. 5. 6.: For doth it not concerne us as much as them? Doth not the Apoſtle ſay, All holy Scriptures are written for our learning 
               Rom. 15. 4.; and, Are not examples of old, written to admoniſh us on whom the ends of the world are come 
               1 Cor. 10. 6.? Aſſuredly it may be your owne caſe, if England will not repent but provoke the Lord, truſt in vaine and lying words, and not be warned by the fearfull judgements of God upon Bohemia, Palatinate, and other places: hee may ſweare in his juſt anger to be avenged, and not heare his ſervants though they pray, and cry for it. I am no Ieremie, no Prophet to threaten the like calamitie to you that is fallen upon your brethren, but as one of Gods poore ſervants, deſirous to be faithfull, and to be free from the blood of all men, and to finde mercy in time of judgement; I come unto you in the name of the Lord, and from this Scripture to acquaint you with what I have received from the Lord, not by viſion or dreame, but by revelation from the Word written, plainly to lay before you your ſinnes, and to call upon you earneſtly for repentance, and a Chriſtian uſe of Gods juſt judgements both abroad and at home, leſt in the end 
                  Aggravation. That I may ſay of it as Iacob did of Bethel, How fearfull is this place? Gen. 32. it be too late to pray, and cry for you: and the more to move your attention, let mee tell you, this is one of the fearfulleſt charges that we reade

in all the Scriptures of God, and a preparing of way to execution of one of the heavieſt judgements of God upon his Church and people; yea it is (at leaſt in appearance) contrary to as many comforts as there are words in it. As firſt, call on me in the day of thy trouble, and I will heare and deliver 
               1 
               thee 
               Pſal. 50. 15.; Oh what a comfort is that, that though many troubles may befall Gods people and ſervants, yet he hath commanded them to call on him, and hath promiſed to heare and deliver them. But this is fearfull, God forbiddeth now, pray not. David ſaith, that all fleſh ſhall come to 2 God Pſal. 65. 2. by prayer, & that there is no reſpect of perſons with God; but the poore may as confidently pray to God as the rich, and the baſe as well as the noble: but this is fearefull, that now his Prophet, his ſanctified Prophet may not come to him by prayer, but is expreſly forbidden, pray not thou. No prayers ſo acceptable unto God as thoſe that are made unto him for his Church and people. 3 
               David biddeth us pray for the peace of Ieruſalem, and for encouragement ſaith, they ſhall proſper that love it: and therefore preſently falleth to practiſe, peace be within thy wals 
               Pſal. 122. 6.. But here hee expreſly forbiddeth his Prophet to pray for Iudah and Ieruſalem, pray not thou for this people. The King of 4 
               Ninivie commanded both man and beaſt to put on ſackcloth, and cry mightily unto God Iona. 3. 8.; and was perſwaded God would heare even the cry of bruit beaſts: and he did ſo. A moſt comfortable ſtory. But here the Prophet is expreſly forbid, to lift up any cry for them; Oh that is fearfull;

that God will heare no prayers, though made with ſighes and groanes, (which was Moſes crying, Exod. 14. 13.) nor with lamentation and teares (which was Davids crying Pſal. 6. 8.) no cry will now be heard, yea no cry muſt now be made, that is fearefull. The Lord ſometime did complaine, I ſought for a man among them that ſhould make up the hedge, and ſtand up in 
               5. 
               the gap before me, for the land, that I ſhould not deſtroy it, but I found none 
               Ezech. 22. penult.
               . Oh that is comfortable, that though the ſinnes of the people being great, and God ſayd he would deſtroy, that yet he did even ſeeke for a good man, to ſtand up by prayer in the gap, to turne away his wrath, and is ſorry that he found not ſuch an one: but loe, here is an holy Prophet ready to ſtand up in the gap, and hee is expreſly forbidden to doe ſo, (Make no interceſsion to me.) Againe, Call on me, and 
               6. 
               I will anſwer; cry, and I will ſay, here I am 
               Eſay 58.: Oh that is comfortable, that God is more ready to heare and helpe, than his people are to call upon him. But here God telleth the Prophet, he will not heare him; oh this is fearefull! As then Iacob awaking out of his dreame, ſaid, How dreadfull is this place? this is none other, but the gate of Heaven 
               Gen. 28. 17.; ſo may I ſay, when I muſe upon theſe words, Oh how dreadfull is this text! this is none other, but the gate of deſtruction; Oh ſinne, oh ſinne, whither leadeſt thou? how vile and odious a thing art thou! that bindeſt Gods hands, that he cannot helpe; ſtoppeſt Gods eares, that he cannot heare; ſhutteſt his eyes, that he cannot ſee; turneſt compaſſions into cruelties; ſmiling countenance,

into frownes; promiſes, into threatnings; mercies, into judgements; and of a loving Father, makeſt an angry Iudge! Oh wofull, the condition of Gods people now! That it may not be yours, be ware of their ſins. And this is the maine marke I aime at, both in the choyce and handling of this Scripture; which that I may the more orderly and profitably doe, I will firſt give you the ſenſe of the words, and then raiſe the Doctrines, with their ſeverall Uſes and Applications: and becauſe they are many, and very uſefull, let me ſtand a little longer, in the inlightning of this darke Scripture, becauſe upon the true underſtanding thereof, as on an immovable foundation, the enſuing Doctrines are raiſed and builded.
            The queſtion then is, whether this be an abſolute Senſe. interdiction or no? whether God meant, as the words ſound, that indeed the Prophet muſt not pray for them? if he did, it were a ſinne of diſobedience againſt Gods revealed will, or no?
            I anſwer, It was an abſolute prohibition, as the letters ſound, ſo as if hee had prayed for them, hee had ſinned; yet with this qualification, that he is forbidden to pray for them, that they may not be carried into captivitie. Their captivitie in Babylon was the burthen of his propheſie, and againſt that he may not pray Eſt ſpeciale interdictum. Piſcat. in locum.; as a judicious Divine ſaith on the place, hee might not pray for the ſtate of the kingdome Non debuit proſtatu regni or are. Calv.; hee might, and doubtleſſe did, pray for many bleſſings of God, yea for greater bleſſings than this was, or could be; hee might pray to God to give them

knowledge, faith, repentance, remiſſion of ſinnes, redemption from eternall captivitie; he might pray to God, to give them comfort and patience in their captivitie, and to ſend them deliverance, according to promiſe; he might pray for deliverance from ſome other judgements, as famine, or peſtilence; but to pray for the ſtate of the kingdome, that it might ſtand and flouriſh, and the enemie not prevaile, ſo he might not pray: God was reſolved, for their ſinnes, they ſhould goe into captivitie, as their brethren before them had done. That this is the true ſenſe, ſeemeth to mee ſufficiently confirmed by theſe foure Reaſons.
            Firſt, after this time, we doe not reade that ever 1. Reaſon. Hee did not pray for them. the Prophet did pray for them. It may be, ſome that are well acquainted with this propheſie, will ſay, I failed in memory, for he prayed, and prayed moſt earneſtly for them, ſaying, We acknowledge, ô Lord, our wickedneſſe, and the iniquitie of our fathers, for we have ſinned againſt thee, doe not abhorre us, for thy names ſake, doe not diſgrace the throne of thy glory, remember, and doe not breake thy covenant with us 
               Ierem. 14. 20.: Could there be a more powerfull and patheticall prayer made than this? I anſwer, that the very next words to that prayer, the laſt verſe of that chapter, doth declare, that at that time there was a great famine, by reaſon of drought; and for remove of that judgement, and for the bleſſing of raine he prayed, ſaying, Is there any among the vanities of the Gentiles, that can cauſe raine? or can the Heavens give ſhowers? art not thou he, ô Lord our God? therefore we will wait upon thee. But (I ſay againe)

he never prayed, that the people might not goe into captivitie, which proveth that this was an abſolute prohibition.
            Yea, for further fortification of this Reaſon, take notice, that he was ſo farre from praying for Fortification. their deliverance, that, occaſioned from the great wrongs they offered him, by the motion of Gods Spirit, he doth moſt fearefully imprecate them, Poure out their bloud by the force of the ſword, let their wives be bereaved of their children, and be widowes, let their men be put to death, and their young men ſlaine by ſword in battaile 
               Ierem. 18. 21.. And againe, Let me ſee thy vengeance upon them, for unto thee have I opened my cauſe 
               Ierem. 20. 12.. Thus humbly did the Prophet ſubſcribe to Gods revealed decree, and zealouſly pray for the execution of it, though moſt contrary to his naturall deſire: neither did ever any thing ſo much grieve and afflict him, as his Lamentations beare witneſſe.
            If any object, that herein the Prophet was wanting Obiect. in love:
            No, no, we muſt love one another, but it muſt Sol. be in God: Abraham muſt, but love his ſonne Iſaack in God: if God command him to take and ſacrifice him, he muſt riſe earely Gen. 22., and go as chearfully about that, as if he went to his marriage: Eli muſt not love himſelfe, nor his ſonnes, but in God, if hee crave ſuch a meſſage againſt him and his houſe, as whoſoever heareth it, would make his eares to tingle; It is the Lord (ſaith Eli) let him doe what ſeemeth him good 
               1 Sam. 3. 18.: Hath not Chriſt taught us to pray, that Gods will may be done Matth. 6.? This

Prophet loved Gods people dearely; and appealeth unto God, Remember that I ſtood before thee, to ſpeake good for them, and to turne away thy wrath from them 
               Ierem. 18. 20. Gods will be done with us, and on us.: but when God forbiddeth him to pray, he muſt either hold his peace, or pray for execution of Gods judgements.
            Secondly, the Prophet ever perſwaded the King, Princes, and people, without any reſiſtance 2. Reaſon. Hee ever perſwaded them to yeeld. to yeeld themſelves to the King of Babylon; ſaying, Thus ſaith the Lord, behold I ſet before you the way of life, and way of death: he that abideth in the Citie ſhall die by the ſword, by famine, and by peſtilence; but he that goeth out, and falleth to the Caldeans that beſiege you, he ſhall live, and his life ſhall be unto him for a prey; for I have ſet my face against this Citie, for evill, and not for good, it ſhall be given into the hands of the King of Babylon, and he ſhall burne it with fire, ſaith the Lord Ierem. 21. 9.. The like he counſelled Zedekiah the King, Bring your necks under the yoke of the King of Babylon, and ſerve him and his people, and live; why will ye die, thou and thy people, by the ſword, by the famine, and by the peſtilence 
               Ierem. 27. 8. 12.? And as he adviſed the King and people to yeeld themſelves; ſo he wrote a letter to thoſe that were carried away captives, requiring them in the name of the Lord to be quiet, and to pray to the Lord for the peace of the Citie Ierem. 29. 7.; which ſheweth, that Ieremie well knew that the Lords purpoſe was abſolute, and his prohibition to pray for them ſo too.
            If any man ſhall aske me, whether Gods threatnings Quest. be not conditionall?
            
               
I anſwer, that many of Gods threatnings of Anſw. temporall puniſhments are conditionall: ſo ſaith God by our Prophet, At what inſtant I ſhall ſpeake concerning a nation, and concerning a kingdome to plucke up, pull downe, and deſtroy it; if that nation againſt whom I have pronounced, turne from their evill, I will repent of the evill I have thought to doe unto them 
               Ierem. 18. 7, 8.. It was the caſe of Ninivie, againſt which Ionah, by commiſſion from the Lord, pronounced, Yet fortie dayes, and Ninivie ſhall be deſtroyed 
               Ionah 3.: yet Ninivie repenting, Ninivie was not then deſtroyed, God changed his revealed will and ſentence, the propheſie fell, but the Citie fell not; yea, the ſame puniſhment, which at the firſt threatning is conditionall, yet afterwards may become abſolute and unavoidable; as the deſtruction of Sodome, conditionally threatned, when as at Abrahams ſuit the Lord was brought from fiftie to ten, If there be found but ten righteous perſons in Sodome, I will ſpare it for the ten ſake 
               Gen. 18. penult.
               : but becauſe they could not be found, the deſtruction was abſolutely threatned, when the Angell ſaid to Lot, We will deſtroy this place, the Lord hath ſent us to deſtroy it 
               Gen. 19. 13.; and if God had not beene mercifull to pull Lot away, he had beene deſtroyed in it. Such was the caſe of this people. If when Ieremie began his miniſterie, reproved them for their ſinnes, and threatned them with captivitie, they had humbled themſelves, and repented in ſackcloth The beginning of his propheſie is full of good counſell, & comforts. and aſhes, it might have been prevented 
                  He called, O Ieruſalem waſh thine heart from wickedneſſe, that thou mayeſt be ſaved. Ierem. 4. 14.
                  
                     Turne ye backe-ſliding children, and I will heale you. Ierem. 3. 22.
               : but growing worſe and worſe, and unto their former ſinnes, adding this of extremely abuſing

the Prophet, the Lord grew to be reſolute, they ſhould into captivitie as well as their brethren, he revealed it unto his Prophet, and forbade him to pray for them, which he did, and only counſelled them to yeeld themſelves into their enemies hands.
            Thirdly, by way of prevention, God ſatisfied his Prophet, in what he foreſaw might be objected. 3. Reaſon. Prevention of objections. The Prophet might object, that hereby both his juſtice and truth might be queſtioned; he ſatisfieth the Prophet in both: firſt he cleareth his juſtice, and that two wayes; firſt, by declaring the greatneſſe of this peoples ſinne; (whereof you Iuſtice. ſhall more hereafter) for a taſte, looke but the next verſe following my text: Seeſt thou not what they 
               1. Declaration of their ſinnes. 
               doe in the Cities of Iudah, and ſtreets of Ieruſalem? The children gather wood, and the fathers kindle the fire, and the women knead their dough to bake cakes to the Queene of Heaven: Therefore my furie ſhall be poured out on ſuch a people unworthie to be prayed for. Is it not a juſt thing to ſend ſuch into captivitie?
            Secondly, he declareth his ſoveraigne and abſolute 2. Declaration of abſolute ſoveraigntie. authoritie, over all people and nations, ſo as without controll, he may juſtly build and plant, or pull downe and deſtroy: which he ſhewed in the pottershouſe, in whoſe hands a veſſel that he made of clay being marred, he made it another veſſell, as ſeemed good to the potter Ierem. 18. 1, 6.; then came the word of the Lord, ſaying, O houſe of Iſrael, cannot I doe with you, as this potter? behold, as the clay is in the hands of the potter, ſo are yee in mine hands.
               
The clay is not beholden to the potter, for it had being before; and the clay never offended the potter, yet the potter may make what veſſell he will, and the veſſell not complaine, Why haſt thou made me thus? But we are beholding to God for our being, and we have ſinned againſt him, and may he not doe with us as pleaſeth him? This ſinfull people ſhall into captivitie, the Prophet muſt not pray for them, yet is God herein moſt righteous and juſt. Yea, but harken how the Prophet 2. Gods truth. bemoaneth Gods truth, ſaying, Ah Lord God, the Prophets ſay unto them, yee ſhall not ſee the ſword, but you ſhall have an aſſured peace in this place. Then ſayd the Lord, the Prophets propheſie lies in my name, I ſent them not, neither have I commanded them, neither ſpoken unto them, they propheſie a falſe viſion and divination, the deceit of their owne heart, but I will bring the ſword, yea and by the ſword ſhall thoſe falſe Prophets alſo be conſumed 
               Ierem. 14. 13.; ſpeake unto the people, and charge them, that they harken not to the Prophets, Diviners, Dreamers, Inchaunters, and Sorcerers, which ſay, ye ſhall not ſerve the King of Babel, for they propheſie a lie unto you 
               Ier. 27. 9, 10, 14.. Thus God preventeth his Prophet, and declareth that this judgement is well deſerved, and ſtandeth with juſtice and truth, and would have the Prophet to reſt therein, and not pray for them.
            Laſtly, though many temporall judgements be 4. Manner of revealing his purpoſe. denounced conditionally, yet that this is abſolute, and that he meaneth indeed, his Prophet ſhould 1. Aſſeveration. not pray for them, in this may be gathered from the manner of his revealing of this purpoſe, which

was firſt with many words of moſt earneſt and vehement aſſeveration, ſaying, The land ſhall be deſolate, the earth ſhall mourne, and the heavens above be blacke, I have ſpoken it, I have purpoſed it, and will not repent, neither will I turne backe from it 
               Ierem. 4. 28.. That muſt needs ſtand, which the Lord thus avoucheth; yet to make it, if it were poſſible, more ſure, the Lord hath ſworne it, I ſweare by my ſelfe, (ſaith 
               2. Oath.
                
               the Lord) this houſe ſhall become a deſolation 
               Ierem. 22. 5.. An oath (ſaith the Apoſtle) is amongst men, an end of all ſtrife: and God that he might fully declare the immutabilitie of his counſell, having no greater to ſweare by, hath ſworne by himſelfe Heb. 6. 13, 17.. Loe, how the Apoſtle ſaith, an oath declareth the immutabilitie of his counſell. God never ſware, but hee performed it. He hath ſworne, and will not repent (ſaith David 
               Pſal. 110. 4.) if God ſweare, he will never repent of it; he may change his ſentence, but never reverſe Mutare ſententiam, ſecundum voluntatem ſigni. his oath: yea, God ſwearing that Moſes ſhould not enter into the promiſed land, though he repented of his ſinne, and moſt earneſtly intreated this favour, could not obtaine, but received a kinde of rebuke, Let it ſuffice, ſpeake no more to me of this matter, Deut. 3. 28. He cannot lie, much leſſe forſweare himſelfe, he hath ſeldome ſworne, but ever made it good. Seeing then God revealed to Concluſion. his Prophet, that for their ſins they ſhould be carried into captivitie, and with an oath affirmed it, it muſt needs be granted, the decree and ſentence were abſolute, and that, according to the letter of the prohibition, the Prophet muſt not pray for them in this: neither did hee, but ſubmitted

himſelfe to Gods holy will and pleaſure.
            The maine objection (which I know of) that may be made either againſt this ſenſe delivered, or Obiect. the practice of our Prophet, is a like Prohibition to Moſes: which yet was but conditionall, for he preſently prayed and prevailed; ſo we reade, that in Moſes abſence, the people cauſing Aaron to make a golden calfe, which they worſhipped, God told Moſes what a great ſinne they had committed, and addeth, Now therefore let me alone, that I may conſume them, and I will make of thee a great nation; and Moſes beſought the Lord, and he repented of the evill which he thought to doe to his people 
               Exod. 32. 10.. I anſwer, that betwixt that to Moſes, and this to Ieremie, 
               1. Forme.
                there is a great difference; for howſoever that be delivered to Moſes in the Imperative as well as this, yet that carrieth the face of a milde inſtruction, and intimateth, that it was in Moſes power to give leave, or to let God: ſo as Moſes receiveth thereby encouragement to pray. What is it for God to ſay, Let me alone, but to make him bold to pray 
                  Quid eſt, Dimitte, niſi deprecandi anſam praebere? Gregor.
               ; but this charge is with waightie words, Thou ſhalt not pray, nor crie, nor make interceſsion, for I will not heare thee.
            
            Secondly, Moſes was but once bid let God alone; 2. Repetition.
                but our Prophet was thrice expreſly forbidden to pray for them Ierem. 7. 16. 11. 14. 14. 11.. Now if Ioſeph told Pharaoh his dreame was doubled, becauſe the thing was eſtabliſhed of God; he will bring it to paſſe Gen. 41. 32.; how much more may I ſay, this charge is tripled to his Prophet, to ſignifie that he meaneth good ſooth, their captivitie is decreed and eſtabliſhed

of God, and he will bring it to paſſe.
            Thirdly and laſtly, God threatned to Moſes, he would utterly conſume the people, yea, and blot 
               3. Threatning.
                
               out their name from under heaven 
               Deut. 9. 14.; that God could not doe, but much diſhonour his name; and therefore Moſes urgeth in his prayer, wherefore ſhould the Aegyptians ſpeake and ſay, For miſchiefe did he bring them out, to ſlay them in the mountaines, and to conſume them from the face of the earth. Againe, to doe ſo, were to breake promiſe and oath, which he had made with their fathers, and therefore Moſes doth ſpecially urge that, Remember Abraham, Iſaack, and Iſrael thy ſervants, to whom thou ſwareſt by thine owne ſelfe, and ſaydſt unto them, I will multiply your ſeed, as the ſtarres of heaven, and all this land that I have ſpoken of, will I give unto your ſeed, and they ſhall inherit it 
               Deut. 32. 12, 13.. So that what face ſoever it carried, Moſes ſaw well enough, God did not meane he ſhould not pray for them. But the caſe is here altered; firſt, Gods glorie is no way endangered, no more than it was by the captivitie of the ten Tribes; nay, this was greatly for his glorie; firſt, that all nations might ſee what a juſt God he is, who will not forbeare to puniſh ſinne, no not in his owne people; for many nations ſhall ſay, Wherefore hath the Lord done thus to this great Citie? and they ſhall anſwer, Becauſe they have forſaken the covenant of the Lord their God, and worſhipped other Gods, and ſerved them 
               Ierem. 22. 9.; but his deliverance of them out of captivitie ſhould be much more for his glorie, for hee meant that ſhould be more eminent and glorious

than their deliverance out of Aegypt was, ſo as after that time it ſhould be no more ſaid, The Lord liveth that brought up the children of Iſrael out of Aegypt; but the Lord liveth that brought up the children of Iſrael from the land of the North, and from all the lands whither he had driven them 
               Ierem. 16. 14.. See how greatly their captivitie ſhould be for his glorie. Neither was this againſt any promiſe or oath: for hee had already performed them, he had caſt out the Heathen, and planted Iſrael in. Yea rather herein God was as good as his word, for hee had threatned them, if they were rebellious and diſobedient, he would give them into the hands of their enemies, and they ſhould reigne over them Deut. 28. 48.. Thus I hope, by conference of Scriptures, I have ſufficiently cleared the ſenſe of this, viz. that it was an abſolute prohibition 
                  Abſolutè & definitè imperaſſe Jeremiae, ne oraret. Barrad. Itinerar. lib. 4. cap. 19. pag. 379.; and therefore, howſoever the Prophet was exceedingly afflicted; to foreſee in ſpirit, and afterwards to ſee with the eyes of his bodie the captivitie of the Iewes, and deſolation of the Citie and Temple, neither was hee ever wanting to give them good counſell, and pray in other caſes for them; yet in this, he might not; in this he did not. Now it followeth to build doctrines, for Inſtruction, Conſolation, and Reprehenſion; and by application to make them uſefull unto us: which doctrines naturally ariſing, are many, and namely theſe.
            Firſt, God commonly giveth warning, before 1. Doct.
                he bring any judgement upon any place or perſons, ſpecially on his Church or people, or on any place, where his people are. This doctrine will

be ſufficiently proved, both from poſitive and exemplarie Scriptures. Thus ſaith the Prophet, Surely the Lord God will doe nothing, but hee revealeth his ſecrets unto his ſervants the Prophets 
               Amos 3. 7.. Before God brought the floud, God revealed it to Noah 
               Gen. 6. 13., who by word of mouth, and building the Arke, gave warning to the old world, for 120. yeeres 1 Pet. 3. 20.: before hee ſent fire and brimſtone to conſume the Cities in the plaine, hee revealed it to Abraham, and then to Lot, and his children Gen. 18. 17. 19. 12, 13.: before the judgements were executed on Pharaoh and Aegypt, God revealed it to Moſes and Aaron 
               Exod. 3. 19, 20.: before he deſtroyed Ninivie, he gave knowledge thereof to Ionah, and he proclaimed, Yet fortie dayes, and Ninivie ſhall be deſtroyed 
               Ionah 4. 10.. The Iewes ſhall not be deſtroyed, but the day and time ſhall be firſt proclaimed, that Gods people may betake themſelves to faſting and prayer. Before the captivitie of the ten Tribes, God revealed it to many of his Prophets, as Iſaiah, Iehu, Eliah, Michaiah, Obadiah, Hoſheah, Amos, Ioel: that, as before a great ſtorme the cocks crow loud and thicke; ſo before this great judgement, the Prophets threatned, and cried loud and ſhrill; before the captivitie of Iudah and Beniamin, many other Prophets knew of it, and were ſent to threaten it, as Eſay, Ezechiel, Zephanie, and our Prophet, who moſt plainly told them, for how long it ſhould continue. How were the Iewes abundantly warned, before their finall deſtruction and diſperſion? how is Babylon fore warned? how thoſe golden Churches in Aſia Minor? how are wee all forewarned

of the deſtruction of the world by fire? how are we all forewarned of the deſtruction of the wicked in hell fire? yea, what judgement can befall us, but our conſciences muſt needs teſtifie, that ſome way or other, yea many wayes, God hath given us warning? All which doe ſufficiently confirme our doctrine, that commonly God doth give warning, before hee bring any great judgement upon his people, or any place where his people are. Only this is to be lamented, that people will take no warning. As it was in the dayes of Noah, ſo ſhall it be at the end of the world, Matth. 24. The men of the old world had warning faire enough, and yet knew nothing, would know nothing: wee have warning enough, but moſt will take no warning, but walke on ſtill, and will know nothing, till the heavens be all on a flaming fire, the trumpet ſound, yea hell fire ſeaze upon them; and then it is too late.
            You will aske me, by what meanes doth God 2. Meanes.
                give people ſuch warning?
            I anſwer: the meanes are of two ſorts, viz. ordinarie, and extraordinarie; the ordinarie meanes, is the miniſterie of his ſervants: as of Noah to the old world, Lot to Sodome, Moſes and Aaron to Aegypt, Prophets to Iudah and Iſrael, Chriſt and his Apoſtles to the Iewes, Ionah to Ninivie, (as you have heard) Meanes extraordinarie are divers; as terrible ſignes in Sunne, Moone, and Stars; earth-quakes, thunders, flaſhes of lightning, raging windes, roaring of ſeas; of all which, though ſome naturall reaſons may bee probably

rendred, yet being extraordinarie, they doe proclaime, in their kinde, Gods anger, and threaten ſome judgement. So Chriſt ſaid, before his comming to judgement, there ſhould be ſignes in Sunne, Moone, Stars, Aire, Earth, Sea, ſo as mens hearts ſhould faile with feare, Luc. 21. 25. Ioſephus and others report ſtrange things, before the finall deſtruction of Ieruſalem, as a dreadful blazing ſtar, fearfull ſights, of armies of men, chariots and horſes in the aire, a voice heard in the Temple, Migremus hinc, Let us goe hence. But of all preſages, that is moſt remarkable, which Ioſephus hath, De bello Iudaico, lib. 7. cap. 12. De prodigijs & praeſagijs: One Ieſus the ſonne of Ananus, foure yeeres before the Romanes came, when the Citie was in great peace and opulencie, hee began to cry up and downe in the Citie, and ſpecially in the Temple, and that upon their moſt ſolemne feſtivities, Woe, woe to Ieruſalem: and being privately by many, and afterwards publikely by Magiſtrates, both rebuked, puniſhed, and threatned, to hold his peace; yet he held on, ſo long as he was able day and night, till in the end the enemies came, and hee walking upon the wals, and crying as before, Woe to the people, woe to Ieruſalem, and woe to the Temple, at the laſt he alſo cryed out, And woe to me. At which words, lapis tormento miſſus, a ſtone being throwne by ſome warlike inſtrument then in uſe, it hit him in the head: ſo ended he his life and preſage; which ſome accounted to proceed from divine inſtinct.
            God often gave them into the hands of their

enemies, and often delivered them, and everie deliverance was as a warning-peece, to ſinne no more, leſt he would deliver them no more. Everie mercie abuſed is a warning-peece, and threatneth judgement, Woe to Capernaum, which had beene exalted to heaven. Likewiſe leſſer judgements (when people doe not repent) doe threaten greater, as everie leſſer plague in Aegypt did threaten a greater in the heele of it, according to Gods threatning, If for theſe things thou wilt not repent, I will puniſh thee ſeven times more, Levit. 26. Now Iudah and Ieruſalem muſt to it, becauſe they would not be warned by the calamitie of their brethren. Deliverances from evils not thankfully received, nor godly uſe made of them, threaten judgements: yea, mercies abuſed threaten judgement: and the greater mercies abuſed, the greater judgements threatned; loe theſe are the meanes, beſides many others, for it is not poſſible to reckon up all.
            Thirdly, would you know the Reaſons of this 3. Reaſons. the Lords manner of dealing, why he doth commonly warne and threaten, before hee bring a judgment? The reaſons are principally theſe three. Firſt, in regard of himſelfe: Secondly, in regard of the godly: Thirdly, in regard of the wicked.
            For the firſt; This he doth, to declare the riches of his mercie; how ſlow to judgement, and loth to 1. Reaſon.
                avenge himſelfe he is; and therefore will not ſmite any, before he diſcharge a warning-peece, that all the world may give him glorie for his mercie, goodneſſe, and (when no meanes will ſerve) moſt righteous judgements.
            
               
Secondly, for his peoples ſake, that being threatned and warned, they teſtifying their faith and 2. Reaſon.
                repentance, by faſting and prayer, may either turne away Gods wrath, or finde comfort in the day of calamitie.
            The third & laſt reaſon is in regard of the wicked, that they being threatned and warned, and taking 3. Reaſon.
                none, but flattering themſelves, lulling themſelves aſleepe in ſecuritie, winking with their eyes, becauſe they will not ſee Gods judgements, perſwading themſelves there is no ſuch matter, eſteeming the Prophets words but as winde, accounting of all ſignes from heaven and earth, but as proceeding from naturall cauſes, & laughing at thoſe as ſilly fooles, that make any divine uſe, or are afraid of Gods anger and judgements; Put the evill day farre off, ſay peace, peace; having made a covenant with death, and are at an agreement with hell, that all ſuch wickedneſſe may be cut off, and periſh without excuſe. Lo theſe are the reaſons.
            Now if wee make Application, who ſeeth not that the hand of God is verie heavie upon divers Application. of the reformed Churches abroad, in famine, war, and all the miſeries that accompanie it. But I demand with the Apoſtle, Have they not heard? were they not warned? did theſe judgements come upon them, like a flaſh of lightning, no foreknowledge of them? Yes, yes, they had the faithfull ſervants of God, who zealouſly reproved their profanation of Sabbaths, taking of Gods name in vaine, drunkenneſſe, whoredome, pride, covetouſneſſe, and foretold the judgements of God

without repentance: They ſaw that terrible blazon, and heard that ſtately tongue of Heaven Magniloqua lingua Coeli., which preached theſe things to them that had eares to heare Matth. 24. 25.. To come to our ſelves, we Gods Miniſters have told you of theſe things before. What have wee told you? When and how God will puniſh this land? No, we could not tell you ſo, but we have faithfully told you, the ſinnes of this land crie unto God for vengeance, God is a juſt God, and if ſinne be not repented of, hee will puniſh; there is no corner of the land, but for many yeeres hath rung with theſe warnings. We ſaw alſo that prodigious ſtarre, we heard that Lecture, (I feare you will forget it.) God hath moſt marvellouſly delivered us from forraine Invaſion, and fierie furnace of Gunpowder treaſon. The windes have roared, and ſea broken in, to the deſtruction of whole valleyes, and diſpeopling of many pariſhes; the laſt winter hath beene long and extreme, the preſent ſpring backward, the fruits of the earth in great meaſure deſtroyed, a famine ſuddenly come upon us: are not all theſe as warning peeces? And unto them all adde this, as the greateſt of all, that by the calamitie of our neighbours he doth admoniſh us to repent, who (for any thing that I know) are as great ſinners as they; ſo as if God ſhould bring upon us a heavier judgement than he hath done upon them, yet were it moſt juſt, our conſciences muſt needs witneſſe, we have had warning abundantly: But above all, bleſſed be God, who hath given, and doth daily give us ſuch faire and full warning of

the laſt judgement and deſtruction of all the Reprobate in hell fire, oh beware of them.
            The ſecond Doctrine is, that all Gods true ſervants, when they ſee by evident ſignes, that the 2. Doct.
                Lords anger is kindled againſt his people for their ſinnes, and perceive ſome fearefull judgements to come upon them, they are wonderfully affected therewith, take it to heart, and labour by all good meanes to pacifie and prevent it.
            This doctrine ariſeth from this word, Doe not 
               Obſerv. 
               lift up a (crie) unto mee; which noteth, that hee would not in a cold and ſenſleſſe manner have prayed, but as being wonderfully affected to foreſee the miſerie of Gods people for their ſinnes, he would with ſighes and groanes, yea and bitter teares, have prayed to God for them, if he had not bid him hold his peace; for to cry in the Scriptures, when it is referred to praying, noteth, to pray unto God in moſt earneſt and vehement manner; as where God asked Moſes, Why crieſt thou unto mee 
               Exod. 14. 15.? and David complaineth, O my God, I crie by day, 
               Pſal. 22. 2. 
               and thou heareſt not; and the Apoſtle ſaith, That our Saviour, in the dayes of his fleſh did offer up prayers and ſupplications, with ſtrong crying and teares 
               Heb. 5. 7.: In all which (and many other places which might be alledged to this purpoſe) crying doth rather ſignifie mournfull intention of Examples. heart, zeale and fervencie of ſpirit, rather than any loud vociferation and contentions of words. And from this word our Doctrin ariſeth; which would firſt bee confirmed and backed with ſome other Scriptures. And to begin with Moſes: when hee

ſaw imminent deſtruction to the people of God at the red ſea, he cried unto God Exod. 14. 15.: little did any know the bitter affliction of his ſoule, but God who ſaw it, and revealed it, Moſes why crieſt thou? How was David moved, when he ſaw the Angell that ſmote the people, and ſaid, Lo, I have ſinned and dealt wickedly, but theſe ſheepe what have they done 
               2 Sam. ult. 17.? Holy King Ioſiah, when hee heard from reading the Booke of the Law that was found, what great wrath of God was kindled againſt the people for their ſinnes, to make them a deſolation and a curſe, he rent his cloathes, his heart melted, and his eyes poured out abundance of teares 2 King. 22. 19.. How did godly Mordechai and Heſther take to heart the decree gone out for the deſtruction of the people of God, and humble themſelves with ſack-cloth, faſting, weeping, and praying, crying with loud and bitter cries Heſt. 4. 1.? When Ezrah heard of the great ſinnes of the people, and foreſaw ſome imminent judgement, hee rent his garment, plucked off the haire of his head and beard, and did neither eat bread, nor drinke water, but mourned exceedingly 
               Ezrah 9. 5.: The Prophet Eſay foreſeeing the captivitie of Gods people, ſaid, Turne away from me, I will weepe bitterly, labour not to comfort me, becauſe of the ſpoiling of the daughter of my people 
               Eſay 22. 4.: Our Prophet exceeded in this, who thus complained, My bowels, my bowels, I am pained at the very heart, mine heart maketh a noiſe in mee, I cannot hold my peace, becauſe I have heard the ſound of the trumpet, and alarum of warre, deſtruction upon deſtruction is cried 
               Ierem. 4. 19.; and wiſhed, Oh that mine head were waters,
               
               and mine eyes a fountaine of teares, that I might weepe day and night, for the ſlaine of the daughter of my people 
               Ierem. 9. 1.: And againe, Let mine eyes run downe with teares, night and day, and let them not ceaſe, for the virgin daughter of my people is broken with a great breach, and a very grievous blow 
               Ierem. 14. 17.: The Prophet Ezechiel, upon the ſame occaſion, ſeeing the Angels deſtroying Gods people, feil on his face, and cried, Oh Lord God, wilt thou deſtroy all the reſidue of Iſrael, in pouring out thy furie on Ieruſalem 
               Ezech. 9. 8.? Our bleſſed Saviour wept, when hee propheſied the deſtruction of Ieruſalem Luk. 19. 41.. The bleſſed Apoſtle proteſteth the continuall heavineſſe and ſorrow of heart, for the miſerie of Gods people Rom. 9. 2.: and forewarned the Philippians with teares, of the g Philip. 3. 18. evill to come. By which cloud of witneſſes, out of the old and new Teſtament, our doctrine is ſufficiently confirmed, viz. That when Gods anger is ſeene, and ſome great judgement to befall Gods people is foreſeene, Gods true ſervants are greatly affected therewith, and labour to prevent it. It being then moſt cleere that it is ſo, let us now proceed to conſider the reaſons thereof, why it is ſo, and why they are thus affected.
            The firſt is, becauſe there is nothing ſo ſweet 1. Reaſon. Gods love. and deare unto them as Gods love and favour, nothing doth ſo much affect them with joy as the ſenſe thereof. I ſay againe, Gods children are men and women, and ſubject to paſſion, as others, and are glad of the comforts of this life: but this is the glorious and unſpeakable joy wherefore David prayeth, Lord lift up the light of thy countenance
               
               upon us 
               Pſal. 4. 6.; and thrice in one Pſalme the Church prayeth, Cauſe thy face to ſhine, and wee ſhall be ſaved 
               Pſal. 80. 3. 7. 19.; Yea, the greateſt bleſſing the Prieſt could pronounce was, The Lord bleſſe thee and keepe thee, the Lord make his face to ſhine on thee, and be gracious unto thee, the Lord lift up his countenance upon thee 
               Numb. 6. vlt.. And no marvell, for David ſaith, that in Gods favour is life 
               Pſal. 30. 5.. And if Salomon ſay, The favours of an earthly King be as a cloud of the latter raine, what is Gods? Prov. 16. 15. What more urged by the Apoſtle than this pleaſing of God, as, Offer up your bodies a living ſacrifice, holy and pleaſing unto God 
               Rom. 12. 1.: and he ſaith this is a maine thing, wherein the happines of ſingle life conſiſteth, the unmarried careth how he may pleaſe the Lord 
               1 Cor. 7. 32.; and S. Paul prayed for the Coloſſians, that they might walke worthie of the Lord, to all pleaſing of him 
               Col. 1. 10.; and biddeth children obey their parents in all things, in the Lord, for this is well-pleaſing to the Lord 
               Col. 3. 20.; and calleth almes, a ſacrifice acceptable and well-pleaſing unto God 
               Philip. 4. 18.; and beſeecheth the Theſſalonians, ſo to walke, as they may pleaſe God 
               1 Theſſ. 4. 1.. Oh, doe good children finde ſuch comfort and content in the good favour Simile. and pleaſure of their parents; wives, of their husbands; ſervants, of their maſters; and ſubjects, of their Kings? how much more true joy, content and comfort, doe Gods children finde in Gods favour and good pleaſure? So as if hee be well pleaſed, they care not though all the world be offended. And as nothing is ſo ſweet and joyfull, E contrario. and highly eſteemed and prized as Gods favour, and doth even raviſh the heart with joy unſpeakable

and glorious: ſo there is nothing ſo bitter and grievous, as ſenſe and appearance of Gods anger: Who (ſaith Moſes) conſidereth the power of his wrath? Pſal. 90. Oh it is a powerfull wrath indeed, as Hezekiah and David ſay, It cruſheth and breaketh the bones, it woundeth and killeth. If the wrath of a King, who is but a mortall man, be as meſſengers of death Prov. 16. 14.: what is the wrath of the King of Kings? Oh (ſaith David) when thou turnedſt away thy face I was troubled 
               Pſal. 30. 7.; and Solomon ſaid, A wounded ſpirit, who can beare 
               Prov. 18. 14. No rare thing, that two may be in one bed, and the one in Heaven, and the other in hell, on earth.? Oh it is the ſenſe of Gods anger troubleth, woundeth, killeth, is the hell on earth, at the appearance whereof, Gods children are ſo affected, mourne and cry.
            The ſecond reaſon is, becauſe (next unto God) Gods Church and people are dearely beloved, of all the true members thereof, as being the people 2. Reaſon. They love his Church. that God hath redeemed with his bloud Acts 20. 28., entred into perpetuall league and covenant with, yea, the ſpouſe of Chriſt, Epheſ. 5. 32. and therefore it wonderfully affecteth Gods ſervants with griefe, and maketh them cry, when they foreſee any judgement or miſerie befall them; the rather becauſe Amplification. in the miſerie of Gods Church, Gods glory ſeemeth to be ſtained; whereof they are ſo zealous, that rather than that ſhould happen, Moſes wiſhed to be blotted out of the booke 
               Exod. 32. 12.; and S. Paul to be ſeparated from Chriſt 
               Rom. 9. 3. Examples.
               . Oh how father Eli was afflicted at the report of heavie newes, when one told him, that Iſrael was fled before the Philiſtims, his two ſonnes ſlaine, and the Arke of God taken! It ſtrucke him dead at heart, he fell backward

from his ſeat, and broke his necke 1 Sam. 4. 18.; and his daughter in law hearing the ſame newes, preſently fell into the throwes of travaile, and being delivered of a ſonne, called his name Ichabod. When zealous Nehemiah heard how the people of God were in great affliction, Ieruſalem broken downe, and the gates burnt with fire, he could not containe himſelfe, but ſate downe and wept, and being the Kings Cup-bearer, (and as much as his office and life was worth, to appeare ſad, and hee never had beene ſo before) yet now he could not hide it, his countenance bewrayed it, the King tooke notice of it, and asked him, Why is thy countenance ſad, 
               Nehem. 1. 3. 11. 2. 1, 2, 3. 
               ſeeing thou art not ſicke, this is nothing elſe but ſorrow of heart? Oh the ruines of Ieruſalem lay at his heart; which alſo made the people of God ſo imprecate themſelves, If I forget Ieruſalem, let my right hand forget her cunning, yea, let my tongue cleave to the roofe of my mouth, if I preferre not Ieruſalem to my chiefeſtioy 
               Pſal. 137. 5, 6..
            The third and laſt reaſon (whereof fleſh and bloud are more ſenſible, than the two former) is, 3. Reaſon. Wrapping in the ſame judgement. That the godly may be wrapped with the wicked▪ in the ſame temporall puniſhment: and therefore when they ſee it comming, they are much affected, and labour to prevent it. I ſay againe, howſoever God is marvellous, in commonly providing 
                  Confirmation By Examples. for his children, before a judgement come, (as we ſhall heare more hereafter) yet many times even the godly are wrapped with the wicked, in the ſame temporall puniſhment, and therefore are ſo affected. Shall we condemne all that periſhed

in the waters Gen. 6. 7. 21. 22.? and all that were conſumed with fire Gen. 19. 25.? God forbid: If yee doe, yet know, that though all were not guiltie of the ſinne, of making and worſhipping the golden Calfe, yet it endangered all; Let mee alone, ſaith God, and I will utterly conſume them, and blot out their name from under Heaven 
               Exod. 32. 10. Deut. 9. 14.: for Achans ſinne, Ioſuahs armie is put to flight, and many ſlaine Ioſh. 7. 4.; for Sauls ſinne in killing the Gibeonites, there came a famine upon the land for three yeeres together 2 Sam. 21. 1, 2, 3.; and you know, for that great villanie committed by the inhabitants of Gibeah, in abuſing the Levites Concubine, not only vengeance came upon the Citie, wherein it was committed, but upon all the Tribe of Beniamin, becauſe they delivered them not up to be puniſhed, but rather would ſeeme to defend them; yea, not only upon that Tribe which might ſeeme juſtly acceſſarie, but upon the inhabitants of Iabeſh Gilead, becauſe they came not up to the warre, to ſee Gods judgements executed upon thoſe wicked men Iudg. 19 20, 21.. Let him that readeth that ſtory, conſider how farre the judgements of God may extend themſelves, towards all ſuch as are not affected with Gods anger, and doe not to the uttermoſt of their power endevour to puniſh ſin. This was it, made all the people of Iſrael ſo much afraid, when they heard how the Reubenites, Gadites, and halfe the Tribe of Manaſſeh, had erected an Altar on the other ſide Iordan, and ſuppoſed it had beene to offer ſacrifice on; their Commiſſioners told them, if they did ſo rebell againſt the Lord, the next morrow, the Lord
               
               would be wroth with all the Congregation of Iſrael 
               Ioſh. 22. 18.. If then the zeale of Gods glorie, and love to Gods people will not move, yet the love to ourſelves and eſtates, may move us to mourne for ſinnes and abominations of the land, and to take greatly to heart, the tokens of anger, and threatnings of judgements, becauſe wee alſo may be wrapped up in them.
            But mee thinketh I heare ſome ſay, ſuch is Satans Obiect. malice, and bloudie murtherous deſire, to have Gods judgements generall, and therefore dulleth the ſpirits of Gods children thus; Alas what profit will it be for me to mourne and afflict my ſoule? if the judgement come, I and mine, all we are, and have, ſhall be wrapped up in it, as well as thoſe who take nothing to heart, but live joyfully; and therefore let us even eat and drinke, and let God doe his will.
            Oh fainting ſoule, be not abuſed and deceived, Sol. ſtep up for thy part into the breach, to ſtay Gods wrath Ezech. 22. penult.; ſeeke the Lord amongſt the meeke of the earth Pſal. 76. 9.; for Sions ſake hold not thy tongue, and for Ieruſalems ſake give God no reſt Eſay 62. 6.; bee one of his remembrancers day and night, in all thy ſupplications and prayers hold up thy hands againſt Satan and Antichriſt, and bee thou to the uttermoſt of thy power an enemie to all the enemies of the Church, and helpe the Lord 
               Iudg. 5. 23., and his people againſt them, with prayer, preaſe, and puſh of pike (if thou beeſt thereunto called) and crie mightily unto God for helpe in this, that God would generally open the eyes of all men to ſee

our ſins, and the judgments thereby deſerved, that all mens hearts may melt into teares, (as Ioſiahs did in the like caſe 2 Kings 22. penult.,) and that all (as one man) may goe out and meet the Lord by repentance, before his decree bee executed upon us. Yea, if none ſhall joyne with thee, but in this caſe thou mayeſt complaine with Eliah, that thou art left alone 1 Kings 19. 10., yea ſo farre from helping, as that they doe mocke and diſcourage thee, as David complained, For thy ſake I have borne reproach, and ſhame hath covered my face: when I wept, and chaſtened my ſoule with faſting, that was my reproach, I put on ſackcloth, and became a proverbe, they that ſate in the gate ſpake againſt me, and drunkards made ſongs of me 
               Pſal. 69. 7.; yet for thy part ſtill wreſtle with God Gen. 32. 26.; the prayer of one righteous man availeth much with God, if it be fervent Iam. 5. 16.; one Moſes ſtood in the gap Pſal. 106. 23.; and one Phinehas turned away the wrath from all Iſrael Numb. 25. 11.; Phinehas prayed, and the plague ſtayed; and Lot by his prayer ſaved Zoar, Gen. 19. 22. But how ever God dealeth, thou ſhalt bee ſure to Comfort. deliver thine owne ſoule Ezech. 14. 14.; God hath a tender eye to all ſuch as are affected at the teſtimonies of his anger. Before the ſix deſtroying Angels are ſent forth, one clothed in linnen, with a writers inke-horne by his ſide, is bid go thorow the midſt of the Citie, & ſet a marke upon the foreheads of all them that ſigh, and crie for the abominations of Ieruſalem: then are the Angels ſent forth to deſtroy, but yet with this charge, Come not neere any man on whom is the marke 
               Ezech. 9. 4.. And againe, before the foure deſtroying Angels, went forth an Angell, having the ſeale

of the living God, cried to them with a loud voice, Hurt nothing, till we have ſealed the ſervants of our God in their foreheads 
               Rev. 7. 3.. Before the floud come, God will provide for Noahs ſafetie, he will not only direct him to prepare an arke, but himſelfe wil ſee him in, yea and ſhut him in himſelfe Gen. 7. 16., would not ſuffer or truſt any other to doe it, but would have the locking and ſealing of the doore with his owne hand: and ſhall Lot periſh in Sodome, whoſe righteous ſoule had beene ſo vexed with their uncleane converſation? No, no, he ſhall have warning to be gone, yea if hee ſtay too long, they will take him by the hand, and draw him away: neither can they doe any thing, till hee bee ſafe in Zoar Gen. 19. 22.. And hiſtories report, that before the laſt and finall deſolation of Ieruſalem, there was a voice heard amongſt the Chriſtians, Goe forth to Pella, goe forth to Pella; which ſo ſoone as ever the Chriſtians had done, and that they were ſafe there, the Citie was ſacked, and the wrath of God poured out upon it to the uttermoſt 1 Theſſ. 2. 16.. You have heard how God advanced Daniel in Babylon, and miraculouſly delivered him out of the Lions den Dan. 6. 22., and the three children from the fierie furnace Dan. 3. 27.: But what need wee goe further than our preſent propheſie for the clearing of this point? Doth it availe Ieremie, that he hath ſo bitterly wept, mourned and lamented, and prayed unto God? Yes, yes, becauſe hee had beene ſo faithfull, God provided well for him, for Nebuchadnezzar himſelfe gave charge to Nebuzaradan his chiefe ſteward, to looke well to Ieremie, and

doe for him as he would, and let him goe whither he would; and indeed he did ſo, putting him to his choice, whether he would goe to Babylon and receive kindneſſe there, or ſtay in Iudah: and becauſe he deſired rather to ſtay in Iudah, hee gave him victuals and a reward, and let him goe whither hee would Ier. 40. 2, 3, 4, 5., ſo as he found a great deale more favour from the enemies, than hee did from his owne Princes and people. Yea (and worthie to be noted) Ebedmelech, who had ſpoken good to the King, and beene a meanes to deliver him out of the dungeon, God promiſed him his life for a prey, Ierem. 39. ult. And Gedaliah, whoſe father Ahikam had beene his great friend, and ſaved his life, Ier. 26. ult. And Baruch his Scribe, and others that feared God, and had beene Ieremies friends, and encouragement, even theſe had their lives given for a prey, were left behinde in the land, and Gedaliah the ſonne of Ahikam, made their governour in Mizpah Ierem. 38. 7. 39. 15. 26. 24. 40. 5..
            Oh thus the Lord hath many wayes to deliver his out of troubles and miſeries, and hee will doe it, if it be for his glorie and their good; if otherwiſe, Vſe. hee be pleaſed to wrap them up in the common calamitie, yet even that ſhall turne to the furtherance of their ſalvation, and God will ſo enrich them with patience and comfort in aſſurance of Gods love, that in ſuch miſerie, they ſhall bee moſt happie. How ever things goe, it ſhall bee well with the juſt.
            The Doctrine being thus confirmed, the reaſons Teſtimonies. thereof rendred, and objection againſt the

practiſe thereof removed; it now followeth to conſider what are the teſtimonies, whereby Gods ſervants doe witneſſe to others, and ſpecially to God, and their owne ſoules, that they are amongſt the ſmall number of ſuch as doe take Gods anger and judgements to heart:
            And they are of two ſorts, viz. common to all Diviſion. Gods good ſervants, and ſpeciall or proper to Common. ſome ſorts of them: the common teſtimonies are of two ſorts, private and publike; private teſtimonies Teſtimonies private. are praier, and interceſſion, helped with faſting and humiliation, that ſo they may pray the more fervently, and cry mightily unto God to ſpare his people. No ſooner did God reveale to Abraham, his purpoſe to deſtroy Sodome, but he fell inſtantly to praier, and moſt vehemently importuned him to ſpare them Gen. 18. 22.. When did God ever manifeſt to Moſes his conceived anger againſt his people, and threatned a judgement, but Moſes was downe on his face crying to the Lord, contending with him, and urging of him, for his name and glory, grace and goodneſſe, mercies, promiſes, oath, and covenant, to forgive and ſpare Deut. 9. 18.? When Nehemiah heard of the miſery of Gods people, and Ieruſalem, he ſate downe and wept, and faſted, and prayed, before the God of heaven 
               Neh. 1. 4.: The ſecond are more publike, and are either of geſture, as in Nehemiah, or words, when every 2. Teſtimonies publike. man and woman, according to their places and gifts, doe call on others, of their families, or neighbours, to humble themſelves, and ſeeke to prevent the judgement threatned. So Mordechai,
               
(when he heard of the bloudy Decree that was paſſed) was not contented to put on ſackcloth and mourne in ſecret, but went into the midſt of the City, and cried with a loud and bitter cry, and made it knowne to Heſther, and Heſther would have all the Iewes in Shuſhan to faſt too Heſt. 4. 1. 16.. The Prophet ſaith, All ſuch as feared God, ſtirred up one another, by ſpeaking often to one another, ſaying, feare the Lord 
               Malac. 3. 16.. This is it the Apoſtle aimeth at, Exhort one another daily whilſt it is called to day, leſt any of you be hardened through the deceitfulneſſe of ſinne 
               Heb. 3. 13.: and provoke one another to love and good workes, Heb. 10. 24. And ſo the ſhipmaſter wakened Ionah, and bade him call upon his God, Iona. 1. 6.
            The more proper and ſpeciall teſtimonies, concerne Proper teſtimonies. two ſorts of Gods ſervants, viz. the Miniſter and Magiſtrate. The faithfull Miniſter of 1. The Miniſters. God, teſtifieth that he taketh to heart the anger of 1. Giving warning. God, and threatned judgement, by three things. Firſt, by lifting up his voice like a trumpet 
               Eſay 58. 1., and giving warning, for which purpoſe they have the titles of Seers 
               1 Sam. 9. 9., and Watchmen 
               Eſay 62. 6., I have ſet watchmen upon thy wals, O Ieruſalem. They muſt have eies in their heads, and from their watchtower, As the ſleepie and careleſſe watchman is hanged, that giveth no warning, ſo the Miniſter muſt anſwer for bloud of ſoules. ſee anger and judgement afarre off, and like faithfull watchmen, from the wall, give warning to the City, as ſoone as ever they deſcry the Lord comming againſt his people. Secondly, they muſt labour by their Miniſtery, to bring the people to repentance, that ſo Gods wrath may be 2. Preach repent. pacified, and judgements prevented; and to that end, they muſt faithfully reprove them for their

ſinnes, and let them ſee the hainouſneſſe of their tranſgreſſions, and call earneſtly upon them for repentance. Thus did Noah before the floud, Lot before the burning of Sodom, the Prophets Iſay, Ieremy, Ezechiel, Ioel, before the Captivities: Rent your hearts and not your garments, and turne to the Lord your God, 
               Ioel 2. 13.: thus did Chriſt and Iohn Baptiſt before the finall deſtruction of the Iewes, Repent, repent, Except yee repent yee ſhall all periſh 
               Luk. 13. 3.: Now is the axe laid to the root of the tree; and, O generation of vipers, who hath forewarned you to flee from the anger to come? bring forth fruits worthy amendment of life 
               Matt. 3. 7. 10.: yea thus have all Gods ſervants done, that deſire to be free from the bloud of all men Act. 20. 26.: for if they give not warning, the bloud is required at their hands Ezek. 3. 18., and therefore it behoveth them to beſtirre themſelves, that if it be poſſible they may ſave Gods people from the wrath to come, or at leaſt deliver their own ſoules, and be found a ſweet ſavour unto God, even in them that perish 2 Cor. 2. 15..
            Thirdly, it is the faithfull Miniſters duty to be very tenderly affected towards all ſuch as mourne Thirdly, preach comfort. in Sion Eſay 61. 3.; and with David are afraid of Gods judgements Pſal. 119.; they muſt be ſure to ſpeake a word in due ſeaſon to ſuch as are weary Eſay 50. 4.. God gave the Prophet Iſay a charge, to ſpeake comfortably to the heart of Ieruſalem Eſay 40. 2.. And hence it is that the Prophets, Chriſt, Iohn Baptiſt, and the Apoſtles, did ever interlace reproofes and threatnings, with heavenly comforts, to prepare them for times of triall and tentations; that howſoever

they lived amongſt the wicked, and ſome great judgement and generall might come, yet come what will, it ſhould goe well with them; yea let vs Miniſters be aſſured, the Lord will require as ſtrict an account of us, how we have cheared and comforted the godly, as that we have reproved and threatned the wicked.
            And I ſay upon this occaſion, in the word of the Exhortation. Lord, Be of good comfort all godly Magiſtrates, 1. To Magiſtrates. and Governors, if your hearts be ſet aright to advance Gods Religion, and holy Goſpell of Chriſt, and to ſuppreſſe and beat downe Atheiſme, Poperie, and all wickedneſſe, whereby Gods anger is kindled, and heavie judgements procured. Be 2. To Miniſters. of good comfort yee Miniſters of Chriſt, that watch and warne Gods people, having continuall ſorrow and heavineſſe Rom. 9. 2. to ſee their ſinnes, and being farre off from ſerving the time, and flattering them, ſaying, Peace, peace, when there is no peace 
               Ierem. 6. 14., but faithfully reproving them for all their ſinnes, and earneſtly calling on them for repentance. And be of good comfort, all yee people, 3. To all godly ones. whoſe hearts are broken with godly ſorrow, to ſee the ſinnes of the Land; and you that ſtrive to keepe your ſelves unſpotted of the world 
               Iam. 1. ult., and to walke worthy the Goſpell 
               Epheſ. 4. 1., and ſuch great mercies as God vouchſafeth; and humble your ſoules before God privately in faſting and praiers, and ſo farre as you can (and is lawfull) labour to draw on others in the like practiſe of piety: know that you are ſealed and maintained of God; aſſure your ſelves the eie and hand of God are on you for
               
               good 
               Nehem. 2. 8.; his compaſsions ſhall not faile 
               Lament. 3. 22.; the hils ſhall ſooner remove out of their places 
               Eſay 54. 10.; than his mercy can be removed from you; his covenant with day and night, ſhall ſooner be broken, than with you 
               Ierem. 33. 20.; you are written upon the palmes of his hands, and are ever in his ſight 
               Eſay 49. 16.; and either God will be pacified, and ſpare for your ſakes; or (as he knoweth beſt) will provide for you, either take you to himſelfe, that you ſhall not ſee the evill to come 
               Eſay 57. 1.; or whatſoever evill come, his good Angels ſhall guard you, his ſpirit ſupport you, his grace be ſufficient for you, he ſhall enrich you with peace, patience, and joy, and in good time, make an end of all miſery, and ſet the crowne of immortall glory on your head.
            The ſecond duty particular, is for the chiefe 2. To Magiſtrates. Magiſtrate to command ſuch as are ſubordinate and inferiour, to ſee execution; theſe are to teſtifie, how greatly they are affected with tokens of Gods wrath, and appearance of judgements, by labouring to reforme ſinne, and enjoyning faſting, and humiliation, for pacifying of Gods anger, and preventing of judgements. Thus did Moſes, Ioſhuah, David, Iehoſhaphat, Nehemiah, Heſty King of Ninivie. It would aske too long a time, to ſhew you how wonderfully God hath beene appeaſed, and how ſtrangely judgements have beene prevented, by this moſt godly and Chriſtian exerciſe: the Scriptures are plentifull in this point. Yea it is regiſtred, that even Ahab, only thereunto moved with a baſe feare of judgement threatned, and but faſting and wearing

ſackcloth in hypocriſie, God deferred the judgement untill his ſonnes daies 1 King. 21. 27.. Oh what a bleſſing did this Land receive hereupon in Ann. 1588. I am perſwaded, never any did humble themſelves before the Lord, in true faſting and praier, but found a bleſſing from heaven thereon. Oh that I could but perſwade you to make triall hereof, and to prove the Lord herein: I aſſure my ſelfe, God is the ſame loving God, as ready now as ever, moſt graciouſly to anſwer the ſoule that ſetteth it ſelfe aright to ſeeke God, by ſuch waies and meanes as he hath preſcribed.
            Now let us come and make application of theſe things to ourſelves. That God hath many waies Application. teſtified his anger and diſpleaſure, and not only threatned, but alſo in ſome meaſure executed his judgements, who ſo blinde as ſeeth not? But how Examination. are men and women affected herewith? Doe we, in the conſcience of our ſinnes, judge our ſelves Sight of ſinne. unworthy of any common bleſſing, peace, food, Vnworthineſſe. ſleepe, apparell; and moſt worthy of all thoſe heavie judgements, which either he hath threatned, or executed on any others? Are we afraid of Gods judgements, and ſpecially of thoſe that Feare. are ſpirituall? I ſay againe, of thoſe that are ſpirituall, and moſt dreadfull? Doe we grieve exceedingly Sorrow. and mourne in our ſoules, that we have ſo juſtly offended God, and purchaſed his anger and diſpleaſure, and to have the very floudgates and all the ſluces of his judgements drawne up, to our utter overthrow and deſtruction? Doe we bend our ſelves with all our ſtrength to pacific Prevention.
               
God, and prevent his judgements? And to that end, doe we with full purpoſe of heart, reſolve to forſake our owne knowne ſins? and to put in practiſe all holy purpoſes and vowes? to reforme preſently whatſoever we know to be amiſſe in us? and to ſhew forth more true zeale of Gods glory, and the power of godlineſſe in our lives, than we have done? Doe we poure out our ſoules in inſtant praiers and ſupplications, with ſighs and groanes unto God, for ourſelves and his Church? and as our callings and gifts enable and give leaue, doe we ſtirre up and provoke others to doe ſo?
            If this be ſo, it is happy, and I cannot but comfortably aſſure myſelfe, there are thouſands Conſolation. and ten thouſands that doe ſo; yea how abundantly have men and women in this Land, in this Countrey, and in this City, declared their love to the Goſpell, and compaſſion to the poore diſtreſſed Saints that profeſſe it? which, I doubt not, but God hath regiſtred in his booke, and will, in his good time, remunerate with a large recompence of reward; and I truſt we ſhall yet ſee Ieruſalem in proſperity, and peace upon Iſrael. How ever it pleaſe God to deale, yet all ſuch ſhall finde grace, mercy, and peace with God; let ſuch caſt their care on God, for he careth for them.
            But let me lament, that there are too too many amongſt us, Atheiſts, Papiſts, prophane and irreligious Lamentation. perſons, as ſenſleſſe as blocks and ſtones of their ſinnes, Gods anger, and Gods judgements: who being called to weeping and mourning, baldneſſe,

and girding of ſack-cloth, make ſongs on thoſe that doe ſo, Pſal. 69. Doe-ſlay oxen, and kill ſheepe, and for their parts, eat fleſh, and drinke wine 
               Eſay 22. 12.. Tell them of the afflictions of Gods people, they ſit drinking ſtill, let Shuſhan bee in never ſo great perplexitie 
               Heſth. 3. ult.; yea, eat the calves out of the ſtals, and lambs out of the flocks, drinke their wine in bouls, annoint themſelves with beſt ointment, and invent to themſelves inſtruments of muſicke, like David, but are not ſorrie for the afflictions of Ioſeph 
               Amos 6. 6.. Yea, I would there were not too many Edomites, who rejoyce in the calamitie of the Church, and ſay, There, there, ſo would we have it, perſecute and take them, there is none to deliver them, there is no helpe for them in God, Downe with it, downe with it, even to the ground 
               Pſal. 137. 7.; who would be glad that all religion, and the profeſſours, were utterly ruined and rooted out, and all as prophane as themſelves. Tell them of their ſinnes, they doe not know any ſuch things, nor beleeve that any are better than themſelves. Threaten them with judgements, peſtilence, famine, ſword, they make a mocke, Let us eat and drinke, for tomorrow we ſhall die 
               Eſay 22. 14.; The Prophets words are but winde, tomorrow ſhall bee as to day, and much more abundant, Eſay 56. ult. Or elſe deſperately ſay, Let God haſten his worke, even his great worke, that wee may ſee it 
               Eſay 5. 19.; Or elſe preſumptuouſly ſay, I ſhall have peace, though I walke in the ſtubbornneſſe of mine heart, and adde drunkennes to thirſt, no evill ſhall happen to me 
               Deut. 19. 19.. Others are ſecure, for They have made a covenant with death, and are at agreement with hell, when the
               
               overflowing ſcourge ſhall paſſe thorow, it ſhall not come neere them, they have made lies their refuge, and under falſhood have hid themſelves 
               Eſay 28. 15.. Others are angrie with the Prophets that threaten, as they accuſed Ieremie to the King, that the world was not able to beare his words, that hee diſcouraged the people, and was never well, till he was in priſon, Ierem. 38. 4. Thus they put off the evill day farre from them, and approach to the ſeat of iniquitie, going from evill to worſe, without all feare of God or man, hating to bee reformed.
            Oh prophane Atheiſts, Belly-gods, and Worldlings, Concluſion. know that it is not for your ſakes that God ſpareth, it is for his ſervants ſakes, amongſt whom yee live, that yee enjoy ſo large a ſhare in many good bleſſings of God; ſuch as yee deſpiſe and make a mocke of, yea extremely hate and perſecute, are they, that ſtand in the breach, and turne Commination away Gods judgements; but if our ſinnes grow ſo full, and God make way for his fierie wrath, by taking away ſuch, and that his judgements doe breake out, you ſhall not eſcape, nay you ſhall drinke deepe of the cup of Gods wrath, yea ſucke and wring out the verie dregs of the ſame Pſal. 75. 8.; you ſhall finde your ſtaves to be but broken reeds Eſay 36. 6., and all your ſhelter for defence, lying, falſhood, and vanitie; ſhift and ſhuffle, and flie whither you will, you ſhall not bee able to flie from his vengeance; though you could dig to hell (as the Prophet ſpeaketh Amos 9. 2.) yet Gods hand would fetch you thence; though climbe up to Heaven, hee

would pull you downe; though hide your ſelves in moſt ſecret caves, and under rocks and mountaines, yet even there ſhall his vengeance finde you out: flie whither you will, he will command the ſword, the peſtilence and famine, to purſue you with terrour of heart, and trembling of conſcience, the Lord will ever, and everie where, ſet his face againſt you for evill, and not for good, till hee hath rooted out your names from under Heaven, deſtroyed you from off the face of the earth, and caſt you into hell, the place prepared for the Devill and all reprobate ones.
            If therfore thou deſireſt to finde mercie and comfort, Repent, be ſorrie for thy ſinnes, mourne that thou haſt diſpleaſed and offended God, tremble to thinke of his judgements, doe thy beſt endevour to prevent them: for how ſoever it ſhall pleaſe God to deale, ſuch and ſuch only ſhall bee moſt happie. And ſo much for the ſecond Doctrine. It followeth.
            The third Doctrine is, That Gods faithfull ſervants 3. Doct.
                are verie powerfull with God, and as his deare favourites, by their prayers, to prevent and turne away judgments and calamities, from themſelves and Gods people. This Doctrine I raiſe from the word (Pagarg) which ſignifieth to reſiſt, or withſtand, as Ierome tranſlateth it 
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                   
                  Ierom. Tranſlat.
               ; Non mihi obſiſt as, Doe not withſtand me; for the word in native proprietie, intendeth a kind of force or violence Impetum fecit. Pentoglott.. One place ſhall ſerve amongſt many, for to enlighten this point: this word is uſed in the booke of Iudges, where Zebah and Zalmunnah entreat

               Gedeon, Riſe thou and fall upon us 
               Iudg. 8. 21.; and is, by metaphor, frequently aſcribed unto prayer; wherin Gods ſervants uſe an holy force and violence unto God, in their deprecations; which thing alſo our Engliſh tranſlation ſignifieth, Doe not (intercede) which is properly a Latine word, and ſignifieth to come betwixt Inter & cede.; and ſo to let, hinder, withſtand, or prohibit the doing of a thing. As if God had more plainly ſaid, according to the originall and Tranſlations, I am purpoſed that this people ſhall be carried into Captivitie, and doe not thou by thy prayers come betwixt me and them, to let, hinder, withſtand, or reſiſt mee. The Doctrine thus naturally and properly raiſed, is well fortified and backed by many other, both poſitive and exemplarie Scriptures. The Prophet Eſay 
               Confirmation complaining of the great want of prayers, doth it in this forme, There is none that calleth upon thy name, that ſtirreth up himſelfe to take hold of thee 
               Eſay 64. 7.. Firſt, obſerve how in times of greateſt need, Gods 
                  Obſerv.
                ſervants may be ſo dull, as to have need of ſtirring up, like unto that elegant metaphoricall decompoſite of the Apoſtle unto Timothie, Stir up the gift of God. The graces of God being like fire, muſt ever and anon be ruſſled and ſtirred up, elſe will grow cold, 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               . Oh ſtirre up your ſelves.
            Secondly, being ſtirred up by prayers faithfull and fervent, men lay hold on God: And againe, I ſought for a man among them, that ſhould make up the hedge, and ſtand in the gap before me, for the land, that I ſhould not deſtroy it 
               Ezech. 22. penult.. Our Saviour ſpeaketh of offering violence to the Kingdome of Heaven,

and the violent taking it by force Matth. 11. 12.; wherein prayer hath a ſpeciall part; for woe were it with many, if bodily ſtrength carried it away, but the pooreſt and weakeſt Chriſtian ſicke in bed, and ſcarce able to breathe, yet by ſighes and groanes may offer violence, and take Gods kingdome by force: and S. Paul beſeecheth the Romanes, For the Lord Ieſus Chriſts ſake, and for the love of the Spirit, that they would ſtrive with him in their prayers to God for him 
               Rom. 15. 30.. He would have them pray, but not coldly and negligently, as the Papiſts mumbling and tumbling over their beads, when their mindes are wandring about earthly occaſions; but hee would have them ſtrive with God, and put all their ſtrength to it; yea, to ſtrive to the ſhedding of bloud, as 
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , Simul contendere.
                the word ſignifieth. Chriſt being in an agonie, his ſweat was as it were great drops of bloud 
               Luk. 22. 44. 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  .. Thus for confirmation of this Doctrine, you have God and his Prophets in the old Teſtament, and Chriſt and his Apoſtles in the new. To this purpoſe, ſweet are the ſentences of ſome of the Fathers. An ancient one ſaith, When prayers joyne together in devotions, they doe (as it were) even band themſelves together to encounter God Quaſi manu facta Deum ambiunt orantes. Tertull. Apolog.. And another ſaith, The Saints have God ſo bound, that he cannot puniſh without their permiſſion and licence 
                  Ligatum habent Sancti Deum, ut non puniat niſi permiſermt ipſi. Bernard. in Cantic. Serm. 30.. Loe, loe, the incomprehenſible mercie and loving kindneſſe of God, towards ſuch as truly feare and ſerve him, making them in his goodneſſe, in his bottomeleſſe goodneſſe (I ſay) ſo powerfull and mightie with him, that their prayers are as it were bands to tie

his hands, and as a wall againſt him, that hee cannot execute his anger (though moſt juſtly deſerved) unleſſe they will ſuffer him, and (as it were) ſtand out of his way. How may the conſideration hereof make us exclaime, O Lord, what is man, that thou art mindfull of him, or the ſonne of man, that thou regardeſt him 
               Pſal. 8. 4.! or (as Iob hath it) That thou doeſt ſet thine heart upon him, Iob 7. 17. Will you Examples. ſee how powerfull Gods Saints are with God by their prayers, (I meane not to obtaine great bleſſings, and doe great works, the Scripture is ſo full in this, I ſhould finde no end) but (according to the Text and Doctrine raiſed) in preventing threatned judgments to themſelves, or the Church of God. Take a few, ſelected out of many, for inſtance. When Iacob ſoreſaw deſtruction threatned to himſelfe, and wives and children, by his cruell and bloudie brother Eſau, comming out againſt him with 400. men, then ſaith the Text, was Iacob greatly afraid and diſtreſſed, and falleth to prayer unto God for deliverance; yea, and with that fervencie, that hee is ſaid to wreſtle with God, and told him hee would not let him goe, till hee had bleſſed him 
               Gen. 32. 7. 24.; and in the end, by his prayers and teares he prevailed Hoſh. 12. 4.; and thereupon was his name changed from Iacob into Iſrael, which ſignifieth a Prevailer with God: the evill he feared was removed, his brother that came out againſt him as fierce as a Lion, when they met, was as meeke as a Lambe; yea, hee confeſſeth hee ſaw his face, as the face of God 
               Gen. 33. 10.. When the Amalekites came out againſt Iſrael, and threatned their deſtruction, Moſes went

up into the mountaine and prayed, and when hee held up his hands in prayer unto God, Iſrael prevailed; but when he let downe his hands, Amalek prevailed Exod. 17. 11. Plus precando, quam praeliando.
               : which ſheweth, that the puſh of Moſes prayers, did more than the pikes of all Iſrael beſides. When againe, for that great ſinne of worſhipping the golden Calfe, God, before hee ſignified to Moſes his purpoſe to conſume them, and blot out their names from under Heaven, bade him let him alone; yet Moſes by prayer prevailed with God, for pardon of their ſinne, and continuance of his favour Exod. 32. 10. 14.; whereof David ſpeaketh thus, He ſaid he would deſtroy them, had not Moſes his choſen ſtood before him in the breach, to turne away his wrath 
               Pſal. 106. 23.; where he compareth Moſes to a valiant Captaine, who when beſieging enemies have made a breach in the wall, & the Citie is like to be loſt, ſteppeth up into the breach, and defendeth it, which Moſes did by the power of his prayer, and turned away Gods wrath from his people. Againe, for the children of Iſraels murmuring againſt Moſes and Aaron, the plague beganne amongſt them, and there died foureteene thouſand and ſeven hundred, wherefore Moſes commanded Aaron, quickly to take fire from the Altar, and put on incenſe, and ſtand betwixt the living and the dead, and ſo the plague ceaſed Num. 16. 41. 46.; whereof in the Wiſdome of Solomon we have an excellent paraphraſe, and fitting our purpoſe: the blameleſſe man made haſte, and ſtood forth to defend them, and bringing the ſhield of his Miniſterie, even praier & the propitiation of incenſe, he ſet himſelfe

againſt the wrath, and overcame the deſtroyer Wiſd. 13 21.; the words in the Greeke Text are verie ſignificant, 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               , propugnavit, hee fought valiantly; hee brought forth, 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               , Arma Miniſterij, the weapons of his Miniſterie, and 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               , he reſiſted wrath, non vi, ſed precibus: all the created powers in heaven and earth cannot reſiſt God, yet may a poore man, by the power of his prayers, turne away Gods wrath, and procure an undeſerved bleſſing, and remove a moſt juſt deſerved puniſhment. As the young infant more prevaileth with the father or mother by a teare, Simile. than the ſtrength of arme; ſo God pitieth us as a father Pſal. 103. 13.; hath more compaſſion than a mother Eſay 66. 13.; he cannot but fulfill the deſires of ſuch as feare him Pſal. 145. 19.. David ſaw the Angell ſtretching his hand out upon Ieruſalem to deſtroy it, and yet by praier prevailed with God to ſpare it; who ſaid to the Angell, It is enough, ſtay now thine hand 
               2 Sam. ult. 16, 17.. In that great tempeſt by ſea, when there was no hope of life, yet Paul prayed, and God gave him the lives of all that paſſed, being to the number of two hundred threeſcore and ſixteene ſoules; ſo as though they made ſhipwracke, and with the violence of the ſea the ſhip was broken to peeces, yet not one ſoule was loſt, all came ſafe to ſhore Acts 27. 24. 37. ult.. And if the praiers of one be ſo powerfull with God, how much more the praiers of many being united? Let Heſther, and Mordechai, and the Iewes, faſt and pray, and then commeth moſt wonderfull deliverance to Gods people, and deſtruction to their enemies Heſth. 4. 16, 17.. Doth there come up an huge

multitude of Moabites, Ammonites, and Mount Seir, againſt King Iehoſhaphat? let but him proclaime a faſt throughtout all Iudah, and let them pray, and God will make their enemies deſtroy one another, and he and his ſhall looke on, and only ſing and praiſe God 2 Chron. 14. 9, 10.. Oh Peter is in priſon, a great calamity is thereby threatned to the Church, but if the Church make praiers to God for him, the Angell of the Lord came, with great power and glory into the priſon, and brake off Peters chaines, opened the priſon doores, yea and made the iron gate open of it owne accord Act. 12. 7.. Loe how the praiers of Gods children are ſtronger than fetters and gates of iron. Yea Chriſt is gone on high, and hath left his Church; what is now to be done? let them continue in praier, and doe their duty: after the Holy Ghoſt commeth, as this day witneſſeth; which, and much more, that might be ſaid to this purpoſe, doth abundantly confirme your raiſed Doctrine, viz. That Gods faithfull ſervants by their praiers, are powerfull with God, to turne away and prevent threatned and imminent judgements, to themſelves or the Church of God: which made zealous Luther ſay, There is nothing omnipotent under God, but faithfull praier 
                  Oratio fidelis omnipotens, Luth. Eſt quedam onmipotentia precum. Alſtedius Syſtem. Theolog. lib. 4. cap. 2.: This commandeth all things, in heaven, earth, hell; in all the elements, aire, fire, earth, water. But it would not be amiſſe to ſearch, that we may know the reaſons, why the praiers of Gods ſervants are ſo powerfull with God, and they are principally theſe two, viz.
            
            Firſt, our praiers are not our owne, as the Reaſons.
               
worke of our reaſon, will, affections, or any thing 1. Gods ſpirit. that is naturall in us, but the operation of Gods owne Spirit in us; For as for us, we know not what to pray as we ought, but the ſpirit it ſelfe maketh requeſt for us 
               Rom. 8. 26.: and againe, It is the ſpirit of adoption, whereby we cry Abba Father 
               Rom. 8. 15.. In nothing is there ſo evident demonſtration of the ſpirit of God, as in zealous praier. To which purpoſe Gregory hath an excellent ſaying, The Saints receive from God, what they oppoſe to his blowes, and, as I may ſay, from him it is, whereby they lift up themſelves againſt him, and whereby they are enabled to reſiſt him 
                  Ab ipſo accipiunt, ut contra impetum percuſſionis ejus opponantur: atque ut ita dixerim, cum ipſo Deo ſe erigunt contra ipſum. Greg. mor. lib. 9. cap. 12.. Iacob wreſtled with God & prevailed, but it was God gave him the ſtrength ſo to doe; now God cannot but acknowledge the worke of his owne Spirit, and therefore, we know that whatſoever we aske of the Father according to his will, he heareth us 
               1 Ioh. 5. 14.; and our Saviour hath ſaid, Whatſoever yee ſhall aske my Father in my name, he will give it you 
               Ioh. 16. 23.. But the praiers of Turkes, Iewes, Idolaters, Heretikes, Infidels, Hypocrites, are of no power with God, becauſe ſuch are not made by the Spirit of God; the praiers of a wicked man are abominable, and turne into ſinne; no more accepted of God, than if he cut off a dogs necke 
               Eſay 66. 3.; God hath threatned, that though ſuch doe multiply their praiers, hee will not heare them 
               Eſay 1. 15..
            The ſecond reaſon hereof, is Gods owne free 2. Gods free love. love and mercy, who is pleaſed to make all the faithfull his favourites, ſo as Haman, nor any favourite, could ever doe ſo much with thoſe Monarchs

and Kings, that have ſet their love upon them, as the leaſt of Gods Saints may doe with the Lord: for if earthly Kings be exceedingly offended, favourites muſt give way, Hamans face muſt be covered, he ſhall never ſee the Kings face any more Heſt. 7. 8.: But though God be angry, and have muſtred his Armies, yea and beſieged, and battered, ſo powerfull are Gods ſervants, that they can ſtand up in the breach, and by their praiers turne away threatned judgements. Oh who would not be ſuch a Kings favourite! who cannot deny any thing, which is for his glory, and their true good? The more I thinke on this, the more I am aſtoniſhed, that man, poore, miſerable man, weake, ſicke, diſeaſed, vile and abominable in his owne eies, deſpiſed of others, yet ſhould be ſuch a favourite to the King of Kings: Oh the free mercy and love of God! How ſhould the conſideration hereof raviſh us?
            This being ſo, when the ſinnes of a people are full, and when the Lord is purpoſed to bring a judgement upon a people, hee commonly maketh way thereunto. As an earthly King purpoſing to doe a thing which he knoweth is diſpleaſant to his favourite, who would hinder him in it, will make way, by ſending him out of the way, or forbidding him to ſpeake, or ſome way taking him off: So the Lord, ſometimes by taking to himſelfe, 1. Reſtraint Death. and calling out of this world, ſuch as elſe would ſtand in the gap; whereof the Prophet Eſay thus ſpeaketh; The righteous is taken away from the evill to come 
               Eſay. 57. 1.. Thus God tooke away

good King Ioſiah, that in his ſonnes daies he might bring the threatned evill upon the Land 2 Chron. 34. 28..: And God tooke good S. Auguſtine, when his City Hippo was beſieged by the Vandals, that he ſhould not ſtand in the breach for them 
                  Moritur B. Auguſtinus in urbe Hipponae, cum à Vandalis obſideretur, temporibus Theodoſij Iunioris, Anno Dom. 430. Sixt. Senenſ. lib. 4. 2. Reſtraint..
            Or if he ſuffer them to live, he reſtraineth them from praier, as here he did our Prophet; and rebuked Samuel, How long wilt thou mourne for Saul, ſeeing I have reiected him from reigning over Iſrael 
               1 Sam. 16. 1.. Or elſe he takes away the ſpirit of praier, and doth ſuffer it to be dulled, as that they cannot pray fervently; as Eſay complained that no man did ſtirre up himſelfe 
                  Malū, orationem, ejuſque vim amovere. Caſtro. in Ierem. pag. 73. to lay hold on God, but as it were grew weary.
            As then it is a moſt comfortable thing to ſee godly men to live, and to ſee men zealous in preaching, praying, and ſerving God; as when a ſtorme commeth, to ſee all men betake themſelves to their tacklings, as the Prophet ſaith, to ſtirre up them ſelves to lay hold on God: ſo is it a fearefull thing to ſee the righteous taken away by death; or ſuch as have beene zealous, to become cold, careleſſe, and negligent, ſet all at ſix and ſeven, let others care whom it doth more concerne, and ſo poſt it over from one to another. For hereby God even maketh way to the execution of ſome great judgement, by removing ſuch as might ſtand in the breach, and ſtop his courſe.
            And verily, herein lieth no ſmall part of our feare, that within theſe few yeeres paſt, God hath Application. taken away a great number of his faithfull ſervants,

both Magiſtrates, Miniſters, and Chriſtian people; and howſoever in his mercy, he hath left a remnant, ſome few Noahs, and Lots, Nehemiahs, and Eſaies, that being ſenſible of Gods judgements, doe warne this ſecure and unthankfull world, lift up their hearts and hands with Moſes againſt Amalek, make interceſſion with faithfull Abraham, mourne for the abominations of the Land, wreſtle and weepe with Iacob, (otherwiſe we had ſurely beene made long agoe as Sodome, and like to Gomorrha Eſay 1. 9.) yet alas, what are theſe amongſt ſo many prophane, careleſſe, and ſecure ſinners? and how are theſe ſcorned and derided, diſgraced and diſcouraged, how are ſuch for ſignes and wonders in Iſrael, Eſay 8. 18. and generally wiſhed they were taken out of the way, as thoſe that trouble the world, and if it were not for them it would be well, and we ſhould have merry times. Oh unthankfull world, oh wretched and unthankfull world, that wilt not acknowledge, but hate and perſecute ſuch as ſtand in the breach, and reſiſt God! Well know, if ever all the Noahs be is the Arke, and all the Lots out of Sodome; if all theſe ſwallowes have once taken their flight there will come the coldeſt and wofulleſt winter, that ever the Church amongſt us felt and endured. But of this more anon. Let us now proceed to the uſes of this Doctrine, whereof the firſt is.
            Seeing Gods ſervants are powerfull with God, 1. Vſe.
                to prevent judgements threatned to themſelves and others, and ſeeing Gods judgements are not

               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
only threatned to our ſelves, and in fearefull meaſure executed, ſpecially on our brethren in other Countries; let us practiſe this Doctrine, ſtirre up our ſelves, by moſt humble, hearty, and devout praiers, to lay hold on God, and as it were reſiſt him in his courſe, and not let him goe till his indignation be overpaſt. Doe you profeſſe your ſelves the ſervants of God, and will you not doe this? Doe you beleeve, God will heare your praiers, and yet will yee not pray? Oh be not wanting to your ſelves, and to the Church of God in this! In ſome things, Kings and Princes may doe the Church of God good, wherein ſubjects cannot; in other things Miniſters may doe that good, which common Chriſtians cannot; in other things rich men may doe that good, that poore cannot; in other things ſtrong and able men may doe that good, which weake, and feeble, and impotent cannot; yea in many things men may doe that good, which women cannot; but in this, all men and women, may doe alike good, by praier for the good of Gods Church: What can we doe more eaſily, or more fruitfully? It may be we have not ſilver, gold, food, raiment, but none ſo poore, (of Gods Saints) as have not praier. If we were rich, the poorer ſort are only thereby releeved, but by praier we doe good to all, even the richeſt. Againe, whereas ſome other duties, require the preſence of friends, and all of them ſeaſon and opportunity; it is never out of ſeaſon to pray; yea therewith even in the twinckling of an eie, we may

helpe ſuch as are thouſands of miles off. Oh fie on our dulneſſe then, ſpecially the members of Chriſt Reprehenſion. (to whom we cannot otherwiſe doe good) ſo greatly ſtanding in need hereof, that we ſhould ſo ſeldome and coldly, (if at all) helpe them with our praiers; ſpecially God ſo calling upon us for it, and giving ſuch comfortable aſſurance we ſhall be heard. If an earthly Prince ſhould make Proclamation Simile. to all his ſubjects, that if they would come to the Court, and make ſuit, they ſhould all of them have Lordſhips, houſes, lands, mannors, offices; imagine what riding and running there would be; how would they thinke him moſt worthy to beg his bread, yea to ſtarve through want, if he would not goe and aske? But that the King of heaven hath commanded us to pray, and promiſed, whatſoever good thing we ſhall aske in his Sonnes name, according to his will, we ſhall have it, for this life preſent, or a better hereafter, for our ſelves or others; and we ſee how well others have ſped, yea our ſelves have had great experience of Gods goodneſſe in this kinde: and it may be God hath cut us  and others ſhort, and threatned much evill, and all becauſe he would provoke us to pray, as delighting to be importuned, and wreſtled with: Yet all this will not ſerve to provoke us ſo to pray as we ought. It may be Conceſsion. ſickneſſe, hunger, thirſt, nakedneſſe, temporall loſſes and croſſes, may make us ſometimes cry unto God: but who doth ſtrive with God for the beſt things for themſelves? And to ſpeake according to the nature of my Text, How is Ieruſalems

good generally forgotten? It may be, we may beare her a good will, and for faſhion or cuſtome, as we walke and talke with others, let good wiſhes fall, rejoice when we heare good newes; ſhake heads, ſhucke the ſhoulders, and ſigh, when we heare evill tidings; (and yet how few doe thus farre teſtifie their love?) but who (even of her beſt friends) frequently, and fervently, publikely and privately, at leaſt thrice a day with Daniel, looketh toward Ieruſalem? and for Ieruſalem, whetting the edge of our zeale and devotion, by premeditation of what an happineſſe it were, and how greatly to Gods honour and glory, that Ieruſalem ſhould proſper, and what a miſery, and diſhonor to God, that ſhe ſhould goe to wracke and ruine; helping our weakneſſe, with abſtinence and faſting, as Nehemiah, and Heſther, and the Iewes did, that ſo we may cry mightily unto God, and reſolved with the woman of Canaan, to take no nay, the Lord ſhall never be rid of us, we will never ceaſe knocking at heavens gate till he heare, and helpe?
            Oh where are theſe friends? Why doth the Church of God ſuffer ſo much evill? Why doth ſhe lie open to the execution of ſuch fearefull judgements? Becauſe Gods faithfull ſervants give way, and doe not ſtand in the breach for her, to reſiſt God. There was a curſe, yea a bitter curſe, laid upon the inhabitants of Meroz, becauſe they did not helpe the Lord againſt the mighty, Iudg. 5. 23. And no leſſe curſe doth lie on the Inhabitants of any Place and Countrey, when the

Lord is in armes, that doe not by their prayers helpe the poore weake Church againſt God: that doe not lay hold on him and reſiſt him, but ſuffer him to cruſh and deſtroy. The greateſt victories and deliverances that ever we read of, were obtained by faſting and prayer, yea ſeldome, if ever, was the Church in any trouble and danger, and delivered, but it was procured by prayer: and ſurely it is not without divine providence and grace, that Gods Miniſters doe ſo labour to ſtirre you up, for even that ſheweth God hath a great bleſſing in ſtore for his Church, if his ſervants would but aske it of him. Wherefore I ſay againe, Pray, pray, pray for the welfare of Ieruſalem, they ſhall proſper that love it. Wherefore God Concluſion. hath ſent me to you, and to call on all that heare me this day, Pray, pray, pray, and to make you excuſeleſſe if yee neglect it. And that mine exhortation hereunto may bee the more waightie and powerfull, I will deliver it in the words of the holy Prophet Zephanie, our Prophets fellow-labourer, who having in the firſt chapter threatned the heavie and ſevere iudgements of God againſt Iudah for her ſinnes, That the Lord would utterly 
               Zeph. 1. 
               conſume all things from the land, man and beaſt, fowles and fiſhes, and that the great day of the Lord is neere, and haſteth greatly, when the waightie man ſhall crie bitterly, for it is a day of wrath, a day of trouble and diſtreſſe, a day of waſtneſſe and deſolation, a day of darkneſſe and gloomineſſe, a day of the trumpet and alarum, againſt the defenced Cities and high towers: bloud ſhall bee powred out as duſt, and fleſh at dung:
               
               neither ſhall ſilver nor gold bee able to deliver them in the day of the Lords wrath, but the whole land ſhall bee devoured by the fire of his iealouſie, for hee ſhall make a cleane riddance of all them that dwell in the land. I ſay, after the Prophet had thus ſpent, and concluded the firſt chapter in denunciation of ſevere judgements, in that fearefull manner, as might make the knees knocke, and haire ſtand upright: marke how he beginneth the ſecond chapter, with heavenly and good counſell, Gather your ſelves together, yea, gather together, ô nation not deſired before the decree bring forth, before the day paſſe as the chaffe, before the fierce anger of the Lord come upon you, before the day of the Lords anger come upon you, ſeeke yee the Lord, all the meeke of the earth, which have wrought his iudgement, ſeeke righteouſneſſe, ſeeke meekneſſe, it may be ye ſhall be hid, in the day of the Lords anger 
               Zeph. 2. 1..
            Where note, that when Gods judgements are 1. Obſerv.
                threatned, men and women muſt not ſit downe careleſly with hand over head; Let God doe his will, I ſhall eſcape aswell as others, it concerneth mee the leaſt of many thouſands. But God would have men to be exceedingly affected at the teſtimonies of Gods anger, and to tremble at his judgements: a Doctrine which hath beene raiſed, and largely handled from this Scripture already.
            Secondly, note, that hee would not have the faithfull content themſelves to mourne and pray 2. Obſerv.
                in ſecret, but to gather together, ſo farre as their callings and gifts will ſerve, to draw on others to the practiſe of pietie and godlineſſe.
            
               
Thirdly, note who they are that God ſpecially 3. Obſerv.
                looketh ſhould ſeeke him, as being his favourites, and ſuch as are beſt able to reſiſt him, even ſuch as are meeke on earth, i. Such as are meeke to ſtoope to the inſtructions of the Word, ſuch as are meeke patiently to beare the corrections of his rod; and ſuch as are meeke, to put up wrongs and injuries, ſtill crying to God for the good of his people, even when they offer them greateſt injuries. Such a meeke man was Moſes, moſt earneſt for the peoples good, when they were readieſt to ſtone him. Moreover, they muſt be ſuch as have wrought his judgements; i. Such as have kept themſelves unſpotted, and ſpecially from Idolatrie, ſuch as have ſtill cleaved unto God, his Word, Law, and Commandements, doing ſuch things as hee hath judged to be juſt and right, ſtill walking with God as Enoch did; theſe are the men, who in all ages have only beene in favour with God, and moſt powerfull with their prayers: wherefore Pharaoh intreated Moſes and Aaron to pray for him; and the people in their diſtreſſe runne to Samuel, and pray him not to ceaſe to one to God for them. And verily how 
                  〈◊〉
                
               
                  〈◊〉
                wicked world eſteeme of them, all the hope and helpe of a people that can come from man, remaineth in theſe, and their prayers only. Againe, that their prayers may be 4. Obſerv.
                the more available, it muſt not ſuffice that they have beene meeke, and have wrought right, but they muſt ſeeke meekneſſe and righteouſneſſei. Labour everie day to be more and more meeke and righteous, walking with ſuch care and conſcience

in all the Commandements and Ordinances of God, that the world cannot have the leaſt matter againſt them, except it be as againſt Daniel, for the matters, of their God: for the more mortified, ſanctified, and holy any are, in the greater favour they are with God, and the more powerfull are their prayers, for themſelves and others. Whereas God will not heare ſinners, no not for themſelves, much leſſe for others, it being as dangerous for a ſinner to come neare unto God, as for the drie ſtubble to come neare the flaming fire. Wherefore David would waſh his hands in innocencie, and ſo goe to his table Pſal. 26. 6.; and the Prieſts had their laver to waſh hands and feet in, before they went to miniſter to the Lord.
            Then laſtly obſerve, what ſhall be the comfortable 5. Obſerv.
                iſſue of ſuch ſeeking God; viz. That if they cannot prevaile with Gods Majeſty, for the ſparing of his people, yet they ſhall ſave their owne ſoules, and finde an hiding place in the day of the Lord. One of theſe two, or both, they ſhall be ſure to finde; and the very leſſer of them is an abundant reward, for all the labour any can take in ſeeking, God, though it were day and night. An example whereof we have in our Prophet, who taking exceedingly to heart, the miſery of Gods people which he foreſaw, and wiſhing his head were waters, and his eies a fountaine of teares, that he might weepe day and night for his people 
               Ierem. 9. 1.: and proteſting to God, that he ſtood before him to ſpeake good for them, and to turne away his wrath Ierem. 18. 20.; howſoever therein he could not prevaile,

and in the end God forbade him to pray for them, yet his praiers and teares were returned into his owne boſome; for as God promiſed him, Verily I will make the enemies to entreat thee well, in the time of evill, and in the time of affliction 
               Ierem. 15. 11., ſo God performed it: For Ieremy being in priſon when Ieruſalem was taken, Nabuzaradan the chiefe Steward, (according to the command which Nebuchad-nezzar had given him) not only ſet him at liberty, but gave him victuals, and a reward, with leave to goe whither he would Iere. 40. 2, 3, 4, 5.; ſo good a thing it is to be faithfull unto God, how ever things goe with his Church.
            Upon theſe grounds from Gods Word, I renew Concluſion. mine exhortation againe, Pray, pray, pray, you ſhall at the leaſt deliver your owne ſoules. Yea let me yet ſpeake a word of further comfort Conſolation. unto you; I cannot finde one example in all the Booke of God, wherein a people humbling themſelves in ſincerity, in any meaſure, according to the ordinance and word of the Lord, but they were ever delivered from that temporall judgement threatned, at the leaſt for the preſent. Oh therefore that it would pleaſe God, that the Lords Miniſters could ſtirre up all the meeke of the Land, to ſeeke the Lord in repentance and praier, to ſtep up into the breach, intercede, and reſiſt God, I would not doubt, but as to ſee judgements paſſe over us, ſo to ſee peace on Gods Iſrael abroad. There is helpe for Ieruſalem in her God, and when the Lord hath brought her on her knee, and clothed her with ſackcloth, for

her ſinnes, he will viſit the fruit of the proud heart of the King of Aſhur, and the glory of his high lookes, who doth not know, that he is the rod of Gods wrath 
               Eſay 10. 6, 7.. The ſtripes of Ieruſalem ſhall be healed, but the wounds of Babylon are incurable, there is no Balme in Gilead for her; Ieruſalem may be ſhaken, but it is Babylon ſhall fall, and never riſe againe: Oh then pray, and pray heartily, for the welfare of Ieruſalem, and then ſtand ſtill, and ſee the ſalvation of God 
               Exod. 14. 13., who hath meanes that we ſee not, to accompliſh his act, his ſtrange act, and to bring to paſſe his worke, even his ſtrange worke Eſay 28. 21..
            A ſecond uſe, is to love, honour, and make much 2. Vſe.
                of ſuch, as are ſo gracious and powerfull with God, as to ſtand in the breach, and to withſtand and remove threatned judgements. Oh let Noah the Preacher of righteouſneſſe, have double honour; let Lot be loved, that doth grieve his righteous ſoule; let us make great reckoning of Moſes, that ſtandeth in the breach, to ſtay the Lords anger; for as was ſaid of Elijah, Theſe, theſe, are the chariots and horſemen of Iſrael 2 King. 2. 12.. Theſe, theſe, are the protection of the Church, and fortification of the Land: Theſe are to us, as Paul was unto them in the ſhip with him, the ſaving of houſes and goods, lives and liberties; it is for the godlies ſake that dwell amongſt us, that the Goſpell, and our gracious King and Governor, peace and proſperity, with all other our bleſſings are continued unto us: if it had not beene for their ſakes, we may well aſſure our ſelves, the full viols

of Gods wrath, (as in the Powder Treaſon, or otherwiſe) had long ſince beene powred downe upon us.
            And here give me leave (upon ſo juſt occaſion) Reprehenſion. to reprove the unthankfulneſſe of the world, towards ſuch, as, under God, are a ſingular meanes of our preſervation. Never were Noah, or Lot, more mocked, ſcorned, and derided, than the godly in theſe daies, diſgraced, and loaded with all indignities, as the men unworthy to live in the world; who if they humble their ſoules with faſting, and put on ſack cloth, they that ſit in the gate ſpeake againſt them, and the drunkards make ſongs of them, Pſal. 69. And when it pleaſeth God to take them away by death, they are as glad thereof, as the inhabitants of the earth were for the death of the two witneſſes, who reioiced, and made merry, and ſent gifts one to another 
               Revel. 11. 10.. Alas that this fooliſh world ſhould be ſuch an enemy to its beſt friends, and from whom it receiveth moſt good. Oh little doe wicked men know, what a treaſure they loſe in the death of a good man, how open then they lie to the laſh of Gods judgements, when he is gone, that uſed to ſtand in the breach. It was ſaid of Elijah (as you heard) that he was the chariots and horſemen of Iſrael 2 King. 2. 12.. And it was ſaid of godly S. Ambroſe, Biſhop of Millaine, and of whom Theodoſius the Emperour pronounced, That hee onely knew Ambroſe worthy to be called a Biſhop 
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  ., That he was the wals of Italy: and Stilico the Earle ſaid, his death did threaten deſtruction to Italy Sic Paulinus Nolae Epiſcopus in vita Ambroſij.. And indeed,

how Italy hath beene harrowed and brought to deſolation by the fire and ſword of barbarous Nations, the Goths, Hunnes, and Vandals, and made the Theater of moſt lamentable Tragedies, Hiſtories doe report. In places where enemies are up in Armes, chariots and horſes are in great requeſt; and when enemies beſiege, there is great regard had to the wals; if they have breaches made in them, and none to defend, or fall downe flat (as the wals of Iericho did Ioſh. 6. 20.) thoſe Cities muſt needs be ſurpriſed: Now good men are as the wals of the Common-wealth, City, or Towne, where they dwell; if it were not for them, the judgements of God would breake in, and deſtroy them. How are ſuch to be eſteemed? Noah was as a wall to the old world, and no ſooner in the Arke, but the floud came and deſtroyed them all. Lot was as a wall to Sodome, and no ſooner in Zoar, but fire and brimſtone fell and conſumed them all. The Chriſtians were as the wall to Ieruſalem, and no ſooner in Pella, but Ieruſalem was ſurpriſed and ſacked. No ſooner had Ioſiah his eies cloſed, that he might not ſee the vengeance, but be taken to reſt, as God had promiſed, but ſtraightway the wofull tragedy of Iudah and Ieruſalem beganne. Wherefore the Prophet complaineth, that good and mercifull men are taken away, and men doe not take it to heart Eſay 57. 1., as a great loſſe, and fearefull prognoſtication of evill.
            For concluſion, ſeeing Gods ſervants are ſo Concluſion. powerfull with God, and that only by praier, and we doe not know how to pray, as we ought ourſelves,
               
               but it is the Spirit which helpeth our infirmitie 
               Rom. 8. 15. 26., and maketh us cry Abba Father 
               Rom. 8. 15. 26.: And God hath promiſed, to give his Spirit to them that aske it 
               Luk. 11. 13.. As every good gift commeth downe from the Father of lights 
               Iam. 1. 17., ſo ſpecially this moſt excellent, proper, and peculiar gift of praier. I pray you obſerve, that whereas the Lord by his Prophet promiſeth, I will deſtroy all the Nations that come againſt Ieruſalem, he preſently addeth in the next words, as the meanes whereby ſo great a favour is procured, I will poure upon the houſe of David, and upon the Inhabitants of Ieruſalem, the ſpirit of grace, and of ſupplication 
               Zach. 12. 9, 10..
            Where note, firſt, what is the lot and condition 1. Obſerv.
                of all the perſecutors of Ieruſalem, that firſt or laſt, they ſhall be deſtroyed. Secondly, that the 2. Obſerv.
                meanes whereby deſtruction is procured, of the enemies of Ieruſalem, Gods Church and people, is praier. Laſtly, that this gift of praier commeth 3. Obſerv.
                downe from God, it is his gift, he will poure out the ſpirit of ſupplications: and verily as there is no gift more neceſſary and uſefull, none more rare; how poore are ſome in this, that are rich in ſome other graces? I know, God giveth this in meaſure, to ſome more, and ſome leſſe, according to his good pleaſure. And God forbid, I ſhould diſcourage any, (and ſpecially novices, and younglings) for it is moſt cleare, that even the ſighs and groanes of a faithfull penitent ſoule, are loud and ſhrill cries in the eares of God: ſhort ejaculations, God be mercifull unto me; God bleſſe his Church; God proſper his Goſpell;

God convert, or confound, the enemies of his Church and Truth; even theſe, uttered, not for forme, faſhion, vſe, cuſtome, but fervently, heartily, are moſt excellent and powerfull praiers; yet herein we are not to reſt, but to ſeeke after a growth in this, as in other graces of the Spirit, and never to ceaſe begging of God, till in good meaſure, according to the Scripture phraſe, even in the language of Canaan, we be able to expreſſe our owne wants, and the wants of his Church; and in his owne words, to crave ſuch bleſſings and graces, as we, or his people, doe ſtand in need of; Standing in the breach, with his owne weapons, of gracious Covenant, and Promiſe, and Oath, in one hand, and urging his owne Arguments, of truth, grace, glory. Oh this is an excellent gift indeed, and this is the way to bring deſtruction upon the enemies of Ieruſalem; and whoſoever ſeeketh this grace, ſhall in good meaſure obtaine it; and as any receive, let them uſe it, and they ſhall, to their great comfort, ſee a bleſſed increaſe of it.
            Oh moſt gracious good God, wee humbly A Praier. thanke thee, that though our ſinnes be many, great and grievous, yet thou haſt not ſuddenly rooted us up, and deſtroyed us, as we have deſerved; but haſt, for many and many yeares, from thy word, and workes, of mercy, and juſtice, on our ſelves and others, warned us. Thou never gaveſt greater and fairer warning to any people, than thou haſt done to us. But ſeeing thou art a God of juſtice, and when thy patience is long

abuſed, and no meanes will ſerve, thou viſiteſt indeed, and in dreadfull manner; Lord give us grace, to take to heart thy threatned judgements, and ſtirre up all thy faithfull ſervants, that they may ſtand in the breach, to turne away thine anger from us; yea Lord, give to all us that have heard thee this day, the ſpirit of praier and ſupplication, that by our lips and lives, we may cry unto thee. And becauſe Atheiſme, and Popiſh Idolatry, are the common plagues, wherewith thou doſt ſcourge a people, who doe not receive the love of the truth, nor walke worthy the glorious Goſpell vouchſafed unto them; Lord deliver us from theſe plagues, grant thy Goſpell a free and powerfull paſſage, and increaſe every where the love and obedience of it, that ſuch judgements as are threatned for contempt of it, may be removed, and thou maieſt continue a good God, to us and ours, to the comming of Chriſt. Amen.
            
               For I will not heare thee.] It is very common Senſe. in the Scriptures of Old and New Teſtament, to promiſe and threaten, the grant or deniall of mens praiers, in this forme of hearing or not hearing. One place of Scripture (ſelected out of a great multitude) may ſerve for proofe of this: Wee know that God heareth not ſinners: but if any man be a worſhipper of God, and doth his will, him he heareth 
               Ioh. 9. 31.. So then, the meaning (of not hearing) is, God will denie what the Prophet ſhould thus begge of God. If the Prophet (contrary to his charge) ſhould make his ſuit unto

God, to ſpare his people, and preſerve them from captivitie, hee would not heare, hee would not grant his deſire; he ſhould but ſinne againſt God himſelfe, and doe the people no good; God was now unchangeably reſolved, Iudah ſhould into captivitie, as well as their brethren the ten Tribes; he was reſolved to caſt them out of his ſight, as he had done the whole ſeed of Ephraim; and it were bootleſſe for the Prophet to pray againſt this, which he ſignifieth thus, I will not heare thee 
               Non ego exaudiam.. Indeed it is true, that the judgements of God are commonly conditionall, as God himſelfe hath Prevention. ſaid, At what time I ſhall ſpeake concerning a nation, and concerning a kingdome, to plucke up, to pull downe, and deſtroy it; if that nation againſt whom I have pronounced, turne from their evill, I will repent of the evill which I thought to doe unto them 
               Ierem. 18. 7, 8.. And in threatnings, ſometimes the condition is expreſſed, as divers times God threatneth his people thus; If ye walke contrary to me, and will not hearken unto me, I will puniſh you ſeven times more 
               Levit. 26. 18, 21, 24.. Sometimes the condition is not expreſſed, but neceſſarily underſtood, as when Ionah threatned Ninivie, Yet fortie dayes, and Ninivie ſhall be deſtroyed 
               Ionah. 3. 4.; the fortie dayes came, and Ninivie was not deſtroyed, God changed his revealed will, becauſe the concealed condition was kept, for Ninivie repented, and therefore muſt not be deſtroyed. Yea the ſame judgement which at the firſt threatning may be conditionall, yet afterwards may become abſolute, and unavoidable; as the deſtruction of Sodome was at the firſt conditionally

threatned, and therefore Abraham ſo farre prevailed with God, that if there were but ten righteous perſons found in it, he would ſpare them for thoſe tens ſake Gen. 18. penult.; but that condition failing, it was in the next place abſolutely threatned, the Angels ſaid to Lot; The Lord hath ſent us to deſtroy this City, and we will deſtroy it 
               Gen. 19. 13.. It might be the caſe of this people: if when Gods ſervants Application. reproved them for their ſinnes, and threatned them with captivity, they had repented in ſackcloth and aſhes, peradventure the Lord would have heard them, and repented of the evill: But ſeeing they would not be reformed, but grew worſe and worſe, and unto all their other ſinnes, adding this crying one, of evill entreating, yea moſt ſhamefully abuſing Gods ſervants, who dealt faithfully with them, to bring them to the ſight of their ſinnes and repentance; honouring and eſteeming none but the falſe Prophets, who preached peace, and pleaſing things: God is now reſolved to bring a heavie judgement, even the ſword of the enemie upon them, and to give them over into captivity, revealeth this purpoſe to his Prophet Ieremy: The Land ſhall be deſolate, the earth ſhall mourne, and the heavens above be blacke; I have ſpoken it, I have purpoſed it, and will not repent, neither will I turne backe from it 
               Ierem. 4. 28.. Yea to make it (if it were poſſible) more ſure, he told him, He had ſworne by himſelfe, that houſe (wherein they ſo truſted) ſhould become a deſolation 
               Ierem. 22. 5.. And to adde yet more waight thereunto, expreſly forbiddeth the Prophet to pray, cry, or make interceſſion

to him in behalfe of the people in this kinde, aſſuring him, if he ſhould he would not heare him, or grant his requeſt. The ſenſe being given, and that which might be ſaid againſt it, prevented, now I raiſe your fourth and laſt leſſon, for inſtruction, viz.
            
            That ſuch may be the ſinnes of Gods deare 4. Gen. Doct.
                Church, and people in generall, and of his faithfull ſervants in particular, that he will bring ſome temporall judgement upon them, and he will not heare themſelves, nor others for them, in this kinde 
                  Cum Deus ſemel ab intimis iraſcendo diſponit. Ordin. gloſſ. ex Gregor. in Exod. 32. 10.. This being a Doctrine which doth ſo exceedingly concerne us, even as much as all our lives, and livelihood, bodies, and goods come to, is not ſleightly to be regarded, but in the holy feare of God, to be adviſedly conſidered of, and taken to heart. In the handling whereof, I purpoſe to ſpend all my labours here and elſewhere this day. For method and order wherein, and Method. helpe of memory, there being ſo much now to be delivered, I will firſt ſufficiently prove it, from both poſitive, and exemplary Scriptures; (that all of us may ſee and acknowledge the truth of it) Secondly, declare the reaſons thereof, that we may ſee how juſt and true God is therein; Thirdly, ſearch what are thoſe ſinnes which doe ſo exaſperate and provoke God, that he will not ſpare; (that ſo we may take heed of them) Fourthly and laſtly, I will make application to our ſelves, and ſearch, whether thoſe ſinnes be found amongſt us; and remove ſuch objections as may be made againſt it, and accordingly preſſe the uſe unto

you. And all theſe, I will deliver with ſuch plaine evidence, as I have received from the word, which hath onely power over the ſoule and conſcience. Firſt then, let us ſee how the word of God maketh this doctrine good.
            Firſt, take knowledge, that the Scriptures are 1. Confirmat.
                moſt cleare, that ſuch may be the ſinnes of a people, that God will not regard their owne praying and faſting. Hearken how the Lord himſelfe 1. Not heare them. threatneth a rebellious people: Becauſe I have called, and yee have refuſed, I have ſtretched out mine hand and no man regarded, but yee have ſet at nought all my counſell, and would none of my reproofe, I will laugh at your calamity, and mocke when your feare commeth: when your feare commeth as deſolation, and your deſtruction commeth as a whirlwinde. Then they ſhall call upon me, but I will not anſwer; they ſhall ſeeke me earely, but they ſhall not finde me 
               Prov. 1. 24.. Lo, how the ſinnes of a people may come to that height, that in their greateſt calamity and deſtruction, and when they cry moſt fervently, and ſeeke God earely; yet God will be ſo farre from hearing and anſwering of them, that he will laugh and mocke them. And againe, When yee ſpread forth your hands, I will hide mine eies from you; yea when yee make many praiers, I will not heare 
               Eſay 1. 15.. And againe, by our Prophet he ſaith; When they faſt, I will not heare their cry, but I will conſume them, by the ſword, by the famine, and by the peſtilence 
               Ierem. 14. 12.. And againe, I will bring evill upon them, which they ſhall not be able to eſcape; and though they ſhall cry, yet will I not hearken unto them 
               Ierem. 11. 11.. And againe,

               I will deale in fury, mine eie ſhall not ſpare, neither will I have pitie; and though they cry in mine eares, with a loud voice, yet will I not heare them 
               Ezek. 8. ult.. Loe, how plainly and plentifully, this is proved, though but by a few places, in ſtead of many.
            And as he hath threatned, he will not heare 2. Not others for them. themſelves, though they faſt, and pray, and cry aloud; ſo neither will he heare any others, no not the beſt of his ſervants for them. Marke your Text; Ieremy, an excellent man of God, and ſanctified in his mothers womb, yet God telleth him, if he pray againſt the peoples captivity, he will not heare him; yea and telleth him, (becauſe he ſhould not thinke that he was out of favour) that if Moſes and Samuel ſtood before him, yet his minde could not be towards his people. Caſt them out of my ſight, and let them goe forth; and if they ſay, whither ſhall we goe forth? thou ſhalt tell them, Thus ſaith the Lord, ſuch as are for death, to death; and ſuch as are for the ſword, to the ſword; and ſuch as are for the famine, to the famine; and ſuch as are for the captivity, to the captivity 
               Ierem. 15. 1.. See what perſons God hath picked out of all the bunch, of the Patriarches, Prophets, Judges, and Kings. Who ever prevailed more by praier with God for others, than Moſes and Samuel? When the people had committed that foule Idolatry, in worſhipping the golden Calfe, God ſaid, He would deſtroy them, had not Moſes his choſen ſtood up in the gap 
               Pſal. 106. 23.: But Moſes he beſought the Lord, and prevailed. The Lord repented of the evill, and did it not 
               Exod. 32. 14.. And when the Philiſtims came up againſt Iſrael,

and they were exceedingly afraid, Samuel, Oh faithfull Samuel the Lords Prieſt, cried unto the Lord for Iſrael, and the Lord heard him, and thundred with a great thunder, and diſcomfited the Philiſtims 
               1 Sam. 7. 9.. But if Moſes, and Samuel, did now ſtand before the Lord, his minde cannot be won towards this people, but they ſhall goe into captivity. And againe, by another Prophet he ſaith; Sonne of man, when the Land ſinneth againſt me, by treſpaſsing grievouſly, and I ſtretch out mine hand and breake the ſtaffe of bread, and ſend a famine, and cut off man and beaſt; though theſe three men were in it, Noah, Iob, and Daniel, they ſhould deliver but their owne ſoules by their righteouſneſſe. Or if I bring noiſome beaſts, or bring a ſword, or a peſtilence, to cut off man and beaſt, as I live, ſaith the Lord, though theſe three men were in it, Noah, Daniel, and Iob, yet ſhould they deliver neither ſonne nor daughter, they ſhould only deliver their owne ſoules, but the Land ſhall be deſolate 
               Ezek. 14. 13, 14, 15.. Oh ſee againe, what three Worthies he doth inſtance in? Noah, that upright man in the old World, when all fleſh had corrupted their waies; Iob, that upright man, and fearing God in the Land of Vz; and Daniel, that man of Gods deſire, in Babylon. Three men, who could doe much with God, for whom God did much; yet if they had praied for this people, God would not heare them, they ſhould not be able to deliver ſonne nor daughter, but only their owne ſoules.
            And as ſuch may be the ſinnes of a nation or 2. Of particular perſons. people, ſo alſo of a particular perſon, yea of Gods

deare ſervants, that he will not heare them, but bring ſome temporall puniſhment upon them. How great a favourite was Moſes unto God? to whom God ſpake mouth to mouth, as a man talketh familiarly with his friend 
               Exod. 33. 11. Numb. 12. 6, 7.; who obtained by his praier ſo many and great things at the hands of God for others; ſo apparently honoured and graced of God, that the Lord asked Aaron and Miriam., Wherefore were ye not afraid to ſpeake againſt my ſervant Moſes 
               Numb. 12. 8.? Yet this great and good man, for not ſanctifying God at the waters of ſtrife, yea for once ſpeaking unadviſedly with his lips, and thereunto much provoked by that rebellious people Pſal. 106. 32., was threatned he ſhould not goe into the promiſed land Numb. 20. 12.: An heavie judgement. And though Moſes made it his earneſt ſuit unto God; O Lord God, thou haſt begun to ſhew to thy ſervant great kindneſſe, I pray thee let me goe over and ſee the good land that is beyond Iordan, that goodly mountaine, and Lebanon; yet the Lord would not heare him, but cut him off, ſaying, Let it ſuffice thee, ſpeake no more to me of this matter 
               Deut. 3. 24.. David Gods deare ſervant, and a man after Gods owne heart Acts 13. 22., and for whoſe ſake he did much to others; (how often have we theſe promiſes, for my ſervant Davids ſake?) yet he, begetting a childe on Bethſhebah the wife of Vriah, the Lord ſtrake the childe, that it was very ſicke; and though David beſought the Lord for the childe, and faſted, and went in, and lay all night upon the earth, yet God would not heare him, but on the ſeventh day the childe died, according to the

word of the Lord by his Prophet Nathan; Becauſe by this deed, thou haſt given great occaſion to the enemies of the Lord to blaſpheme, the childe that is borne to thee, ſhall ſurely die 
               2 Sam. 12. 14.. And againe, for his great ſinne of numbring the people, the Lord ſent him a meſſage by his Prophet Gad, that he would ſend either peſtilence, famine, or ſword: and though David repented, and complained that he was in a great ſtrait, yet he could not obtaine freedome, but (according to his choice) God ſent a peſtilence, whereof in three dayes there died ſeventie thouſand men 2 Sam. ult. 13.. Let all men and women then ſubſcribe to this undoubted truth of God, that ſuch may be the ſinnes of Gods Church in generall, or of his owne deare ſervants in particular, that God will not heare themſelves, nor others for them, but will bring ſuch a temporall puniſhment as he hath purpoſed upon them.
            But now me thinketh I heare ſome ſay, Oh Obiect. this is an heavie and comfortleſſe doctrine indeed, and ſeemeth to checke all devotion and humiliation; for will not men, hearing this doctrine delivered, ſay, If the caſe be ſo, that for ſinnes, yea even ſmall ſinnes (as the ſinnes of Moſes, and David, in ſpeaking unadviſedly, and numbring the people, ſeeme to be) God will be ſo farre provoked, as no praying, faſting, crying, teares, of their owne, or others for them, can prevaile, but God will bring a temporall puniſhment; to what end then ſhould we weepe and mourne, faſt and pray, and afflict our ſoules? Let us eat and drinke, and be merry as we may, we muſt beare that puniſhment

which God hath purpoſed to lay upon us; let us therefore never make two evils of one, but take that which God hath appointed, and there an end, Gods will be done.
            Oh, God forbid that any ſhould hearken and Sol. give way to ſuch ſubtill and malicious ſuggeſtions of Satan, ſo ſeeking to pervert and abuſe even the beſt things. Marke therefore, and from Gods booke thou ſhalt learne, that the doctrine doth not abrogate, but eſtabliſh the meanes of pacification. Doſt thou dwell in a nation, Countrey, or Citie, and doſt thou feare, the ſinnes of the people are ſuch, as God will bring ſome judgement upon them? Now marke what God requireth of thee, even to ſeeke the Lord 
               Zeph. 2. 3.; to turne to God, by faſting, weeping, and mourning 
               Iocl 2. 12.; to ſtand for the land 
               Ezec. 22. penult.: and if the Lord will not heare thee for them, yet thou ſhalt ſave thine owne ſoule: The Lord is not more marvellous in any thing, than in preſerving his, in ſome generall judgement and calamitie, that have mourned, and wept, and ſought his face, as wee ſee in the deliverance of Noah, Lot, Ioſiah, and the marking of thoſe in the forehead, that mourned for the abominations of Ieruſalem 
               Ezec. 9. 4.. Thou doſt not know what good thou maiſt doe to others, even to the whole Church of God wherein thou liveſt; but thou ſhalt be ſure to doe thy ſelfe good. Or doſt thou feare that thine owne ſinnes are ſuch, as God will bring a judgement? yet humble thy ſoule, and if thou canſt not by repentance, faſting, and praier, alter the decree, yet thou maiſt alter the manner

of execution. Let Moſes repent, that he did not Examples. ſanctifie God, and let him begge leave to enter, and if that will not be granted, yet ſee with what favour the ſentence ſhall be executed! he ſhall have leave to goe up to the top of Piſgah, and ſee it Deut. 3. 27.; and if he goe not into the land flowing with milke and honey, he ſhall be tranſlated into heaven, which is beſt of all. Let David faſt and pray, and if the childe die, God will give him a Solomon in ſtead of it. Let the people repent, and if God will not heare them, nor any other for them, but they muſt into captivitie, yet God will make, even thoſe that lead them away captive to pitie them Pſal. 106. 46.. Oh, religion never loſt it reward, never did any ſerve God for nought. Wherefore Gods will be done: but lèt us doe our duties, it ſhall one way or other be requited us; and if God heare us not according to our deſire, he will heare us to our profit Non 
                     •
                  e exaudit ad voluntatem, ſed ad utilitatem: non fit quod vis, ſed quod expedit. Aug.. Now let us proceed to conſider the reaſons wherefore the Lord ſometimes will not be intreated, but will bring ſome temporall judgement upon his Church and people: and they are principally theſe.
            Firſt, to declare the juſtice of God: for if God 1. Iuſtice. did threaten, and at every intreatie ſhould forbeare to execute, this were great mercy; but where were juſtice? Wherefore God (ſometimes) will not pardon, in regard of temporall puniſhment, no not his deare ſervants, upon repentance and intreatie, that thereby he might proclaime to all the world the ſeveritie of his juſtice, and thereby men be warned, to take heed of ſinne, it being a

fearfull thing to fall into the hands of God.
            And verily (if we had grace) the remembrance Vſe. hereof would be a notable bridle, to reſtraine us from ſinne, if when Satan tempteth us, and wee are in danger of falling, wee would ſay as Ioſeph did to his impudent miſtreſſe, How ſhall I commit this great ſinne againſt God 
               Gen. 39. 9.? It may be, this ſinne will adde ſo much to the meaſure of my former ſinnes, that God will not be intreated to pardon it, but bring ſome heavie temporall judgement upon me. Would not God heare his Prophet Ieremie, no nor Moſes, and Samuel, Noah, Iob, and Daniel, though praying for his owne people, but caſt them off, a prey to the peſtilence, famine, and ſword? Yea would not God heare his deare ſervants, Moſes and David, praying for themſelves; but even for ſmall ſinnes (in compariſon) brought heavie temporall calamities and chaſtiſements upon them? Oh what am I, a worme of the earth, that I ſhould commit ſuch and ſuch ſinnes, and preſume of impunitie! O ye ſonnes of men, ſtand in awe, and ſinne not 
               Pſal. 4. 4..
            The ſecond reaſon, is for declaration of his 2. Truth. truth: for if God ſhould threaten judgements by his ſervants, and upon every humiliation and intreatie revoke the ſame, his Prophets would be found liers, and light fellowes, and no credit given to their words. This was it that diſpleaſed Ionah ſo exceedingly Ionah 4. 1., that having threatned Ninivie, Yet fortie dayes and Ninivie ſhall be deſtroied, yet upon their repentance, he alſo repented of the evill, and did it not. And indeed ſome Confirmation
               
of the wicked have in this reſpect bolſtered up themſelves in their ſinnes againſt the Prophets of God, ſaying, Let us eat and drinke, for to morrow wee ſhall die 
               Eſay 22. 13. Ierem. 5. 13.: but the Prophets words are but winde; tomorrow ſhall be as to day, and much more abundant 
               Eſay 56. ult.: yea deſperately call for the execution of their threatnings, Let the Lord bring to paſſe, and haſten his great worke, that we may ſee it 
               Ierem. 17. 15.: but the dayes are prolonged, and every viſion faileth, Ezech. 12. 22. For this cauſe, both to maintaine the credit of his Prophets, and to make the wicked to tremble at his word Eſay 66. 5., howſoever ſometimes, upon repentance, he altered the ſentence; yet ſometimes he would not be intreated, but executed judgements as he had threatned. Which Iehu obſerved, when having ſtrucken Ioram dead, the King of Iſrael, and ſonne of Ahab, he ſaid to Bidkar his Captaine, Take and caſt him in the portion of the field of Naboth; for remember how that when thou and I rode together after Ahab his father, the Lord laid this burden upon him. And againe, being told that the dogs had eaten Iezabel, he ſaid, This is the word of the Lord, which he ſpake by his ſervant Elijah the Tiſhbite, ſaying, In the portion of Iezreel ſhall dogs eat the fleſh of Iezabel 
               2 King. 9. 25. 36. Thus hath God made good his threatnings.
            But me thinketh I heare ſome inſult, and ſay, Ob. Tuſh, this is no matter of feare unto us, we have no Prophets in theſe dayes, to foretell judgements, or whoſe threatnings we need to regard.
            I anſwer; Though the gift of prophecie (properly Sol. ſo called) be ordinarily 
                  〈…〉
               
               
Church, neither doe the true Miniſters of the Goſpell now take upon them to foretell, wherewith, when, and how the Lord will puniſh the ſinnes of a people; yet aſſuredly the providence of God is wonderfull, to direct them in their miniſterie, what texts of Scripture to handle, what Doctrines to raiſe, what promiſes or threatnings, comforts or reproofes, to uſe.
            If therefore thou art placed under the miniſterie, or heareſt ſuch an one, as thy ſoule and conſcience Vſe. doth witneſſe, he is the true Miniſter of Chriſt; know that the ſpirit of God doth wonderfully guide and direct his ſtudie and meditation, his Sermons and preaching: and therefore if he be much in the promiſes of the Goſpell, reioyce; if in reproofe of ſinne, be ſorrie; if in the threatning of judgements, feare: he ſpeaketh not raſhly and at randome, the fictions of his owne braine, or publiſh the ſuggeſtions of an evill ſpirit, but undoubtedly he delivereth what he hath received from the Lord: it is the good Spirit of God, directeth his heart, tongue, and pen, to thinke, write, and ſpeake, what he knoweth moſt needfull for his people; and therefore receive it with reverence, as from God; and ſubmit your ſelves to ſuch as watch over your ſoules, and muſt give account unto God for you 
               Heb. 13. 17..
            And verily herein lieth no ſmall part of our feare, that as God hath many waies teſtified his Application. anger, ſo hath he ſtirred up his faithfull ſervants, (both here and elſewhere) by word and writing, 
                  〈…〉
                and preſſe, zealouſly to reprove the

great and monſtrous ſinnes of this age; and as ſonnes of thunder, to cauſe every corner of the Land, to ring with the threatning, and denunciation of ſome judgement or other, and to call and cry for repentance, whereby the ſame may be prevented; which cannot be without God, who undoubtedly (without repentance) will in his good time, make good their word, when mens hearts ſhall breake within them, to remember, they were told ſo before. And ſo much for the maine reaſons, why ſometimes God will not be intreated to the contrary, but will puniſh a people, viz. The declaration of his juſtice, and truth, that he may be feared, and beleeved, when by his ſervants he doth threaten.
            It now followeth according to my propoſed 3. The ſinnes. method, to declare what ſinnes they are, which then did, now doe, and for ever will, ſo provoke God, and exaſperate him, that he will not ſpare; and namely what were the ſinnes, which brought this miſerable and inevitable captivity upon this people, and which threaten the like judgement, whereſoever found. And therein two things are to be conſidered, viz. The ſinnes for their kindes; and the meaſure or proportion of them. What their ſinnes were, will appeare from the Prophets ſent unto them, to reprove them, and threaten their captivity, which were, our Prophet, Ezechiel, Nahum, Zephany, Habacuck, and Ioel 
               
                  Dan. fore-notes on the ſmall Prophets, cap. 11.. Wherefore from their Propheſies only, and ſpecially of thoſe two great and worthy Prophets, I will gather light to this purpoſe, and from them prove what

I ſhall deliver. And that I and you, may the more orderly proceed, and better remember them, I will range them in certaine rankes.
            As firſt, the ſinnes of the Prieſts, and then of the people: the ſinnes of the Prieſts, either in regard Method. of their Miniſtery, or converſation: the ſins of the people, were either the greater, as againſt the firſt Table; or leſſer, as againſt the ſecond Table. The laying open of theſe things, will both declare the juſtice of God, who would not be entreated to ſpare ſo ſinfull a people, and alſo admoniſh all people to beware of ſuch ſinnes, for feare of a like judgement.
            And firſt note, that judgement beginneth at Gods Sanctuary Ezech. 9. 6.. And no marvell; for there beganne the corruption of all ſorts of men Ierem. 23. 15.. The Prophets did moſt reprove, and cry out againſt the Prieſts, who in their Miniſtery, firſt, 1. For Miniſtery. were blinde and ignorant. It is true, they were wonderfully conceited of their learning and 1. Ignorant. knowledge, and like enough they had a great meaſure (at leaſt ſome of them) of worldly wiſdome, and humane learning; but they rejected the word of the Lord, and then what wiſdome was in them Ierem. 8. 8, 9.? Whereby it appeareth, that howſoever the Prieſts lips ſhould preſerve the knowledge of God 
               Malac. 2. 7.; and God made his Prophets Seers, and Watchmen, to preſerve the people from judgements to come, by declaring their ſinnes, and directing them in the waies of God; yet before the captivity, they generally rejected the word of God, and were ſimple, without any power

to tell the people of their ſinnes, or give direction what courſe to take, whereby to prevent enſuing judgements. Secondly, they dealt falſely in their 2. Deceitfull dealing. Miniſtery, which the Lord complaineth of, ſaying; If they had ſtood in my counſell, and declared my words to my people, then ſhould they have turned them from their evill waies 
               Ierem. 23. 22.. And the Prophet bewaileth this fault: Thy Prophets have not diſcovered thine iniquity, to turne away thy captivitie 
               Lament. 2. 14.; but gave themſelves to ſerve the time, and pleaſe men, flattering, and ſaying, peace, peace 
               Ierem. 6. 14.; building, and dawbing with untempered morter 
               Ezec. 13. 10, 11.. They told the people all was well, and that they ſhould ſee neither ſword nor famine, nor any evill 
               Ierem. 23. 17, 13.. And if any one dealt more faithfully with the people, ſhewing their ſinnes, and labouring to touch their conſciences, and to humble them, that ſo they might prevent the judgement (as Ieremy, Ezechiel, and ſome others did) thoſe wicked Prieſts and Prophets were angry, and aſſured the people, they did but terrifie and diſcourage them, without cauſe; all was well: Yea that falſe Prophet Hananiah, tooke away the yoke (which by Gods command Ieremy did weare, whereby to ſignifie their captivity) and brake it, & propheſied falſely. Thus within two yeeres, will God breake the yoke of Nebuchad-nezzar King of Babylon 
               Ierem. 27. 2. 28. 10.: yea Paſhur could not hold his hand, but ſmote Ieremy, and put him in the ſtocks 
               Ierem. 20. 1..
            And as they were corrupt in their Miniſtery, 2. In converſation profane. and enemies to ſuch as were faithfull, ſo were they moſt prophane in their lives and converſations,

being carnall and earthly minded: From the leaſt to the greateſt, every one was given to covetouſneſſe; and from the Prophet to the Prieſt, every one did deale falſely 
               Ierem. 6. 12. 8. 10.. And againe, Both Prophet and Prieſt are prophane; yea in mine houſe, have I found their wickedneſſe, ſaith the Lord 
               Ierem. 23. 11.. Whereas God told Baruch, that which I have built, I will breake downe, and that which I have planted, I will plucke up, even this whole Land, and ſeekeſt thou great things for thy ſelfe? ſeeke them not, Ier. 45. 4. As this was the great corruption of the Prieſts and falſe Prophets, ſo the people did exceedingly further it, and increaſe it in them. For firſt, they approved and liked well of flattery; ſo the Lord himſelfe ſaid, A wonderfull and horrible thing is committed in the Land: The Prophets propheſie falſelie, and the Prieſts beare rule by their meanes, and my people love to have it ſo 
               Ierem. 5. ult.: Whereas a falſe Prophet is the very taile Eſay 9. 15., and a moſt vile perſon in the eies of the godly Pſal. 15. 4., and as unſauoury ſalt, yea and God had caſt dung in their faces, Mal. 2. 3. Now, ſuch as in their Miniſtery would not trouble them, by telling them of their ſinnes, and threatning of judgements, but preach pleaſing things, heale all with ſweet words, rocke the cradle, and let them ſleepe in ſecurity, apply themſelves to their humours, and play the good fellowes with them; oh theſe were Prophets for the nonſt, theſe were commended, honoured, admired, nothing too good for them: but ſuch as God ſent, and in their miniſterie dealt faithfully and truly with them, they loved them not, could

not away with them; whereas their feet ſhould have beene beautifull unto them Eſay 52. 7.; they ſhould only have knowne their voices and obeyed Ioh. 10. 27.; have eſteemed and loved them as their fathers 1 Cor. 4. 15.; ſubmitted themſelves with reverence Heb. 13. 17.; given them double honour 1 Tim. 5. 17.; had them in ſingular love for their workes ſake 1 Theſſ. 5. 13.; received them even as the Angels and Ambaſſadors of God 2 Cor. 5. 20.; yea as Chriſt Ieſus Gal. 4. 14.; to have encouraged them in their Miniſterie, that they might have performed their office with joy Heb. 13. 17.; duties which God expreſly requireth at the hands of his people. Now before the captivity, they heaped all manner of diſcontents, diſcouragements, and diſgrace, upon them: they would not heare them, or elſe it was but to talke of them, when they came home, as one that had a pleaſant voice, and could ſing well Ezech. 33. 31.: if they reproved them for ſinne, or threatned them with judgement, they regarded it no more than winde Ierem. 5. 12, 13; but ſaid, evill ſhall not come upon us, we ſhall neither ſee ſword nor famine 
               Ierem. 5. 12, 13. They did but mocke, and deride, and reproch him for his Miniſterie Ierem. 20. 7, 8.; his owne countrey-men of Anathoth threatned him, to preach no more unto them, in the name of the Lord; for if he did, he ſhould die by their hands Ierem. 11. 21.: yea at another time, when he had in a publike and great aſſembly, delivered what he had received from the Lord; Prieſts, and Prophets, and all the people, caught him, and ſaid, Thou ſhalt die the death 
               Ierem. 26. 8.. They grievouſly ſlandered and accuſed him, as a man that diſcouraged the people by his preaching,

and weakned the hands of the men of warre, and ſought not the wealth of the people, but their hurt; and therefore the Princes beſought the King to put him to death Ierem. 38. 4.: his enemies conſpired againſt him Ierem. 11. 19.; and his owne familiar friends watched for his halting Ierem. 20. 10.; yea they did ſinite and impriſon him both Ierem. 20. 1., and much endanger his life with the filth of the priſon; for he did ſticke faſt in the mire Ierem. 38. 6.; which made him ſo bitterly to complaine: Woe is me, my mother, that thou haſt borne me a man of ſtriſe, and a man of contention, to the whole earth: I have neither lent nor borrowed an uſury, yet every one of them doth curſe me 
               Ierem. 15. 10.. Yea, he was ſo diſcouraged, that he meant verily to have given up his calling, and to have preached no more unto them; and certainly this he had done, but that the word and Spirit of God were in his heart, as fire ſhut up in his bones, which made him weary of forbearing, and he could not ſtay Ierem. 20. 9.. Thus have you ſeene the great corruption that was in the Prieſts and Prophets generally, both in regard of their Miniſtery, and converſation; and how the people behaved themſelves, both towards the good and bad. Now let us ſee what was the generall condition, and the ſinnes of the people. As, to beginne with ſuch as were greateſt:
            Firſt, they were ignorant of God, as he complaineth: 1. Ignorance. 
               My people is fooliſh, they have not knowne me; they are ſottiſh children, and have no underſtanding; they are wiſe to doe evill, but to doe good, they have not knowledge 
               Ierem. 4. 22.: yea they were more

blockiſh and ſenſleſſe, than the bruit creatures: For the Storke of heaven knoweth her appointed times; the Turtle, Crane, and Swallow, obſerve the time of their comming, but my people know not the iudgement of the Lord 
               Ierem. 8. 7..
            Secondly, Atheiſme; they profeſſed, The Lord 
               2. Atheiſme. 
               hath forſaken the earth, he ſeeth not 
               Ezech. 9. 9.. Neither was this the ſinne of the common people onely, but the Princes, like Atheiſts, deviſed miſchiefe, gave evill counſell, mocked the threatning of the Prophet, and ſaid, Iudgement was not neere, they might build houſes 
               Ezech. 11. 2.. Yea King Iehoiakim himſelfe, like an Arch-Atheiſt, having heard ſome of Ieremies Propheſie read unto him, he cut the roule in peeces, with a pen-knife, and caſt it into the fire, and conſumed it 
               Ierem. 36. 23..
            Thirdly, foule and groſſe Idolatry; both private, in the houſes of their imagery, in the darke; 3. Idolatry. 
               God let his Prophet, through an hole in the wall, ſee ſeventy of the Ancients worſhipping Idols 
               Ezech. 8. 8.; and alſo publike, On every hill, and under every greene tree playing the harlot; ſaying to a ſtocke, thou art my father, and to a ſtone, thou haſt brought me forth 
               Ierem. 2. 20. 27.: yea in the Cities of Iudah, and ſtreets of Ieruſalem, offering cakes to the Queene of heaven, and powring out drinke offerings to other gods 
               Ierem. 7. 18.; yea they ſet their abominations in the houſe, which is called by my name, to defile it 
               Ierem. 32. 34.. See how Idolatry groweth, from chambers, to hils; from hils in the Country, to ſtreets in the Cities; yea into the Temple. This was that ſpirituall whordome, which all the Prophets with open mouth cried out againſt: and no

marvell; for as a man will beare with much frowardneſſe and unkindneſſe in his wife, but by no meanes will endure her to commit whordome; ſo God will beare with many ſinnes in his people, but cannot endure Idolatry, ſpirituall whordome and adultery; that never eſcaped heavie puniſhment.
            Fourthly, the taking of Gods name in vaine; 4. Taking Gods name in vaine. hearing the word but of faſhion, cuſtome, or ſiniſter reſpects. Behold (ſaith God) their eare is uncircumciſed, they cannot hearken; behold, the word of the Lord is to them a reproch, they have no delight in it 
               Ierem. 6. 10..
            Adde hereunto their ſoule hypocriſie, whereby 5. Hypocriſie. they cauſed the name and religion of God to be blaſphemed. Will yee ſteale, murther, and commit adultery, and ſweare falſely, and burne incenſe to Baal, and come and ſtand before me in this houſe, which is called by my Name? Is this houſe become a denne of robbers in your eies? behold, I have ſeene it, ſaith the Lord 
               Ier. 7. 9, 10, 11.. And he told his Prophet Ezechiel, the people would ſay one to another; Come, let us heare what is the word that commeth forth from the Lord: and they come and ſit before thee, and heare thy words, but they will not doe them: for with their mouthes they ſhew much love, but their hearts goe after their covetouſneſſe 
               Ezech. 33. 30.. And againe, treacherous Iudah hath not turned unto me with her 
               6. Prophanation of the Sabbath. 
               whole heart, but fainedly, ſaith the Lord 
               Ierem. 3. 10..
            Prophanation of the Sabbaths, another ſinne cauſing their captivity, and much reproved and
threatned, by the Prophets of God 
                  Ierem. 17. 21, 22, 23.
                  Ezech. 20. 16. 22. 8.
               .
            
               
Moreover, the land was full of bloudie crimes 
               Ezech. 7. 23., 7. Murther. by reaſon of murder, man ſlaughter, quarrelling, fighting. Alſo polluted with all manner of carnall 8. Adulterie. uncleanneſſe, adulterie and fornication, aſſembling themſelves by troopes in harlots houſes: and they were as fed horſes in the morning; every one neighed after his neighbours wife. Shall I not viſit for theſe things, ſaith the Lord, and ſhall not my ſoule be avenged on ſuch a nation as this 
               Ierem. 5. 7.? Yea this was ſo common a ſinne, that he called them all, adulterers 
               Ierem. 9. 2.: yea they committed inceſt, humbling their owne ſiſters, and defiling their daughters in law; yea humbling ſuch as were ſet apart for pollution 
               Ezec. 22. 10, 11..
            Likewiſe they did oppreſſe, defraud, and wrong 9. Oppreſſion. one another, by falſe weights, and meaſures, and devoure one another by cruell uſurie, and unjuſt gaine, and did even ſet traps and ſnares to catch men 
               Ierem. 5. 26., building houſes by unrighteouſneſſe, and chambers by wrong: uſing their neighbours ſervice without wages, and not giving him for his worke 
               Ierem. 22. 13.: taking uſurie and increaſe, and greedily gaining by extortion 
               Ezech. 22. 12.. And all this was ſpent in ſumptuous buildings, ſetting their neſts on high, and making 10. Sumptuous buildings. glorious houſes Hab. 2. 9.: in pride of apparell, taking up every vaine, fooliſh, and new fangled faſhion. And when Gods Prophets did moſt threaten vengeance, and they ſhould have humbled themſelves in ſackcloth and aſhes; loe, then did they 11. Pride in apparell. moſt give themſelves to gariſhneſſe, tricking, pranking, and painting themſelves, in ſcorne of God. Wherefore the Lord threatned them, that

he would puniſh the Princes, and Kings children, and all ſuch as were clothed with ſtrange apparell 
               Zeph. 1. 8.. Alſo they gave themſelves to maintaine exceſſe 12. Exceſſe in diet. in diet, drinking, and making one another drunke; which one of the Prophets thus threatned: Woe to him that giveth his neighbour drinke, that putteth the bottle unto him, and maketh him drunken 
               Hab. 2. 15..
            Moreover, they were moſt unthankfull for 13. Vnthankfulneſſe. bleſſings received; never ſaid, Let us feare the Lord our God, that giveth raine, both the former and latter raine in his ſeaſon; he reſerveth to us the appointed weekes of the harveſt 
               Ierem. 5. 24.. Neither did they amend by gentle corrections: the Prophet 14. Not amending by gentle corrections. bewailed it; O Lord, are not thine eyes upon the truth? Thou haſt ſtricken them, but they have not grieved; thou haſt conſumed them, but they have refuſed to receive correction: they have made their faces harder than a rocke, they have refuſed to returne 
               Ierem. 5. 3.. Loe, theſe are the maine linnes which reigned in Iudah and Ieruſalem, before their captivitie; which God ſent his Prophets to reprove and threaten; but all in vaine, for they did truſt, becauſe they had the Temple and worſhip of God, no evill ſhould happen unto them; and therefore anſwered their threatnings, with theſe words of vaine confidence, The temple of the Lord, The temple of the Lord, The temple of the Lord. Wherefore the Lord aſſured the Prophet, he would caſt them out of his ſight, they ſhould goe into captivitie, and he would doe to that houſe, wherein they ſo vainly truſted, as he had done to Shiloh in the dayes of their forefathers 
               Ierem. 7. 4. 14..
            
               
As theſe were their ſinnes for kinde, ſo had they 2. Their meaſure. long continued in them, notwithſtanding they had had ſuch faire warning in the captivitie of their brethren for the ſame: which did not a little adde to the meaſure of their ſinne; which being full, vengeance muſt needs come; and the harveſt of their iniquitie being ripe, the ſickle of Gods iudgement muſt needs cut them downe 
               Ioel 3. 13. Rev. 14. 15., and God will not heare his Prophet intreat for them.
            Now to come to our ſelves, and make Application 4. Applicatión
                of all we have heard; I beſeech you with all godly feare and reverence, receive and conſider well theſe foure propoſitions.
            Firſt, that we in England, by Gods mercy, yet 1. Propoſition
                are, and for many yeeres have beene, as happie, Englands happineſſe. as ever Iudah and Ieruſalem were, in our Kings and Queenes, Iudges, Magiſtrates, Miniſters; peace, plentie, proſperitie, deliverances from dangers, fatherly corrections for amendment; but above all, for advancing and continuing of his glorious Goſpell, to be ſo generally profeſſed in ſuch ſafetie; for making of our kingdome to become an harbour and ſanctuarie to Gods afflicted ſervants of other countries; and for many other bleſſings, wherein it hath beene ſo enriched and preferred, that with Capernaum, it hath beene exalted to heaven 
               Matth. 11. 23., and made the wonder of the world 
               Pſal. 147. ult..
            Secondly, that we are at this time nothing ſound, 2. A ſinfull people. but all ſwellings and ſores, a ſinfull nation; and loaded with iniquitie. You have heard what were the ſinnes of Iudah and Ieruſalem; doe you not

ſee them to be our owne? Shall I goe over them againe, and ſearch for them with candle-light Ezech. 1. 12.? It needeth not, they are written in ſuch Capitall letters, as he that runneth may reade them 
               Hab. 2. 2.. Whoſoever ſhall with reverence and conſcience, reade the writings of thoſe worthy Prophets, and compare our times thereto, ſhall finde, they doe ſo lively picture out the iniquities of our daies, as if they had beene ſent unto us, and had propheſied againſt us; and therefore their writings are ours, either to admoniſh us, and turne us away from all our evill waies, and to prevent the like judgements; or to make our condemnation the more juſt, and our plagues the more terrible, if in his juſtice he ſhall execute them upon us.
            It may be, ſome exception may be taken againſt Prevention. one ſinne, and indeed one of the greateſt; viz. that we cannot be charged with Idolatry, as Iudah was. I anſwer, it is true, (God be bleſſed) that Romiſh Idolatry, is, by our Chriſtian and wholeſome Lawes, ſuppreſſed, and his Excellent Majeſty, both by peereleſſe labours, and exquiſite writings, hath throughly diſcovered the Antichriſt, and by godly Edicts and Proclamations, advanceth pure Religion to the utmoſt; wherein the Lord enable him to perſiſt, that he and his may be bleſſed for ever. Amen. But give me leave to make a few Quaeres. Have we not too many Chemarims, Seminaries, Prieſts, and Ieſuites, ſacrificing to Baal? Have we not too many that ſweare by the Lord & Malcom, as all our Church-Papiſts, that profeſſe religion in Gods houſe, and

have alſo their cloſe chambers of Imagerie at home? Is not the number of Idolatrous Recuſants greatly increaſed, even ſince that moſt helliſh powder-treaſon, (for which no name can ever be deviſed able to ſet forth the nature of it) which a man would have thought would have beene the bane of Poperie thorow the world; it being a fruit of their Religion, and practiſe of their poſitions and principles: oh, how fearefull, that Idolatrie (even ſince that time) ſhould ſo increaſe!
            Thirdly, as we have many enemies, ſo are they 3. Many and moſt cruell enemies. moſt fierce, barbarous, truculent, and ſanguinarie; plotting and deviſing moſt cruell and unnaturall proiects and ſtratagems; and where they 
                  Benzo. in his Indian hiſtorie. prevaile, executing ſuch murders and maſſacres, Dr. King on Ion. Lect. 13. pag. 177. as were never read nor heard of: witneſſe our powder-plot, the mercileſſe French maſſacre, and the incredible havocke of thouſands and millions where Romaniſts have prevailed. Oh, cruell and bloudy Rome, how are thy children every where knowne by their red liverie!
            Fourthly, England hath had as many and faire 4. As fairely warned. warnings, as ever Iudah and Ieruſalem had; by ſtrange tokens, ſignes and wonders. The captivitie of the ten Tribes was not a fairer warning to them, than the calamitie of the Churches abroad is unto us. But above all, for theſe many yeeres, he hath moſt powerfully reproved ſinne, and thundred out vengeance, by his heavenly word, in the mouthes of his holy ſervants, greater than Ieremie or Ezechiel, yea (by the teſtimonie of Chriſt)

greaterthan Iohn, who was alſo greaterthan any of the Prophets Matth. 11. 9, 11.; thereby declaring to all the world, how unwilling he is to enter into judgement with us, of all other people, though wee have provoked him, above all people profeſſing his holy and heavenly truth: and to this end, whereas his hand is ſo heavie on our neighbours, he ſendeth us his Miniſters unto you; as on the one ſide, both to ſet your ſinnes before your faces, whereby you anger him, and the meanes how to pacifie and appeaſe him, that he may perpetually continue a good God to you and yours; ſo on the other ſide, to threaten you, that he will make you a ſpectacle of wrath and miſery to all people, (as he made Ieruſalem) without ſpeedy and unfained repentance.
            Laſtly, and which is moſt fearefull, generally 5. Nothing moved. men live in ſecurity and preſumption. Yea doe not men and women every where grow in ſenſleſneſſe, and harden themſelves againſt all ſignes, and tokens, and warnings? putting farre from them the evill day 
               Amos 6. 3.; and ſay tuſh, we ſhall neither ſee ſword nor famine 
               Ierem. 5. 12, 13.? Yea, are not too many come to that height of impiety, as to ſcorne and deride ſuch as are affected with the threatnings of Gods judgements; and will not runne into the ſame exceſſe of ungodlineſſe they have done 
               1 Pet. 4. 4.? Is it not more ſafe to commit ſinne, than reprove it? Nay is not the practiſe of piety, and zeale for the Goſpell, in many companies more reprochfull, than to lie, ſpeake filthily, ſwagger, and blaſpheme, to ſcorne and jeſt at Religion, and make a ſport of ſinne?

Yea, that which is worſe than all this; are not the Ieremies, and Ezechiels, ſent unto them, hated, mocked, ſcorned, and derided, and even loaded with malicious ſlanders, as the vileſt men on earth, and not worthy to live?
            Who ſo blinde as ſeeth not theſe things? and Concluſion. who ſo ſimple as from them cannot conclude; therefore ſurely, God muſt needs be avenged on ſuch a Nation, unleſſe we repent ſpeedily, and whilſt there is time, we all meet him with entreaty of peace. Oh England, at the laſt, know the time of thy viſitation, and awake out of thy deepe ſecurity; watch, faſt, and pray.
            But I foreſee, many objections will be made againſt this concluſion. As firſt, ſome (like the 1. Obiection.
                proud Phariſie Luk. 18. 11.) may ſay, I thanke God, I am not an Atheiſt, Idolater, blaſphemer, murtherer, adulterer, nor ſuch a ſinner as you have named, and reproved, out of the Prophet; therefore I need not ſo take things to heart, and humble my ſelfe; I ſhall eſcape well enough.
            I anſwer, though thou werteſt as juſt, and Sol. righteous, as thou braggeſt for, yea as righteous as Noah, Iob, or Daniel; yet thou knoweſt theſe ſinnes doe every where reigne, and abound, and thou maiſt be wrapped in a generall judgement. The Scriptures afford us memorable examples, of great and generall judgements, procured by the ſinnes of ſome few; and indeed, all make but one body; quilibet homo eſt pars communitatis; and the ſinnes of the wicked, are in ſome ſort the ſins of all them, where they dwell; but ſpecially their

open and knowen abominations. If thou ſeeſt an Atheiſt, Idolater, a murtherer, a drunkard, and doſt not to the uttermoſt of thy power, ſeeke to ſtop and reforme the ſame; or if that way thou canſt doe but little, yet if thou doſt not mourne in thy ſoule, to ſee Religion thereby diſgraced, God diſhonoured, and his anger kindled, and doſt not pray to God for pardon; how juſt ſoever thou art in thine owne perſon, yet thoſe ſinnes are in ſome ſort thine, and the judgements temporall may wrap thee in them.
            Let it never be forgotten, that when Achan had Confirmation ſtollen the excommunicate thing for which God was angry, and Ioſhuah lamented, ſaying; Oh Lord God, what ſhall I ſay, when Iſrael turneth their backs, before their enemies? God anſwered, Iſrael hath ſinned, and they have alſo tranſgreſſed my covenant; they have taken of the accurſed thing, and have ſtollen and diſſembled, and have put it even amongst the ſtuffe 
               Ioſh. 7. 8.. See how God challengeth, and puniſheth all Iſrael for Achans ſinne: and at his execution, Ioſhuah asked him, Why haſt thou troubled us?
            
            Oh Lord! if this were remembred and beleeved, it would juſtly cauſe a great deale of feare, to Concluſion. ſee or heare, of the ſinnes of the Land or Countrey, much more of the City, Towne, or Pariſh, wherein we live; and therefore how innocent ſoever we thinke our ſelves, let us be grieved for the ſinnes of others, and labour to prevent ſuch judgements, as may juſtly wrap us in them: of which more was ſaid, from the ſecond Doctrine; this being ſaid to be one of the reaſons, why the godly

are ſo exceedingly affected, when they perceive his anger, and heare his threatnings.
            Secondly, ſay ſome, we ſee ſuch as are profeſſed 2. Obiection.
                Idolaters, and moſt corrupt in doctrine, and profane in converſation, in whom all the forenamed ſinnes doe reigne, yet live, and thrive, and proſper in the world: why ſhould we then be ſo affected for our ſinnes?
            I anſwer, That ſmall ſinnes, of ſuch a people Sol. as have entred into league and covenant with God, and have received the knowledge of his truth, and make profeſſion of his feare, are more grievous and diſpleaſing unto God, than great rebellions of profeſſed Atheiſts and Idolaters. God is more offended with the ſinnes of Iudah and Ieruſalem, than ten thouſand times greater in Babylon. If his children obſerve not his Lawes, nor keepe his Commandements, he will be ſure to viſit their offences with the rod, and their ſinnes with ſcourges 
               Pſal. 89. 30.. Hence it is, that the Apoſtle ſaith, Iudgement beginneth at Gods houſe 
               1 Pet. 4. 17.. If a man have a ſtranger, yea an enemy come to him, yet he will make him welcome, carve to him liberally, and of the beſt, beare with his talke and manners, though very abſurd and diſpleaſing; whereas his childe is ſet at lower end, and ſerved with leavings, and if hee offend but in looke, is rebuked; but the ſtranger goeth his way and commeth no more, the ſonne abideth in the houſe, and enjoieth the inheritance. The wicked whoſe portion is in this preſent life, are filled with Gods hidden treaſure 
               Pſal. 17. penult., and fatted as againſt the day of ſlaughter 
               Iam. 5. 5.: whereas his children,

for whom he hath provided better things in the next life, are cut ſhort, and chaſtened, that they be not condemned with the world 
               1 Cor. 11. 32.: yet all in love; As many as I love, I rebuke and chaſten 
               Rev. 3. 19.. If we be without correction, we are baſtards and not ſonnes 
               Heb. 12. 8..
            I beſeech you, remember this; No ſinnes ſo diſpleaſing, and provoking God, as the ſinnes of Exhortation. his people, for whom he hath done moſt, and who profeſſe moſt: You only have I knowne of all the families of the earth, therefore I will puniſh you for all your iniquities 
               Amos 3. 2.. And this is that which God ſaid, I will be ſanctified in them that come nigh me 
               Levit. 10. 3.. Nadab and Abihu muſt die for it, if they preſume to offer ſtrange fire. Small holes in others, are great rents in Moſes, David, Salomon; they had beſt take good heed to their walking; if they fall, they ſhall be ſure to pay for it.
            They are ſo farre greater ſinners than our 3. Obiect.
                ſelves, that God will never ſuffer them to prevaile.
            I anſwer, This is it ſo offended the Prophets, Anſw. and made them ſo to expoſtulate the matter with God; as our Prophet, Righteous (O Lord) art thou when I plead with thee: yet let me talke with thee of thy iudgements. Wherefore doth the way of the wicked proſper? wherefore are all they happy that deale very treacherouſly 
               Ierem. 12. 1.? And the Prophet Habacuck complained, The wicked doth compaſſe about the righteous 
               Hab. 1. 4.. And againe; Wherefore doſt thou hold thy tongue when the wicked devoureth the man that is more righteous than he 
               Hab. 1. 13,? Whereby it appeareth, the Prophet had a great combat in

himſelfe, to thinke that the Babylonians, more wicked and ungodly, ſhould ſo proſper, and devoure the Iſrael of God; as no doubt but it troubleth many, that the Papiſts, ſuch Hereticks, Idolaters, bloudie men, and generally moſt prophane, that they ſhould ſo devoure the Proteſtants, more righteous than they.
            But let Gods children humble themſelves; it is Vſe. juſt: and let not the enemies boaſt; for their day is comming. Hearken what God ſaith by your Prophet; Loe, I begin to bring evill on the citie, which is called by my name, and ſhall ye be unpuniſhed? ye ſhall not be unpuniſhed 
               Ierem. 25. 29.. And againe; They whoſe iudgement was not to drinke of the cup, have aſſuredly drunken; and art thou he that ſhall goe altogether unpuniſhed? thou ſhalt not goe unpuniſhed, but thou ſhalt ſurely drinke 
               Ierem. 49. 12.. If iudgement firſt begin at us, what ſhall the end be of them that obey not the Goſpell of God? And if the righteous ſcarcely be ſaved, where ſhall the ungodly and the ſinner appeare 
               1 Pet. 4. 17, 18.?
            Grievous was the calamitie of Gods people 
                  Application, To Eaſterne Babylon and the Iewes. the Iewes, by the Weſterne Babylonians, and ſo affected the Prophet to whom the Lord revealed it, that he wiſhed his head were waters, and his eyes a fountaine of teares, that he might weepe day and night 
               Ierem. 9. 1.; and on which occaſion he did write his booke of Lamentations, ſo full of paſſion: but it was nothing to the miſerie of Babylon. Theirs was a captivitie for 70. yeeres, which being finiſhed, they were gloriouſly delivered: but Babylon came to perpetuall ruine. In the Prophecies

of their captivitie, many conſolations were mixed; and they made their miſerie the greater through their obſtinacie, becauſe they did not beleeve, nor would obey the counſell of the Prophet, bidding them yeeld themſelves, aſſuring them they that did ſo, ſhould have their lives given for a prey 
               Ierem. 21. 9.: yea, if the King would have done ſo, the citie had not beene burnt with fire 
               Ierem 38. 17. 39. ult.. But the Prophecies againſt Babylon are altogether fearefull: let me give you a taſte thereof. When ſeventie yeeres ſhall be accompliſhed, I will puniſh the King of Babylon, and the land of the Caldeans, and make it perpetuall deſolations 
               Ierem. 25. 12.. And againe; Every one that goeth by Babylon ſhall be aſtoniſhed, and hiſſe at her plagues 
               Ierem. 50. 13.. And againe; Babylon hath beene a golden cup in the Lords hand, and all the earth hath beene drunken, and the nations mad with her wine, but ſhe is ſuddenly fallen and deſtroyed, her iudgement reacheth to Heaven, howle for her 
               Ierem. 51. 7, 8, 9.. Yea, he ſpendeth thoſe two whole large chapters in propheſying the ſevere judgements of God againſt Babylon, in revenge of Iſrael, and that with ſuch words, as who can reade them, and not tremble? Adde hereunto the prophecie of Eſay. Babylon the glorie of kingdomes, the beautie of the Caldees excellencie, ſhall bee as when God overthrew Sodome and Gomorrha, it ſhall never bee inhabited, nor dwelt in from generation to generation; the Arabian ſhall never pitch his tent there, nor Shepherds make folds there, but wilde beaſts of the deſert ſhall lie there, their houſes ſhall be full of dolefull creatures, Owles ſhall dwell there, and Satyrs dance 
               Eſay 13. 19.. And againe,

               I will cut off from Babylon the name and remnant, ſonne and nephew: I will make it a poſſeſsion for the Bitterne, and pooles of water, and I will ſweepe it with the beſome of deſtruction, ſaith the Lord of hoſts 
               Eſay 14. 22.. And laſtly, Come downe and ſit in the duſt, ô virgin daughter of Babylon, ſit on the ground; there is no throne, ô daughter of Caldeans, for thou ſhalt no more be called tender and delicate. Take the mill-ſtones and grinde meale, uncover thy locks, make bare the leg; I will take vengeance, and thou ſhalt no more be called the Ladie of kingdomes 
               Eſay 47. 1.. All which propheſies have long ſince beene fulfilled by the Medes and Perſians. But wherefore hath the Lord brought ſuch deſtruction upon her? the Lord telleth her plainly, I was wroth with my people, and gave them into thine hand, and thou ſhewedſt no mercie, upon the ancient haſt thou verie heavily laid the yoke 
               Eſay 47. 6.. Oh ſee what a dangerous thing it is, even to be the rod of Gods wrath (though his people have well deſerved to be ſcourged) if they thinke not ſo, but exerciſe all manner of crueltie.
            Farre greater is the miſerie, which the weſterne 
                  Application, To the Weſterne Babylon, and the Proteſtants. Babylon hath brought upon Gods Church, and moſt cruell inſtruments are they of Gods anger to his people, and for many hundreds of yeeres have oppreſſed Gods people with the iron yoke of captivitie; never more barbarous and bloudie acts heard of, than executed by Papiſts heretofore in this land: oh how doe they ſhew themſelves to be the ſonnes of that father, who was a murtherer from the beginning, and of that mother the great whore, who is drunke with the bloud of the

Saints? But that God, who by his Prophets foretold, and fulfilled the Eaſterne Babylons deſtruction, hath as plainly fore-told by his Apoſtle, the deſtruction of this Weſterne Babylon: and hee hath a Cyrus 
               Eſay 45. 1., the Lord of hoſts hath a choſen ſhaft in his quiver Eſay 49. 2., wherewith to wound it: wee leave the time and meanes to God; but doe ſtedfaſtly beleeve, that the great whore, which hath in her forehead a name written, Myſterie, Babylon the great, the mother of harlots and abominations of the earth, ſo long drunken with the bloud of the Saints, and with the bloud of the Martyrs of Ieſus 
               Rev. 17. 5, 6.; Shee ſhall be hated, and made naked and deſolate, yet, they ſhall eat her fleſh, and burne her with fire 
               Rev. 17. 16.; that bloudie and perſecuting Citie, which liveth ſo deliciouſly, and ſaith, I ſit a Queene, and ſhall ſee no ſorrow 
               Rev. 18. 7.. Her purple flatterers vaunt, that temporall felicite is a note of the Church; and make 
                  Cardin. Bellarm. Tom. 2. lib. 4. cap. ult.
                a catalogue of the ſtrange) victories which the Catholikes have had, and (as one ſaith) ſcarcely ever received the foile, in a juſt warre Immò vix unquam fuerum Haeretici ſuperiores, quando juſto praelio dimicatum eſt.; yet the holy truth aſſureth us, the Beaſt and falſe Prophet ſhall be taken, and all the ſowles of Heaven filled with the fleſh of thoſe Kings, Captaines, and mightie men Rev. 19. 20, 21., which have fought againſt the Goſpell. Yea, Babylon, as a mill-ſtone caſt into the ſea, ſhall be throwne downe and found no more, and ſhe rewarded double, according to her works, at whoſe deſtruction, all the Kings and Merchants of the earth, who have lived deliciouſly; and committed fornication with her, ſhall bitterly lament, and cry, Alas, alas, that great Citie, bow in one boure is ſhe made deſolate?
               
               So Heaven, Prophets, Apoſtles, and all the Martyrs & Saints, ſhal praiſe God with many a ioyfull Alleluiah 
               Rev. 18. 9, 11, 20..
            Therefore ſtumble not at it, that for the ſins of his people, hee giveth them into the hands of ſuch Concluſion. as are more wicked than themſelves; for when his people are ſufficiently ſcourged, their enemies ſhall for ever be deſtroyed.
            But ſome object againe: wee have continued long in our ſinnes, and have felt none evill; why 4. Obiect.
                ſhould wee now be ſo earneſtly called upon, and urged to repent, and threatned with judgement? If wee repent not, God is not ſo haſtie, I wis, as our Preachers would make us beleeve.
            I anſwer: It is the continuance in ſinne doth Sol. increaſe our danger; as Iudah and Ieruſalem were not carried into captivitie for the ſinnes of a few yeeres, but for their ſinnes wherein they had long continued, even ever ſince they were brought up out of Aegypt 
               2 King. 21. 15.; the men of the old world were ſpared long, even an hundred and twentie yeeres 
               Gen. 6. 3.; yet continuing in ſinne, were in the end drowned: Iudah and Ieruſalem were ſpared long, after their brethren were carried captive, even 130. yeeres; but continuing in ſinne, in the end they were carried into captivitie too. The Lord is patient, and ſlow to anger 
               Ioel 2. 13.; yet if there will bee no end of ſinne, there will be an end of mercie, and God may repent ſo often, that hee will repent no more; and (as our Prophet ſaith) he can no longer beare 
               Ierem. 44. 22.; and (as he ſaith in another place) God is wearie with repenting 
               Ierem. 15. 6.; this wee have in the Scriptures illuſtrated by two familiar and elegant metaphors.
            
               
The firſt is of a large veſſell: which by drops Illuſtration. asketh a long time of filling: ſo God told Abraham, the iniquitie of the Amorites was not yet full 
               Gen. 15. 16.; and our Saviour bade the Scribes and Phariſies of his age, Fill ye up the meaſure of your fathers 
               Matth. 23. 32..
            The ſecond is of an harveſt: Corne when it is ſowen, is not by and by ripe; The husband-man (ſaith S. Iames) hath great patience 
               Iam. 5. 7.. Why did not men cut downe their corne at Eaſter? becauſe it was not then ripe: why are they now in many places ſo buſie with ſithes and ſickles? becauſe the harveſt is come, and corne is ripe: So God calleth to the executioners of judgements, when wickedneſſe is great, as unto his reapers, Put ye in the ſickle, for the harveſt is ripe 
               Ioel 3. 13. Vſe.
               .
            Oh then doe not ſay, we have ſinned often, or long; and what evill hath happened; for a veſſell at laſt may be filled with drops; and corne may ſo long grow, till fields be white to harveſt 
               Ioh. 4. 35., and readie to be cut.
            The laſt objection is: Oh but England is a moſt happie and flouriſhing kingdome, bleſſed with a 5. Obiect.
                moſt wiſe and prudent King, a moſt hopefull iſſue; wee have many learned and religious Preachers, multitudes of godly and ſincere profeſſours, Gods true religion eſtabliſhed by Law, and maintained by authoritie, God hath heaped ſuch temporall bleſſings upon us, that it is another Canaan, flowing with milke and hony; God hath moſt wonderfully delivered it from matchleſſe dangers, and ruine intended; it is a verie Sanctuarie of refuge, for the Saints of God elſewhere perſecuted.

Oh, the conſideration of theſe things makes many an one ſo ſecure, that no warning fro heaven or earth, word or works, of mercie or juſtice, will doe them good, but they proceed from evill to worſe, as though no hurt could come unto them.
            But give me leave: as I doe moſt unfainedly acknowledge Sol. the great mercies of God, ſo I would plucke away theſe pillowes from under their elbowes, whereupon they ſleepe in ſecurity. I ſay then, that the greater are the mercies of God unto any people, the greater ſhall be their judgements, if they abuſe them. The higher that Capernaum is exalted to heaven, the lower ſhall it be caſt downe into hell, if it repent not 
               Matth. 11. 23.: And God threatneth Coniah; As I live, ſaith the Lord, though Coniah the ſonne of Iehoiakim, King of Iudah, were the ſignet upon my right hand, yet would I plucke thee thence, and I will give thee into the hands of them that ſeeke thy life 
               Ierem. 22. 24.. Was there ever any people in the world, could compare with Iudah and Iſrael, for privileges and prerogatives? yet could they not ſecure them: but their ſinnes comming to height, God forſooke the houſe whereon his Name was called, yea and gave the dearely beloved of his ſoule into the hands of her enemies 
               Ierem. 12. 7.; or (as ſome Tranſlations reade) his beloved ſoule 
               
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  . Septuagint. Dedi dilectam animam meam. vulg.
               . Oh, if God did not ſpare ſuch a people as he acknowledgeth to be the dearely beloved of his ſoule, who had ſuch a good and religious King, when Ieremy beganne to propheſie, viz. Ioſiah, who reformed Religion, deſtroied the monuments of Idolatry, and ſtrictly compelled all to ſerve the Lord according to his

word; ſuch excellent Prophets; and ſome learned and worthy Teachers; and ſome good people, that mourned for the abominations of Ieruſalem: yet when their ſinnes came to be full, he would not heare any for them, but gave them over to a Concluſion. long and wofull captivity: What have any people to preſume on? No, no, this Doctrine ſhall ſtand, againſt all the ſubtill objections of Satan, and of fleſh and bloud, againſt it; That the ſinnes of a people may come to that height, that God will bring ſome temporall judgement upon them, and not heare any that ſhall pray for them.
            Now to come to ourſelves, that we may make Vſe. good uſe of all that hath beene ſpoken and heard. You hearken what I ſhould ſay concerning our owne eſtate: and that you ſhall doe; firſt, from the mouth of an enemy. When Ieremie heard the falſe Prophet Hananiah propheſie much good to Iudah; he anſwered feelingly, Amen, the Lord doe ſo 
               Ierem. 28. 6. Amen. ſic faciat Dominus.
               . Pererius the Ieſuite, writing on that you have heard in Geneſis, The ſinne of the Amorites is not yet full 
               Gen. 15. 16., ſaith;. If any doe marvell, why England continueth to flouriſh, notwithſtanding the cruell perſecution of the Catholikes there, he doth anſwer thē with the words of the Text: Becauſe their ſinne is not full Si cujus fortè animum ſubeat inter dum 
                     〈◊〉
                  . Pererius.. To which, with our Prophet, I doe feelingly ſay, Amen, Amen, God grant it: yea I doe hope, though the ſins of England be many and great, yet the ſins of it are not Charitable opinion. ſo full, but that God heareth, and will heare, the praiers of his ſervants for it; and that the decree is not ſo far forth, but it may be ſtill ſuſpended or recalled.
            
               
As a great Argument to perſwade me ſo, it is, Argument. that God doth both ſtirre up many his faithfull ſervants, by word and writing, preaching and Printing, publikely, privately, and every way they can, to provoke men and women to repentance; and alſo for that we ſee, men and women generally, to take to heart the afflictions of their brethren, and to helpe them with their praiers, and purſes, and every way they can: yea, me thinketh, in all places I ſee a quickning of zeale and devotion, and a commendable care to ſeeke the face of God in his holy Ordinances, both publikely and privately: Every where, more thankfulneſſe for our peace, and the bleſſed day of viſitation. Oh, the ſanctified uſe of their troubles, is a ſweet aſſurance, that our ſins are not full, but the Lord will be our protector ſtill, and doe great things for us.
            But becauſe the Ieſuit (ſeeing his fellowes and the Romiſh Catholikes could not ſwallow us up Exhortation. quicke, as they intended in the gunpowder-plot, yet to keepe life in them, that they may with good hope, hold on in their deuilliſh plots and devices, againſt us) doth propheſie, ſaying; The ſinnes of England will ſhortly be full Veniet tandem iniquitatis complementum.. Oh, let us make him a falſe Prophet; let us repent and turne to God, in faſting, weeping, and mourning: Let Miniſters with word, Magiſtrates with ſword, make a leake in the veſſell of ſinne, and rouze up ourſelves, and one another, out of deepe ſecurity, and meet the Lord with all humble and earneſt entreaty of peace. Now (if ever) as we tender the ſalvation of our ſoules, and the good of the Common-wealth

wherein we live, the ſafegard of his Majeſtie, and the royall Iſſue; the good of body, eſtate, and all we have; as we love our ſelves, husbands, wives, children, friends; let us (ſeeing Gods judgements are abroad in the world, and the Lord of Hoaſts hath raiſed terrible Armies, marching furiouſly for our deſtruction) mourne bitterly for our ſinnes, and all our abominations; fall upon our faces, and cry aloud, and mightily, both day and night, in the eares of the Lord; that he would forgive us our ſinnes, and turne away the armies of his plagues and puniſhments from us, and continue a gracious good God, to us and our poſterities, untill the comming of the Lord Ieſus Chriſt, in the clouds to judgement.
            I have armed at no mans perſon, or particular Concluſion. calling. Only as one of Gods ſervants, deſiring to be faithfull, and free from the bloud of all men, I have ſet Trumpet to my mouth, and according to that ability I have received, laboured to ſtirre up all ſuch as have heard me, to the practiſe of ſpeedy and unfained repentance. This hath beene the maine end of all my diſcourſe, which now by Gods good hand I have finiſhed. If it worke that effect in many, if in any, I have my deſire; if but in one, if in none but my ſelfe, my labour is not loſt in the Lord. I ſhall be found a ſweet ſavour unto God, even in thoſe that periſh; and at the leaſt ſave mine owne ſoule. And ſo, to his bleſſing, from whom I have received it, I doe commend it.
            FINIS.
            
         
      
   