
      
         
            
            
            PETERS TEARES.
            A SERMON, Preached at S. Maries Spittle, the xv. of Aprill 1612.
            By Thomas Iackſonne Bachelour in Diuinitie, and Preacher of Gods holy word at Wye in Kent.
            
            
               Audeo dicere, ſuperbis vtile eſſe, in aliquod magnum cadere peccatum, vt ſibi diſpliceant cadendo; qui placendo ceciderunt.
               Auguſt. de Ciuit. lib. 14. cap. 13.
            
            LONDON Printed by W. W. for Clement Knight, and are to be ſold at his Shop in Paules Church-yard at the Signe of the Holy Lambe. 1612.
         
      
      
         
            
            
            PETERS TEARES.
            
               
                  And immediatly the Cocke crew; Then Peter remembred the words of Ieſus, which he had ſayd vnto him, before the Cocke crow, thou ſhalt deny me thrice: ſo he went out and wept bitterly.
                  
                     Math 26 74.75.
               
            
            
               IT is a true ſaying of the Wiſeman (Right Honorable,
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  . Sept
                     •
                  agînt. Tempus et tempeſtitas. Tremell. right Worſhipfull, and dearely beloued men, breathren, and fathers,) that to all thinges, and to euery purpoſe vnder Heauen, there is (as in moſt languages it is varyed) a time and ſeaſon; Eccleſi. 3.1. 
               Judas had a time to betray his Maiſter, for Chriſt left him to himſelfe, but Peter had the ſeaſon to repent; for ſo ſoone as he had denyed, the Cocke crew, and his Maiſter looked backe: now it is the ſeaſon which is as the ſalt, which ſeaſoneth all our actions; Salactionū. for whatſoeuer is vnſeaſonable, is diſtaſtfull: And therefore, howſoeuer my Text may ſeeme vnſeaſonablely handled (in regard of the particular) and as a dolefull Dittie in this time of mirth: yet (in regard of the generall) it is high time and ſeaſon, for all to mourne for their ſinnes; and therefore be it ſeaſonable or vnſeaſonable, (as the Apoſtle ſayth) 2. Tim. 4.2. I purpoſe, by Gods grace, to be inſtant in this: And as Christ bid his hearers, Remember Lots wife; Luk. 17.32. ſo I ſay to you all, Remember Peter, and let your cheekes be watered, and all your actions ſeaſoned with the briniſh teares of vnfaigned

repentance: Weepe in ſorrow for your ſinnes, the cauſe of Chriſtes death: and laugh for ioy, for his reſurrection, whereby ye are iuſtified from your ſinnes: Weepe in ioy, and reioyce in weeping; keepe a meane in both: Rom. 4. vlt. This if I ſhall procure my Theame, with the time, ſhall be both fitte and profitable, Commodū et accommodum. and all of vs ſhall depart hence pertaking in Salomons Bleſsing; A word ſpoken in due ſeaſon, is like Apples of Gold, with pictures of Siluer: which God graunt it may be.
            The Goſpell ſpecially mentioneth and recordeth the ſtories of three, that were ledde into great temptations; viz. Chriſt, Peter, and Iudas: Chriſt was ledde of that good ſpirit, whereof he was full: Luk. 4.1. 
               Peter, of that preſumptuous ſpirit, which ſayd to Chriſt, Though I ſhould die with thee, I will not denie thee: Math. 26.35. and Judas, of that wicked ſpirit, which after the Soppe, entred into him, and put it into his heart to betray him: Ioh. 13.2.27. That good ſpirit which led Chriſt to the combate, gaue him power to ouercome: that preſumptuous ſpirit, which ledde Peter, fled and forſooke him: that wicked ſpirit which led Judas, betrayed and ouerthrew him. Sathan thruſt at Chriſt, and he fell not; he thruſt at Peter, and he fell, and roſe againe, for his Maiſter helped him; he thruſt at Iudas, and he fell, and neuer roſe, for his Maiſter forſooke him. Sathan winnowed Chriſt, and found all Wheate; he winnowed Peter, and found much Chaffe; he winnowed Iudas, and found nothing but Chaffe: he found all good in Chriſt, ſome good in Peter; but no good in Judas: Chriſt was the trueth, both in heart and tongue; Peter had trueth in heart, but not in tongue (for his Maiſter had prayed for him that his Fayth might not fayle, Luk. 22.32.) and Judas had neither trueth in heart nor tongue; for with wordes of peace, he betrayed him; Hayle Maiſter Mark. 14.45.Chriſt is the Father of the Elect, who knew no ſinne: 2. Cor. 5. vlt. 
               Peter a true Jabez, 
               1. Cron. 4.9. the ſonne of Sorrow, for his ſinne: but Judas, that childe of

Perdition, Iohn. 17.11. and dyed in his ſinne. In Chriſt, we haue the example of a ſpotleſſe Redeemer; in Peter, an example of a repenting Elect: but in Iudas, the example of a deſperate Reprobate. Chriſt is a bleſſed example for imitation, that we may not ſinne: Peter a ſweete preſident of conſolation, if through weaknes we doe ſinne: but Iudas, a fearefull patterne of iuſt dereliction, to all ſuch as continue in ſinne: But Peter, is the ſubiect of my ſpeach.
            The vices aſwell as vertues, the ſlippes and falles, aſwell as the ſteadfaſt ſtandinges, and vpright walkinges; the crimminations aſwell as commendations, of Gods beſt Seruantes, are fully and faythfully in holy Writ recorded; Noahs drunkennes, aſwell as his vprightneſſe: Gen. 6.9.9.11. 
               Lots Inceſt, aſwell as the grieuing of his righteous Soule: Gen. 19.33. 2. Pet. 2.8. the weakneſſe of Moſes at the waters of Meribah, when he ſpake vnaduiſedly with his lippes, aſwell as his zeale, when he brake the Tables as he came downe from Mount Sinaj: 
               Num. 20.7. Pſal. 106.33. Exod. 32.9. 
               Ionah his flying towards Tharſis, aſwell as his preaching in Niniuie: Ionah 1.3 4. And to conclude with mine example (paſsing ouer many others) Peters denying, aſwell as his confeſsing: nay rather the former, then the latter; for whereas all the Euangeliſtes make report of his threefold deniall, Math. 26.69. Mar 14.66. Luk. 22 55. Ioh. 18.25. onely one, recordeth his three-fold confeſsion; Ioh. 21.15. not as if holy men of God were herein led & mooued, as carnall men are, who take a delight to be talking off, and blaſing abroad the ſins of others, either becauſe in malice they would diſgrace them, as Cham did his father: Gen. 9.22. or in hipocriſie, commende their owne righteouſneſſe and holineſſe, as the proud Phariſie dealt with the Publicane; Luk. 18.11. but therefore haue the holy Scribes, faythfully chronicled their owne ſinnes, aſwell as others, for the glory of God, and the good of his Church; Iren lib. 4. cap. 45. for in their ſinnes and repentance, as in a Looking-glaſſe of Chriſtall, we may ſee and obſerue; Firſt, Sathans malice

and ſubtiltie,Firſt vſe. Sathans malice. who goeth about ſeeking whom to deuoure, and euer hateth them moſt, whom God loueth beſt; that ſo we may watch continually. 1. Pet. 5.8. Second vſe. 2. Mans weakenes. Secondly, mans frayltie and weakeneſſe, if God leaue euen the beſt neuer ſo little to himſelfe, that he that thinketh he ſtandeth, may take heede, leaſt he fall; 1. Cor. 10.12. yea condole & commiſerate him that is fallen, as that reuerend Father, who with teares lamented the fall of his brother, ſaying; Hee hath fallen to day, and I not vnlikely to fall tomorrow: Ille hodiè, et ego cras. Barn. de reſurrect. dom. ſer. 2. Thirdly, Gods mercy in putting vnder his hand, in rayſing his children againe, and forgiuing them greateſt ſinnes, vpon their true repentaunce, that ſo we may neuer deſpayre.
            
               3. Vſe. 3. Gods mercy.And ſpecially, it was requiſite that Peters ſinne ſhould be knowne, that therin we may ſee Chriſtes veritie, and Peters vanitie. Veritatem Chriſti, et vanitatem Petri. Hofmeiſt. in mar. Chriſt propheſied before the Cocke crow, thou ſhalt deny me thrice, and he did ſo: Peter promiſed, though I ſhould die with thee, I will in no caſe deny thee; Math. 26.34.35. but he did not ſo: let God then be true, and all men lyers. Rom. 3.4. Diuiſion.
            
            In this Story, two thinges are principally to be obſerued, viz. Peters Fall, and his Ryſing againe: his Sinne, and his Repentance: As concerning his Sinne, it is to be noted, that though moſt, or all of the Apoſtles, be touched in the Goſpell, for ſome infirmitie or other; as the two Sonnes of Zebodie for ambitious affectation of Superioritie: Math. 20.21. 
               Thomas for his Incredulitie: Iohn. 20.26. all of them often for their little Fayth, as in the Storme vpon the ſea, Math. 8.26. and when they ſo reaſoned amongſt themſelues, becauſe they had no Bread: Math. 16.8. yea for vnbeliefe, as when they could not cure the Lunaticke; Math. 17, 20. and for hardneſſe of heart, becauſe they belieued not ſuch as had ſeene him, being ryſen vp againe: Mar. 16.14. and laſtly, for a feare-fullneſſe; for when he was apprehended, all the Diſciples forſooke him & fled &c. Mar. 14.15. Yet are the infirmities of Peter, both for number and

meaſure diſcouered to exceede all the reſt; as his raſhneſſe in aduenturing to walke vpon the Sea; Math. 14.29. his vnaduiſed ſpeach vpon the Mountaine; Maiſter, it is good for vs to be heere, let vs buylde three Tabernacles: Math 17.14. his vncharitableneſſe, Maiſter, how often ſhall I forgiue my brother, till ſeauen times? Math. 18.21. his foolehardineſſe in drawing his Sword, and cutting off Malchus eare; Iohn. 18.10. and his curioſity asking Chriſt, concerning Jhon, What ſhall this man doe? Iohn. 21.21. I ſay beſides theſe, which were but as common infirmities, and pettie ſlippes, there are three great ſinnes recorded and aggrauated by the holy Ghoſt, and ſtood vpon by the Fathers viz.
            
            Firſt,1. Sinne. his fearefull diſſwading of Chriſt from going to Ieruſalem the place of his Paſsion; Math. 16.22. Wherein he was an enemie to the Paſsion of Chriſt, & by conſequent, to the Redemption of the elect. Secondly,2. Sinne. his hipocriticall ſeperating of himſelfe, by which his euill Example, as by a law he did conſtraine or compell the Gentiles to Judaize; Gall. 2.15. for which Paul zealouſly withſtood him to his face. Thirdly, his deſperate,3. Sinne. perfidious, and moſt execrable denyinge, forſwearinge, and anathomatizing or curſinge of himſelfe if he knew the man: which ſinnes, are not diſcouered by thoſe holy pen-men, to diſgrace their worthy Colleague; nor by me rehearſed, to derogate any thinge, from the bleſſed memorie of ſo worthie an Apoſtle (as Porphirie and Fauſtus the Manithie did:) But that Man may be aſhamed for preſuminge, God for euer prayſed for pardoning; and the prepoſterous zeale of the Romaniſtes brideled, for aſcribing two much vnto him: and ſo ceaſing any further to ſpeake of that ſinne, which is ſo clearely waſhed away with the bloud of Chriſt; forgiuen and forgotten of God; I will proceed to breake the Bottle of Teares which he ſhed for his ſinne, wherein he is an Example teaching all that haue ſinned, how

to turne vnto God, that they may be pardoned: For the more profitable handling whereof, theſe partes are to be obſerued.
            
               Deuiſion.Firſt, the meanes of his Repentaunce, (And immediatly the Cocke crew, and Peter remembred.) Secondly, the Teſtification of his repentaunce, (So he went our and wept bitterly.) Concerning the Meanes; the time is to be noted, when theſe Meanes were vouchſafed vnto him, (Immediatly:) then the Meanes themſelues, which were of two ſortes, viz. Externall, and Internall: The meanes Externall two, viz firſt (the Cockes crowing) and (as S. Luke addeth) Jeſus his looking backe vpon him:) The meanes Internall two, viz. (his remembring of his Maiſters words:) & (as S Marke addeth) the waying of thinges with himſelfe:) The Teſtification of his Repentaunce, was two-fold, viz. firſt his breaking out of the company, and forſaking of their fellowſhip, by whom he had been ſo occaſioned to ſinne, (ſo he went out:) and ſecondly, his ſorrow for his ſinne, (hee wept, yea, and that bitterly:) of which, in order; and though not all that might be ſayd of euery little, yet a little of euery part, as the time and your patience, or both, will giue leaue.
            
               1. Part, the time when the meanes of Peters repentance, were affoorded.The firſt thing to be conſidered, is the Time, when God vouchſafed to Peter, the bleſſed meanes to reclaime or recall him; which is the more carefully to be obſerued, becauſe all the Euangeliſtes doe purpoſely front the Storie of his Repentance therewith, and yet diſpatch it in one word, (Immediatly,
               
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                   Statim.) or (as S. Luke hath it) while he yet ſpake,
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                   Adhuc loquente. Doct. Euen whilſt he was ſwearing and curſing, the Cocke crew, and (as it were) tooke the wordes out of his mouth; which circumſtaunce teacheth: That though God ſee good to let his Children fall, yet he will not long leaue them, and ſuffer them to lie in ſinne (as S. Iohn ſayth this wicked world doth) 1. Iohn. 5 19 but will ſeaſonably and ſpeedily put vnder

his hand to helpe them vp againe; and ſtrike their heartes, before they be canterized 1. Tim. 4.2. through cuſtome, which taketh away the ſenſe of ſinne. No ſooner had Adam eaten of the forbidden fruite, and forfeited that excellent Glorie of his Creation; but in the coole of the day, God came and called vnto him, Adam where art thou? Gen. 3 9. No ſooner had Dauid receiued the number of his people, but his heart ſmote him. 2. Sam. 24.10 No ſooner was Jonah got into a ſhippe and vnder ſayle for Tharſhiſh, but the Lord ſent out a great wind, Ionah. 1.4. diſpatched a Purſiuant from Heauen, to attache him, ſhipped vengeaunce in a Whirle-wind, which ſayled aloft in the ayre, to ouertake and bring in againe that fugitiue Prophet: And ſurely Peter receiued no leſſe grace, for euen whiles he was ſpeaking, ſwearing, and curſing, the Cocke crew, and called vpon him for repentaunce.
            The Reaſons hereof are principally theſe two; firſt,1. Reaſon. becauſe Sathan maketh great haſte, to driue men downe the ſtaires vnto Hell. What they doe, he would haue them doe quickly; if he might haue his will, no man ſhould ſwallow his ſpittle, before he were in the lowermoſt Hell: ſee how haſty he was with Euah, that in ſo little a time, had gotten her, looke vpon, luſt for, eate of, and giue to her huſband. What haſte did Jonah make towards Tharſhiſh, downe to the key, found a ſhippe, payed the fare, and downe in it? What haſte did Peter make? in how little a while, was he come to the feare-full height of ſinne? a preſumer, a denier, a forſwearer, a curſer; Lord what would haue become of him, if his Maiſter had let him alone a while longer? But (Immediatly) the Cocke crew.
            Secondly, becauſe continuance in ſinne, and cuſtome,2. Reaſon. taketh away ſenſe, and breedeth incurable hardneſſe; yea the greater and nearer daunger is at hand, the leſſe it is perceiued; Peter is come to the very threſhold

of Hell, Ad lìmen inferni. Orig. and ſeeth it not: as Dauid ſwore to Ionathan: As the Lord liueth, there is but a ſteppe betwixt me and death; 1. Sam. 20.3. ſo there was but one ſteppe more, and Peter had been in the bottomleſſe pitte: wherfore as a man that will ſaue the Lame that is alreadie in the mouth of the Lyon, muſt make haſte; that will ſaue the Brand from burning, muſt make haſte to pull it out of the Fire; ſo God maketh haſte to ſaue a ſinner. When Peter walked vpon the ſea, he no ſooner began to ſincke, but he cryed out, Maiſter ſaue me; Math. 14.30. ſerua domine. But now that he is in farre greater daunger, ſincking into the floods of ſinne, yea ſuncke to the very chinne, he ſeeth no danger, but holdeth on; yet ſuch was his mercie, whom he denied, that remembring him, who had forgotten himſelfe, (Immediatly) the Cocke crew.
            
               Vſe.The vſe is, that as God is in loue haſty, when wee haue ſinned, to affoord vs the meanes of repentance and ſaluation: So we in wiſedome make haſte, by the vſe of them, to turne vnto God; for he is bleſſedſt that ſinneth not: next to him, is he that ſooneſt repenteth, according to that of Dauid, Bleſſed is the man that doth not walke in the counſell of the wicked, nor ſtand in the way of ſinners, nor ſit in the ſeate of the ſcornefull: Pſal. 1.1. For if from ſuggeſtion, wee proceed to conſent; from conſent, to delight; from delight, to action;1. Meanes externall. from action, to cuſtome; from cuſtome, to ſenſeleſneſſe, to haue no pricke, no remorſe, no diſlike, woe be vnto vs.
            The firſt externall meanes, whereby Peter was brought to the ſight and ſorrow of his ſinne, was the crowing (of the Cocke.) The Grecians will, that a Cocke be ſo called in their tongue, becauſe by his crowing, he doth waken men, and rayſe them out of their beddes: 
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                   ex priuatiua perticula, et 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                   tubile quod excitet e tubii, Ariſtoph. He crew, as we ſay in Engliſh; or lift vp his voyce, according to the Greeke; 
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , vocem emiſit, vociferatus eſt Montan. or according to the vulger, he ſonge: Cantauit, Galli cantus. And this is the ordinarie

phraſe with the Latines, The ſong or ſinging of the Cocke: and well may his crowing be called ſinging, becauſe when he is fatteſt or beſt liking, and findeth his hotte nature refreſhed with the coldneſſe of the night, and vapors of the ayre, he croweth moſt, and (in his kinde) as with a ſong, doth prayſe his Creator: a ſweete domeſticall Creature, by ſinging, teaching vs to lift vp our heartes, and to prayſe our God with our tongues; from whom, euery good and perfect gift proceedeth: But I proceede from the Letter, to Obſeruations.
            Wiſe Philoſophers haue obſerued,1. Obſeruatiō. that Cockes by crowing, doe wake men out of ſleepe, and therfore lay-on towards day, when it is time to awake; and alſo foretell a ſhower comming. Zanch. de operib. Dei. lib. 3. cap. 4. Theſt. 5. de ſignis pluuiae. 
               Peter is faſt on ſleepe in the bedde of carnall ſecuritie, and muſt be awakned, or elſe he ſleepeth in death for euer; Pſal. 13.3. a ſhower of teares is at hand, not for the cauſing of his bedde onely to ſwim, Pſal. 6.6. But as when God deſtroyed the old World, the Windowes of Heauen were opened; Gen. 7.11. ſo the Sluces and Flood-gates of Peters eyes are to be opened, and ſuch Fountaines to breake out, as if his little world were to be drowned with teares, no maruell then, though the Cocke crow.
            Obſerue we alſo the extent of Gods gracious prouidence, who is ſo great in the greateſt thinges,2. Obſeru. as he is not leſſer in the leaſt. Ita magnus in maximis, vt non minor in minimis. There haue been Philoſophers who thought, that the Gods had no regard of humane affayres; whoſe opinion (ſayth Tullie) if it be true, what pietie can there be, what ſanctitie, what Religion? Others, though they went not ſo farre, as to exempt all thinges, yet they withdrew the ſmaller from the Heauenly prouidence; for it was thought moſt iniurious, to bring downe the Maieſtie of God ſo low, as to the husbanding of Bees and Piſmyres; as if in the number of the Gods, there were ſome Myrmecides, to

carue out the ſmaller workes. Minutorum operum fabricator. Another ſect of Philoſiphers, viz. the Peripateticks, who houſed the prouidence of God aboue the Moone, and thought it had no deſent beneath the cyrcle thereof, to intend inferyor buſineſſes, like thoſe Epicures who ſayd, (or at leaſt Eliphaz, in their names) How ſhould God know? can he iudge through the darke clouds? The clouds hide him that he cannot ſee, and he walketh in the cyrcle of heauen; Iob. 22.13.14 
               Aueroës, ſirnamed the Commenter, a Spaniſh Phiſition, that he may ſeeme to be madde with reaſon, by reaſon fortifieth the former iudgement, for he thinketh, that the knowledge, and vnderſtanding of God, would become vile, if it were abaſed to theſe inferior, and infirmer obiectes: But from the Schoole of God we learne, that (wherof theſe wiſe Ethnicks were ignoraunt) that our God, though he haue his dwelling on high, yet he abaſeth himſelfe, to behold the thinges in Heauen & Earth, Pſal. 113.6. as he made all thinges by his word; Pſal 33.6. ſo he beareth vp all thinges by his mightie word: Heb. 1.3. or (according to the Hebrew phraſe, who vſe the Abſtract for the Concrete, the Subſtantiue for the Adiectiue, or Epithite) with the word of his power. D. King L. B. of Lond. on Iona. lect. 10. His Creation, was as the Mother to bring foorth; his Prouidence, as the Nurſe to bring vp: his Creation, a ſhort Prouidence; his Prouidence a perpetuall Creation: his Creation gaue beeing; his prouidence maintayneth in beeing: his Creation, erected the Fabricke; his Prouidence keepeth reparation Plenus negotiideus. Cicer. de nat. deo. In a word, (as a Heathen man ſayd) he is full of buſineſſe; Ioſhu. 10.13. all eye, to obſerue; and all hand, to diſpatch all buſineſſe: by it the Sunne mooueth, for he made it to ſtand, Eſay. 38.8. yea to goe backe: Iob. 38.25. the Raine falleth, for the Cloudes are his Bottles: Pſal. 77.18. the Ayre ratleth, for it is the glorious God that maketh the thunder: Pſal. 
                     •
                  35.7. the Wind bloweth; Math. 10.29. for he bringeth it out of his treaſure: 
                  n
                Birdes doe flye, Math. 6 28. Plants and Graſſe doe grow,Ionah. 1. vlt.
               
Fiſhes doe ſwimme, Wormes doe bite; Ionah. 4.7. yea, and (to conclude with my Text,) Cockes do crow, Immediatly the Cocke crew; for hee that gouerneth all thinges, had ſayd, Before the Cocke crow, thou ſhalt deny me thriſe. 
               Iohn. 23 vlt.
            
            The ſecond externall meanes, was Chriſt his looking vpon him, for ſo S. Luke ſayth;2. Meanes externall. 
               The Lord turned backe, and looked vpon Peter: Luk. 22.61. and this I call Externall, in regard of the Act, though it were Internall, in regard of the effect. For this, this, was it that wounded his heart; he denied and repented not, becauſe his Maiſter looked not vpon him; he forſware and repented not; but when he curſed himſelfe, he repented, for his Maiſter looked vpon him; Peter had thought his Maiſter had not heard or knowen, or regarded his words; But he that knew when he was thronged that ſome faythfull body had touched him, for vertue was gone out of him: Luk. 8.46. now knew that his faythfull diſciple, had forſworne him, & that it was high time, that vertue ſhould proceede from him, for to cure him; and therfore moſt graciouſly turned backe, & looked vpō him, that by ſeeing Peter, he might cauſe Peter to ſee his ſinne, & repent of it: Which yet the act of ſeeing could not effect, for euery one repented not, that Ieſus looked on, for doubtles, he looked on Iudas, when he gaue him the ſoppe, yea he ſpake moſt louingly & mildly to him when he came with ſouldiors to apprehend him, friend wherfore art thou come? Math. 26.50 and Iudas betrayeſt thou the ſonne of man with a kiſſe? Luk. 22.48. wordes which might haue broken his heart, if hee had not been dead in ſinnes; Hee doth but looke vpon Peter, and it ſerueth the turne; For with Chriſt his bodily eye, the ſweete influence of his grace and ſpirit, being conuayed to his ſoule, he repented vnfaignedly, and no meruaile, for how could he remayne in the darkneſſe of his denyall, whom the light of the world, had ſo graciouſly looked vpon?Non enim fieri poterat, vt in negationis tenebris permaneret, quem lux perſpexe rat mundi. Gloſſ. Ordin.
            
            
               Now hath Peter that bleſsing, which the Church ſo earneſtly begged, Aryſe ô North, and come ô South, and blow vpon my Garden, that the Spices thereof may flow out: Cant. 4. vlt. the Garden is the Soule, the Spices are the ſweete graces of Fayth, Repentaunce, Loue, Zeale: The Northerne winde, are the cold and chilling blaſtes of Sathans temptations; the South winde, the warme meelding, and fruitfull breath of Gods ſpirit: the tender graces of Peters ſoule haue been frozen, nipped in the head, and blaſted with Sathans temptations. Oh it was a cold time with Peter, 
               Algebat affectu. Well doth the Euangeliſt note, that Peter went to warme himſelfe at the Fire, for it was cold: Iohn. 18.18. yet was he colder in his ſoule,Magnū frigus eſt vbi Chriſtus non agnoſcitur. Ferus de paſſ. pag. 273.
                then in his body, though he perceiued it not. But now the South wind bloweth, the Sunne of righteouſnes ſhineth: Malach. 4.2. and he whoſe eyes are like a flame of fire, Reu. 1.14. looking vpon him, his graces flow, and he doth euen melt into teares.
            
               1. Obſeru.Our Obſeruations for inſtruction, are of two ſortes: the firſt is, from the Hiſtorie we may obſerue, the infinite loue of Chriſt towardes poore ſinners: he is but newly come foorth of the Garden, where, in his agonie and diſtreſſe, he ſweat like droppes of blood; and is now in the very throng of his enemies, where his Eares glow to heare their Blaſphemies, his Eyes dazle to ſee their deriſions, his Cheekes ſwell with their buffetinges, Inter calumnias ſacerdotū, inter falſitates teſtium, inter caedentium et conspicentium iniurias conſtitutus, turbatum diſcipulū respicit. Leo. de paſſ. dom. Serm. 3. Apoſtrophe. and all his body ſoare, yea blacke and blew, with their nippinges and punſings; yet in the midſt of all theſe his troubles and indignities, he remembreth poore Peter, his moſt vnworthy Diſciple, and graciouſly looked vpon him. Oh ſweete Ieſu, that vouchſafedſt ſuch fauour to him, that ſlept in the Garden, followed a farre off in the way, and hath denyed in the Hall! that remembreſt him, who forgot thee; and vouchſafeſt to looke vpon him, that ſware he neuer knew thee. Did hee thus remember Peter when

he was in the deapth of ſuch mortall miſerie, and hath he forgotten vs, now he is in the height of ſuch immortall Glory? No, no, he remembreth whereof we be made, and knoweth both how and when we ſinne; and though we deſerue to be left vnto our ſelues, yet will he not fayle in good time, to put vnder his hand, and helpe vs vp againe.
            Secondly, from the myſterie we may obſerue,2. Obſeru. the meanes of a ſinners conuerſion, and meanes of his recouery by repentaunce, the Cocke is the Miniſter of the word, Vox Galli, predicatio reſipiscentiae. Muſe. who cryeth aloude, & lifteth vp his voyce, like a trumpet, and ſheweth the people, their tranſgreſſions and ſinnes; Eſay. 58.1. ſuch a Cocke, was Nathan to Dauid, thou art the man; 2. Sam. 12.7. 
               Jonah to Nineuie, yet fourty dayes, and Nineuie ſhall be deſtroyed; Ionah. 3.4. 
               John Baptiſt to Judeah, Repent, for the Kingdome of Heauen is at hand; Math. 3.2. 
               Peter to Jeruſalem, Repent and turne, that your ſinnes may be put away. Act 3.19. But the Cocke by crowing could not awaken him, for he crew once, and Peter repented not; Then the ſecond time he crew; Mar. 14. vlt. yea he might haue crowen a thouſand times in vayne, had not his Maiſter looked vpon him: whervpon the reuerent fathers comment ſweetly, he denyed firſt, and wept not, becauſe his Maiſter looked not vpon him; he denyed the ſecond time, and wept not, becauſe yet his Maiſter looked not vpon him; but he denyed the third time, and wept bitterly, for his Maiſter, then looked vpon him. Negauit primo, et non fleuit, quia non reſpexerat dominus. Chriſoſt. in loc. Alub, lib. 10. Cōment. in Luc. This teacheth vs, that it is not the outward miniſtry of the word only, be it neuer ſo excellent, that is able to worke repentaunce in the heartes of the hearers; let the Preacher be who he will, one of a thouſand, Iob. 33.23. for the excellencye of his giftes; as prompt in the law of God, as Ezra; Ezra. 7.6. as mightie in the Scriptures as Apollos; Act. 18.24. as eloquent to quicken and enliue his ſpeach, as if he ſpake with the tongue of an Angell; 1. Cor. 13.2. as paynefull as Paul, who laboured more then

they all; 1. Cor. 15.10. As blameles of conuerſation,Luke. 1.6. as Zacherie; mar. 6.20. let the people heare neuer ſo gladly, as Herod heard Iohn;Ezech. 33.32. neuer ſo earneſtly, as the Jewes heard the Prophet, as one that had a pleaſaunt voyce, and could ſinge well;Acts. 20.7. let them heare neuer ſo long, as thoſe that heard Paul vntill midnight; let the matter handled, be neuer ſo heauenly & gratious, as all the Synagogue wondred at the gratious words, which proceeded out of Chriſts mouth; Luke. 4.22. yet if the Lord giue not a bleſſing, it is but the bitter ſauour of death, vnto death, 2. Cor. 2.16. for though Paul himſelfe Plant and Apollo water, it is God, and God only, that muſt giue the increaſe.1. Cor. 3.6.
            
            
               Vſe.Let not then any Miniſter, be puffed vp with an high conceipt of his giftes, though neuer ſo excellent; for what hath any man that he hath not receaued, 1. Cor. 4.7. nor yet contemne his brother, though farre meaner, for God vſeth weake meanes, to confound the mightie; 1. Cor. 1.29. neither let the people haue the Perſons of Gods Miniſters, in factious admiration, to ſay I am of Paul, I am of Apollos, & I am of Cephas;1. Cor. 1.12. But let Miniſters giue louingly to one another, the right hands of fellowſhip; Gal. 2.9. & let all the people haue all Gods Miniſters in ſinguler loue for their Works ſake; 1. Theſ. 5.13. and let both Miniſters and people, pray to God for a bleſsing; & if we ſee any fruite of our labours, or yee reape comfort and good by our Miniſtry; let not the leaſt of Gods glory cleaue vnto vs, but all, be giuen vnto him, that hath looked vpon vs, and bleſſed vs.
            
               Application.To conclude this poynt, with Application to our ſelues, conſider what I ſay, and the Lord, giue you vnderſtanding in all things; 2. Tim. 2.7. we haue all of vs ſinned with Peter, God and euery mans conſcience know beſt how, Gods Cocks haue crowen againe and againe, how many hundred times hath God knocked at the portals of our conſciences, by the Miniſtry of his word, to awaken vs, and yet we ſleepe and ſnorte in

ſinne: yea his Cocks crow thicke, great is the number of diligent, and faythfull Preachers, for the darcke night of ſinne and ignoraunce, is almoſt ouer, and the long looked for day of glory, and eternall ſaluation, beginneth to dawne, and no man knoweth whether this day, or this night, the laſt Cocke ſhall crow, euen the Trumpet ſound vnto Iudgement. Looke downe vpon vs, Lord Ieſus, that at laſt we may repent, and mourne for our ſinnes. Amen. And ſo much for the Externall meanes of Peters repentance; the Internall follow, which are alſo two.
            Firſt, (hee Remembred the wordes of Jeſus,
               1. Internall meanes. 
               which he had ſaid vnto him, before the Cocke crow, thou ſhalt deny me thriſe:) amongſt the manifold graces of God, wherewith the ſoule of man, created after Gods image, was endewed; that is none of the leaſt vſe, which is vſually called Memorie, 
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  . by vertue whereof, man doth ſafely keepe what the minde hath once truely conceyued; and as occaſion ſerueth, like a faythfull Regiſter, it doth giue the ſayd knowledge backe againe to the minde, to be thought vpon, Memoria, qua epetit animus, quae fuerunt. Cicer. in Rhetor secund. Ariſtotel, de Memor. and vttered in word, and followed in deed: Great was the holineſſe and happineſſe of this facultie by Creation, ſo as man in ſtate of innocencie had been able, to haue remembred any matter of importance, which either God had reuealed vnto him, or himſelfe conceiued, by any naturall facultie: but though the memories of ſome men haue been wonderfull, as of Mithridate King of Pontus, who could readily ſpeake two and twentie Languages: Galen, et Plin. of Seuere, that hearing two hundred verſes repeated, could rehearſe them againe, beginning at the laſt: Seneca de Scipſo. Orat. of Thom
                     •
                  
                  ſtocles, that deſired to learne the Art of Forgetfulneſſe; yet indeed generally, by mans fall, this facultie is exceedingly weakned, euen concerning earthly thinges. Pharaohs Butler forgat Joſeph, 
               Cicer. 2. de Orat. the man that ſeeth his naturall face in a Glaſſe, immediatly forgetteth the faſhion

of it: Iames. 1.24. the Diſciples forgot to take Bread with them; Math. 16.5. and Trapeznutius forgot all Learning: Voleteran. lib. 21. yea, Meſſala Coruinus forgot his owne name. Iolin. lib. 7. cap. 24. But much more is the memorie brittle, concerning Heauenly thinges, both becauſe the minde doth not well conceiue them, nor the affections take any great delight in them. How many good Sermons haue we heard, good Leſſons haue we learned, and comfortes haue we receiued, and haue we not forgotten them? Aſſuredly, many forget God himſelfe; Deut. 32.18. Iudges. 3.7. 1. Sam. 12.9. Pſam. 50.22. yea, wee ſhould forget the death of Chriſt, if it were not for the Sacrament of remembrance: I, and no maruell, for Peter forgot the wordes of his Maiſter, but now remembreth; yea his memorie was not before ſo dull and forgetfull, but now it is as freſh and liuely: Sathan wrought vpon his memorie before, that remembring nothing, he might preſumptuouſly runne on in ſinne; and now he worketh vpon his memorie, to ſet an edge vpon it, that by remembring all thinges, he may deſpayre for ſinne: If God had left him to himſelfe, I know not whether Peter had been more miſerable in his firſt forgetting, or after remembring; for both of them had carryed him with a full ſwing to Hel-ward: but now through Chriſt, bleſſed is Peter; hee forgot, and ſinned; hee now remembreth, and repenteth.
            
               Doct.From whoſe example we learne, that it is the Word, yea the holy Word of God, which is the preſeruatiue and reſtoratiue Phiſicke of the Soule; it is a preſeruatiue, for ſo ſayth Dauid, J haue hidde thy word in my heart, that I ſhould not ſinne againſt thee: Pſal. 119.11. Yea, aſſuredly he had not committed Adultery, but that for a time, the God of this world, had blinded the eyes of his vnderſtanding: 2. Cor. 4.4. and it is a reſtoratiue, for no ſooner did Nathan put him in minde of his ſinne, but he repented, and as my Text is, Peter no ſooner remembred the wordes of his Maiſter, but he went out, and wept bitterly.
            
               For this cauſe, Sathan hath a foure-fold dangerous policie, whereby to robbe men of the vſe of the word:Satan a great enimy to the word through a foure-fold pollicie. Firſt, to keepe men from hauing the word preached vnto them; which policie of Sathan the Apoſtle deſcried, when he wrote to the Theſſalonians,
               Firſt pollicie. That at the leaſt, once or twiſe, he would haue come vnto them, but Sathan hindred him: 1. Theſſ. 2.18. If herein he cannot preuaile, then hath he a ſecond, viz. by ſuggeſting wandring thoughtes, expoſing of idle obiectes,2. Policie. caſting into drowſines & dulnes, as he did Eutichus: Actes. 20.9. to make the word vnprofitable, that in hearing, they may not heare: Eſay. 6.9. and hence it is, that many hearers of the word yet remaine as ignorant, as if they had neuer heard at all: or if he cannot herein preuaile, then hath he a third,3. Pollicie. 
               viz. to hinder the remembrance of the word; and theſe hearers, our Sauiour compareth to the High-way, receiuing ſeed:Math. 13.19. and thus hee dealt with our example heere, whom hee ſifted, as he doth dayly ſuch as heare at one eare, and let it goe out at the other; nay, whoſe eares are like Sieues that take in Water at one place, and let it goe out at an hundred: And this pleaſeth the Deuill well, for he careth not how much men heare, ſo they remember nothing; nay, to chooſe, he would haue men to heare much, ſo they forget all, that ſo they may ſtand guiltie before God, for that which they haue heard: But if all theſe fayle, hee hath a fourth policie,4. Pollicie. 
               viz. to robbe men of their Fayth, that ſo they may not beleeue the Word; without which, all hearing, knowing, and remembring, are vnprofitable; as the Apoſtle ſayth, The Word which they heard, profited them not, becauſe it was not mixt with Fayth, in thoſe that heard it. 
               Heb. 4.2.
            
            The conſideration whereof, may teach vs a fourefold Wiſedome: Firſt, (as S.1 Vſe. 
               Iames biddeth) To be ſwift to heare Iames. 1.19. and to this end, to pray heartily, (as Chriſt hath taught vs) That the Lord of the Harueſt would thruſt foorth Laborers into his Harueſt; Math. 9. vlt. and

to ſend Preachers, that people may heare the Word at their mouthes. Rom. 10.14.
            
            
               2. Vſe.Secondly, when we heare, to take heede how we heare; Luke. 8.18. and to pray vnto God to open our heartes, as he did Lydias, 
               Act. 16.14. and his Diſciple, Luk. 24 31. that we may vnderſtand the word.
            
               3. Vſe.Thirdly, by Prayer, Meditation, Conference, and all good meanes, let vs labour to remember the Word; for Chriſt hath ſayd, Bleſsed are they that heare the Word of God, and keepe it.
               Luk. 11.28.
            
            
               4. Vſe.Laſtly, let vs pray vnto God, to increaſe our Fayth▪ that we may beleeue his Word; for if we heare, vnderſtand, remember, and beleeue, we ſhall neuer fall: But if we care neither for hearing, vnderſtanding, remembring, nor beleeuing, we ſhall ſinne with Peter; but we ſhall neuer repent with him, for he remembred.
            But what remembred he?
            
               Queſt. Anſw.Many thinges; Peters Memorie was neuer better then now; Whilſt he was in ſinning, and before his Maiſter looked backe vpon him, he was like a man that hauing receiued a great rappe on the head, is aſtonyed and amazed: Peter thought on nothing; but now that he is come to himſelfe, what is it he doth not remember? Now, he remembreth, how he had bene but a poore & baſe Fiſherman, and his Maiſter had called him to be a Fiſher of men: Math. 4.19. how he had cured his wiues mother, lying ſicke of a feauer; Math. 8.14. yea ſaued his life when he was ſinking into the ſea; Math. 14 31. how he made him one of his inwardſt friends, tooke him with him into the moūtaine, whē he was tranſfigured; Math. 17.1.& into the houſe whē he rayſed Jayrus his Daughter; Luk 8.51. & into the garden, where he was in ſuch agonye;Math. 26.37. how he had borrowed mony of a Fiſh to pay his Trybute;Mat. 17. vlt. and is this the requitall of all ſuch fauoures, to deny and forſweare him? he remembreth what a commendation Chriſt gaue him for his confesſion. Bleſſed art thou Symon bar Jonah; Mat. 16 17. and

doth he not now know that man, whom before he confeſſed to be the ſonne of God? he remembreth, how he had, time and time been reproued, as for diſſwading his Maiſter from Ieruſalem, 
               Math 16.23. for his drowſines in the garden, Symon ſleepeſt thou? Mar. 14.37. and for his raſhe ſtriking with the Sword: Iohn. 18.11. But what reproofe may he now looke for, hauing ſo denyed and forſworne him? It is hard to ſay what he did not remember, then what he did remember; aſſuredly, whatſoeuer did aggrauate the greatneſſe of his ſinne, that did he now perfectly remember; but this aboue all other, that his Maiſter had told him, that, Before the Cocke crew, he ſhould deny him thriſe; as Dauid, after he had murthered 
                  Ʋriah
               ▪ ſaw nothing but blood: Pſal. 51.14. ſo Peter after his deniall, could heare nothing from Belles that rung, or Birdes that ſung, but this dole-full dittie, Peter, thou haſt denied thy Maiſter. By whoſe example; we are to be warned;Vſe. for howſoeuer our ſinnes may be ſuper-annate, and as old Leaſes worne out of date, ſo as few remember the ſinnes of their youth: yet if we haue not vnfaignedly repented of them, the time ſhall come, when God ſhall giue our Conſciences ſuch a touch, as we ſhall remember our ſinnes with a witneſſe, yea be as a thouſand witneſſes againſt our ſelues.
            But examine we the words, and with your patience, let me paralell or ballance, a commandement and this promiſe togeather, that, concerning a principall Patriarch & this, a prime Apoſtle; both of them deliuered, in words of greateſt weight, emphaſis, & ſignificatiō, that can be imagined: marke how God prooued Abraham,
               Gen. 27.1. he biddeth him not reſigne or deliuer but (Take) not a beaſt, or bondman, but a (Sonne) not one of many, but an (Only) ſonne; not Jſhmaell, but Iſaack, the ſonne of laughter, in whom he was ſo glad a Father; not ſtubborne and diſobedient, and therfore hated; but (Beloued) as the bowels of his owne breaſt, yea as his owne ſoule, for
in him were the Promiſes of ſaluation eſtabliſhed; he muſt not ſacrifice him at his doore, but trauell three dayes iourney, to the Mount (Moriah) not leaue him there as an Orphant, as Moſes was left in the Arke, but he muſt kill him, and commit ſlaughter vpon his fleſh; not then burie him, but burne him; and neither ſpare him liuing nor dead, till he be in aſhes, which with the leaſt puffe of Winde might be ſcattered into a thouſand places: Oh what waightie wordes are theſe! and (if God had not ſtrengthned him) able to haue broken his bones, and cruſhed him to peeces. D. King on Ion. lect. 2. pag. 25.
            
            You haue heard the Commaundement, now marke this Prophecie; (1. Thou) not Judas, Herod, or Pilate, but Peter; thou that haſt been with me ſo long, heard my Doctrine, ſeene my Miracles, and made ſuch an excellent Confeſsion. (2. Mee) not a forriner, a ſtraunger, an enemie; but (Mee,) thy Friend, Familiar, Maiſter, God, Creator, and Sauiour; (Mee,) that was ſo many thouſand Yeares deſired and looked for (Mee) that haue euery way teſtified my loue & fauour vnto thee, euen (Mee,) that am now taken & ready to die for thy ſinnes: (3. Deny) not flie from, and forſake, or hang aloofe off, or not come neere, but (Denie) 4. not once in raſhnes & vnaduiſednes, as thou haſt been often inconſiderate, but twice yea (thrice) as it were with purpoſe, and deliberation: not in a yeare, Month, or day, but in a ſhort ſpace, (euen this night before the Cocke crow.) Jehu did not march more furiouſly towards Jzreell, then Peter did towards Hell; 2. king. 9.20. as if he had receaued the poſting commiſſion, to ſalute no man by the way, and as if he had vowed, not to ſwallow his ſpittle, before he had dyued as deepe as he could, into the botomleſſe pitt; Sic ſic iuuat ire ſub vmbras. are not theſe words of the Propheſie, as heauie (in their kinde▪) as the words of the charge? And yet, as the Queene of the South, would not beleeue, what was told her of Salomon, till ſhe had ſeene it

with her eyes, but loe then ſhe ſayd; the one halfe was not tolde her: ſo, a man would not beleeue this Prophecye, and yet loe! the one halfe is not tolde you, for the leaſt part of his ſinne was bare denying; from thence he proceeded to ſwearing; yea from thence to curſinge, and that vpon ſmall occaſions: Sathan not contented with a bare denyall, laboureth by all meanes, to make him two-folde more the childe of hell, then himſelfe. Math. 23.15. Preuention.
            
            Yet was this no ſinne againſt the holy Ghoſt (as the mercileſſe Nouations dreamed, who held euery groſſe ſin, committed by a Chriſtian, to be the ſin againſt the holy Ghoſt, & therfore to ſuch as ſo fell, (though they teſtified neuer ſo great repentance, yet) they would not yeeld the priuiledges of the Church; nor communicate with them in the participation of the bleſſed Sacramentes:) Euſeb. Eccleſ. hiſt. lib. 6. cap. 42. for the Apoſtle ſayth, firſt, this ſinne, is a knowne ſinne, yea a knowen ſinfullneſſe; Heb. 10.26. ſuch was not Peters; for though he had heard Chriſt ſay,1. Witting. he that denyeth me before men, him will I denie before my father which is in heauen; Math. 10.23. yea and in particuler, told Peter, before the Cocke crow, thou ſhalt deny me thryce; yet the holy Ghoſt witneſſeth, that he had forgotte this; and therfore, as he gaue comfort to thoſe that had betrayed, and denyed Chriſt, in the preſence of Pylat, that through ignoraunce they did it; Act. 3.17. ſo may he take the like comfort to himſelfe, in the like ſinne,2. Willing. that he did it ignorauntly and forgetfully. Secondly, the Apoſtle ſayth, that is a willing ſinne, a ſinne without cauſe; Sine vlla cauſa, aut cauſae specie, aliquid facere. Bez. yea, this is a deſpightfull, and malicious ſin, a crucifying agayne of the ſonne of God, and making a mocke of him: Heb. 6.6. whereas alas Peter would, and would not; Voluit, noluit. Bucer. in Hom. 9. pag. 325.
                the preſent daunger, and feare of death,3. Malicious.
                extorted theſe Othes, and drew theſe execrations from Peter: his teares did ſufficiently witneſſe, that he could truely proteſt with Paul, he did not allow, that

which he did; Rom. 7 15. & therfore might with comfort, looke towards the mercie-ſeate, for ſin hurteth not if it doe diſpleaſe vs. Peccata non nocent, ſi non placent. Hiero. Generall.
                Thirdly, the Apoſtle ſayth, that this ſinne is not a perticular lapſe but a generall prolapſe and totall Apoſtaſie, an vtter falling away; 
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                   Prolab
                     •
                  ntes. prolapſus. it is not like a perticuler ill diſtemperature 
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  . of ſome one humour, in the body, but as a generall ill diſpoſitiō of the whole body: 
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  . D. Deniſon Sermon at the Croſſe. this is an vtter falling away from all grace, a renouncing of all Religion, & a very congeries of all abhominations: ſuch was not Peters ſinne, for his Maiſter had prayed for him, that his fayth ſhould not fayle; Luk 22.32. the word in the originall, ſignifyeth an vtter fayling, or a fayling altogeather, neither is it to be referred to the time, but the thing, that ſhould not fayle. Non dicit ſimpliciter, 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , ſed 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , nec refertur ad tempus ſ
                     •
                  d ad rem Zanch. mi c. lib. 2 cap 3. pag. 148.
                So that Peters fayth was mooued, but not remoued; ſhaken, but not ſhaken off; he denyed Chriſt with his mouth, but beleeued in him with his heart: Mota, non amota. con
                     •
                  uſſa, sed nō excuſſa, negauit ore, sed tenuit corde. Tertul. 
               Peter is like the Church, that ſayd of her-ſelfe, ſhee ſlept, but her heart waked:Cant. 5.2. that was but a ſlumber, like Eutichus 
               
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  . Septu. of whom S. Paul ſaid; There is life in him, though he ſeeme dead: Act. 20.10. that was but a traunce; and in deed, ſuch ſpirituall traunces and apoplexies, the beſt of Gods Children are ſubiect vnto, to draw the breath of ſpirituall life ſo inwradly, that euen to them-ſelues, and others, they ſeeme dead. And laſtly, he is like a Tree in Winter, which by the barrennes of the boughs, & dryneſſe of the barke, ſeemeth dead, yet hath life in the Roote: the ſpirit of the temptor, like a mightie Northerne wind, had blaſted, & blowne away the leaues of Peters chearefull and bold confeſsion; but life was in the roote, ſayth remayned in the heart. 
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  . Chrisoſt. in Luc. 22.
               
            
            But though this was no ſinne againſt the holy Ghoſt, it was a fearefull proceeding towardes that ſinne; and how farre he would haue gone, if he had been let alone,Admonition. the ſearcher of heartes knoweth; and therefore a faire warning this is vnto all, that no man

preſume of the like Grace, but euery man cut off ſinne betime, and deſtroy it whilſt it is in the bloſſome: no man is hardened at the firſt, but one ſinne draweth on another; and as the Pſalm 
                     •
                   
                ſayth, Men fall from one miſchiefe to another: and as we ſee a ſmall Spring at the firſt runneth not farre, but becommeth a great Streame, breaketh downe banckes, and carrieth all vnreſiſtable before it: ſo in the inundation of ſinne, the beginning is ſmall; but if the current be not ſtopped, in the end it will become violent, breake downe the banckes of Gods threatninges, and carry a man vnreſiſtably into deſtruction. Iudas was firſt a diſſembler, Mar. 14.5. then a thiefe, Iohn. 12.6. then a lyer Math 26.25. then a traytor, Luk. 22.48. then a curſed reprobate: Math. 2.57. 
               Peter, firſt a preſumer, then a denyer, then a ſwearer, and then a curſer; and if his Maiſter had not looked vpon him, God knoweth what he would haue been next: no man commeth to the height of miſery at firſt,Nemo repentè fit miſer. wherfore, If through weakneſſe we ſinne, (as no man liueth and ſinneth not,) yet let vs not ſleepe in our ſinne, nor ſuffer the temples of our heads, to take any reſt, till by repentaunce, we be reconciled vnto God, and haue a bleſſed Quietus est, ſealed to our ſoules, and infallibly witneſſed by Gods good ſpirit.
            Laſtly, here we ſee ſpirituall pryde and arrogancie fearefully corrected,Inſtruction. to teach vs all to walke in humilitie with God, Michah. 6 8. yea ſuſpecting our ſelues, to cleaue faſt vnto God, praying heartily, that he leade vs not into temptation; Luk. 22.40. great was the pride & arrogancy of Peter, both in regarde of his fellow Apoſtles, and Romayne power, yea in regard of Chriſt, and God him ſelfe: Chriſt told all them, All ye ſhall be offended with me this night,Math. 26.33. 
               Peter replyed, Though all men be offended, yet will I neuer be offended: Math. 26.33. Herein he exalted himſelfe aboue his Colleagues, yea aboue all men: the Romaines ſent to apprehend Chriſt, Peter drew forth his ſword,Math. 26.51. and exalted himſelfe againſt Gods ordinaunce; Rom. 13 2. Chriſt

told him playnly, that he ſhould deny him, Peter ſayd he would rather die with him, Math. 26.35. & herein exalted himſelfe againſt Chriſt, and contradicted him; yea when Chriſt aſked him, ſhall not I drincke of the cuppe, which my Father hath giuen me? Iohn. 18.11. he playnly intimated that in ſeeking to ſaue Chriſt from his paſsion, he exalted himſelfe againſt God, as if he were wyſer then God, to finde out another way of redemption, then he had appoynted: Supra Deum patrem extulit, in hoc, quod reſiſtit voluntati eius. Brent. de paſs ful. 695.
                and therfore moſt iuſt with God, that of an egregious preſumer, he ſhould become a moſt diſperate denyer; Ex egregio preſumptore, creber negator effectus. August. Epiſt. 120.
                and as he lifted vp himſelfe, ſo to let him take the greater fall, and that, firſt for his owne good, for as Paul deliuered the inceſtious Corinthian to Sathan, for the deſtruction of his fleſh, and ſauing of his ſpirit: 1. Cor. 5.5. and Himeneus and Alexander to Sathan, that he might learne not to blaſpheme; 1. Tim. 1.20. ſo God let this man fall, for the deſtruction of his carnal preſumption, and that he might learne Davids leſſon, not to lift vp his horne on high,1. Vſe. no more to ſpeake preſumptuouſly, nor ſuffer arrogancy to proceede out of his mouth, yea how good a ſcholler herein he was, the ſtory of the goſpell witneſſeth; for when our Sauiour after his reſurrection, was pleaſed, to renew Peters paſtorall cōmiſſion, & to reſtore him from whence he had fallen, by a triple denyall; by making a triple confeſſion, he aſked him, Peter loueſt thou me? Iohn. 21.15. yea, & as it were purpoſely to try, whether he knew himſelfe any more, or would compare any more he propounded the queſtion comparatiuely▪ 
               Peter, loueſt thou me more then theſe? But Peter had paied for his compariſons, he had done with them;Priori periculo doctus causius reſpondet. Enian. Sa. in loc. if he had asked him ſuch a queſtion at his laſt Supper, he had had a ready comparatiue Anſwere; Yea Lord, I loue thee more then theſe, and more then all men: But now marke how humbly, and warily he anſwereth, Non iam ſe prefert caeteris. Toll. in loc. Lord thou knoweſt that I loue thee; hee hath learned neuer to preferre himſelfe before others

againe: yea, when Chriſt aſked him the third time, the Euangeliſt ſaith, Peter was ſorrie, as hauing learned that Chriſt knew him better then himſelfe, Re ipſa experius not inrem ſe Chriſto quam ſibiipſi. Muſc. and as afrayde that his owne heart deceiued him againe, hee anſwered with teares; Lord, thou knoweſt all thinges; thou knoweſt that I doe loue thee: So that he might well confeſſe to Gods glory with Dauid, and ſay, Before I fell, I went wrong, and preſumed of that which was not in me; but now I haue learned to know my ſelfe.
            Secondly,2. Vſe. this is chronicled for the good of all Gods people, to the end of the world; for at his coſt, we may all learne how great the wretchedneſſe of mans nature is, and that there is no ſinne we can preſume we ſhall not fall into, if God leaue vs to our ſelues; for, did Peter, that had been with Chriſt, heard his doctrine, and ſeene his Miracles? Did Peter, that had made ſuch an excellent confesſion of Chriſt; and (as it were) taſted the ioyes of heauen vpon the holy mount? did Peter, a Cephas, a prime Apoſtle, a piller in the church, did Peter, (as it were) the bel-weather of Gods flocke, who had proteſted, he would rather dye with Chriſt, then denye him? Did, he I ſay, in ſo ſhort a time vpon ſo ſmall occaſion, not only deny, but forſweare his maiſter? Then let no man be high mynded, but feare; Rom. 11.20. he that thinketh he ſtandeth, take heede leaſt he fall;1▪ Cor. 10.12. yea euery man worke out his ſaluation with feare and trembling, Phil 2.12. cleauing faſt vnto God, & praying him, not to leade him into temptation; Math. 6.13. 
               Peter hath fallen, let others beware: Cadìt Petrus vt reliqui caueant. Hugo. in locum. let not the fall of the greater, be the imitation of the leſſe: but the fall of the greater, the feare of the leſſer. Non ſit lapſus matorum, imitatio minorum· ſed caſus maiorum, ſit timor minorum. Augu. in pſ. 51. 2. Meanes.
               
            
            The ſecond internall meanes of his repentaunce was his wayinge and conſidering with himſelfe; for ſo (in moſt tranſlations) it is by S. Marcke added, Mar. 14. vit. (and waying that with himſelfe) as the careles banckrupt,

who being priuie to the weakneſſe of his eſtate & meaning to breake, he borroweth of euery one that will lend, and neuer conſidereth, how to repay it againe; or ſelling his wares doth not waygh them, but deliuer at randome: ſo Peter in ſinning, rūneth in debt vnto God, and neuer once thinketh or conſidereth with himſelfe, how it ſhall be ſatisfied; & deliuereth his ſins in groſſe, as faſt as any one came to be ſerued; but now at the laſt he beginneth to waigh & ponder things; and laying in the one end of the ballance, his Maiſters Prophecy, & the fulfilling thereof; he found them to carry waight, yea to be as heauie as Lead; but laying in the other end, his owne Promiſe, and the performance thereof, he findeth it as light as the wind, yea lighter then vanitie it ſelfe, and moſt worthie of the impresſion of Belthaſhars Embleme, Thou art weighed in the Ballaunce, and art found too light; Dan. 5.27. Doct. and therefore, hee went out, and wept bitterly.
            
            Which teacheth vs how neceſſary and profitable a thing it is for men to thinke & cōſider with themſelues, what God commaundeth, promiſeth, threatneth, rewardeth, and puniſheth: and therewith to waigh and ponder our owne words, actions, and behauiour, that finding them too light, with Peter we may be ſorry; and with Dauid, make haſte to amende; as he ſayd, J conſidered my wayes, & made haſte to keepe thy Commaundements: but ſeeing this is not in the letter of my Text, no nor in the originall at all, I will paſſe it ouer, & come to the Teſtification of his repentance; which is two-fold.
            
               1. Teſtificatiō of his repentance.Firſt, (Hee went out,) if Peter had not been forewarned of the frailtie of his nature, & plainely told, and fore-told of his ſinne, I ſhould haue commended him much for his pietie, & honeſt affection, in following into the High-prieſts Hall, as earneſtly deſiring to ſee, what the iſſue would be, & what would become of his Maiſter: but ſeeing he was fore-warned and fore-told, and had made himſelfe the more noted, by being ſuch a

ſtickler in his Maiſters quarrell, and cutting off one of the high Priſtes ſeruants cares; Iohn. 18.10. hee is much to be condemned, that he would ſo raſhly offer and expoſe himſelfe, to ſuch violent occaſions of ſinne, and temptations therevnto, oh why rather did he not flie with his fellowes, or hide himſelfe cloſe in ſome ſecret place, til the ſtorme ſhould be ouerpaſt? Neither doe I altogeather commende him for his going out, for if his heart were truly ſmitten with ſorrow, & remorſe for his ſinne, why did he not make amendes, by publicke confeſsion? Why doth he not in an holy zeale, where and before whom he had denied, there teſtifie his repentaunce? Hath he ſinned in publicke, and doth he runne out at doores to ſorrow in priuate? Oh it had been much more valiant, to haue confeſſed, where he had denyed; and repented, where he had ſinned. Feciſſet conſtantius et fortius, ſi quo loco peccauerat, eodem paenitentiam egiſſet. Mald. But we ſee his feare is not altogether ouer yet: Veriſimile Petrum metu egreſsum, quia flere coram testibus non audebat. Calu. in Math. his Repentance is true, but weake; yea the beſt vertues of Gods Saints, are ſtained with ſome wantes, euen their righteouſnes as a menſtrous Cloath: Eſay. 64.6. and therefore though S. Paul ſay truely, that Godly ſorrow cauſeth repentance, not to be repented of; 2. Cor. 7.10. Ob. Sol. yet in ſome ſenſe I may ſay, Peters ſorrow brought foorth ſuch a repentance, as when he had repented, he might well repent thereof; becauſe he had not perfectly repented in his former repentance, for, Hee went out.
            
            Some ſay, this was to auoyde all appearaunce of hipocriſie. I anſwere, that as no ſinne is more odious to God, or hatefull to Gods people, that worſhippe him in ſpirit and trueth, then hipocriſie, and therefore moſt carefully auoyded by Dauid, who cauſed his Bedde and Couch to ſwimme with teares: Pſal. 6.6. And Ezekiah (though he could not goe out of the roome, yet) bee turned his face to the wall, and wept ſore; Eſay. 38.2. Whereas Hipocrites, neuer weepe but in publicke; but then they haue moſt teares at commaunde, when they haue moſt witneſſes thereof: Vt ſterent oculos erudiere ſuos, addidit et lachrymas tanquam mundaſſet et illas Ouid Yet ſome-times to weepe in publicke,

is no note of hipocriſie: are teares the Preachers praiſe? Lachrymae auduorum ſint laudes tua. Jerom: and are they not alſo the hearers prayſe? yes aſſuredly, & a ſweet argument, as God witneſſed of Joſiah, that their hearts do melt; as when the Congregation is aſſembled to Preaching or Prayer, and ſpecially in time of ſome great humiliation; as in the Niniuites faſt: or of the aboundance of a ſorrowfull ſpirit, the eyes guſh out; as in Hannah, who poured out her ſoule before the Lord. 1. Sam. 1.15. Oh then, that Peter had gone ſo through-ſtitch with his Repentaunce, that as it is recorded, that in the Phariſies houſe, euen before all that ſate at Table with him, a Woman in ſorrow for her ſinnes, did waſh his feete with teares; Luk▪ 7.38. ſo it might haue been recorded, that in the High-prieſtes houſe, there was a man, an Apoſtle, yea Peter, who in true ſorrow, for denying his Maiſter before them all, did weepe bitterly before them all: but alaſſe, herein he fayled, through feare, he ſinned publickly, and is afrayde to repent publickely; ſo, hee went out.
            
            
               1. Vſe.Whoſe example, affoordeth great conſolation, ſeeing God is well pleaſed with the poore endeauours, and deſires; the lame and halting obedience of his children, ſo that, what they do, be in trueth: and alſo is a fayre warning and admonition, that when we haue done any thing,Vſe. (and as we conceaue in beſt maner) yet ſtill, to ſuſpect ſome want, and to confeſſe, we are but vnprofitable ſeruants, 
                  Luk. 17.10. Serui inutiles ſumus. we eyther, haue not done what we ought, or not in that manner we ought; for Peter went out to weepe.
            Yet finde we heere, ſome good, ſome ſweete, for Peters commendation, and our imitation: firſt, that Peter delayeth not,1. Commend. nor deferreth not his repentaunce, he ſtayeth not till his Maiſter be condemned & executed, but ſo ſoone as euer God ſtroke his heart with remorſe, he made haſte into ſome conuenient place, where

he might poure out his ſoule, and his teares vnto God:Doct. and therby teacheth vs, with all ſpeed, to put holy motions in effect; pray, when God moueth thee; read, when God moueth thee; repent, when God moueth thee; giue almes, when God moueth thee: quench not, checke not, grieue not the ſpirit; with Cras, cras, thou knoweſt not, whether euer God will moue thee any more; or at leaſt, it may coſt thee deare to recouer ſuch motions agayne: wherfore whilſt it is called to day, harden not your hearts; but let euery ſoule marche valiently, when God ſoundeth and ſtryketh the drumme.
            The Reaſon hereof is,Reaſon. becauſe ſinne and the allurements thereof, do neuer cleaue ſo faſt, as when men bethinke, to part from them; ſo that he that is not fitte to day, without the great mercy of God, will be leſſe fitte to morrow; Qui non eſt bodie, cras minus aptus crit. wherfore take no day with God, but as Abrahams ſeruant bad Laban and Bethuell, hinder me not: Gen. 24.56. and the blind man in the Goſpell, caſt away his Cloake when Chriſt called him: Mar. 10 50. ſo let vs ſay to father, mother, husband, wife, or friend, hinder me not: yea caſt away all hindrances, Heb. 12.1. though as pleaſant, profitable, and deare vnto vs, as right hand, or right eie; Math 5 29. yea as Zache came downe haſtily to entertaine Chriſt; Luk. 19.6. and Lot did ſcape for his life, out of Sodome; Gen. 19.17 & (as Paul biddeth) let vs flee 1. Tim. 6.7. from our ſinnes, and make euen all the ſpeede wee posſibly can, to leaue our ſinnes, when God calleth and moueth.
            But now if we make Application to our ſelues,Application. Oh Lord how many are there, who hearing their ſinnes boldly and plainely reprooued, and their Conſciences thereof powerfully conuicted, that during the hearing of the Word, they haue been at leaſt (as Agrippa ſaid to Paul) almoſt perſwaded, Act. 26.28. to leaue their ſwearing, lying, drinking, whoring; yea, how many are there, who when the hand of God is heauy vpon them

in ſickneſſe, will with teares confeſſe their ſinnes, and promiſe great reformation; but are no ſooner recouered, but all their good motions vaniſh like a mornings deaw: Hoſe. 6.4. all their almoſtes come to nothing at all, they returne to their former courſes, as the Dogge to hivomite; 2. Pet. 2.22. they liue, but their ſicke repentance is dead; yea euen repent, of that their repentance: Jpſius paenitentiae agunt paenitentiam. Ambroſ. de paenit. lib. 2. cap. 9. ſo did not Peter, the Waxe was warme, and he put too the Seale; the Iron was hotte, and he ſtroke; God gaue a good motion, and he preſently put it in execution; ſo, Hee went out.
            
            
               2 Commend.The ſecond thing commendable in Peter, is, that finding ſuch great occaſions and temptations, whereby he had been drawen to ſinne, in the High-prieſtes Hal, he ſtaieth no longer there, but went out; yea though our Euangeliſt vſe a word of ordinarie and milde ſignification; yet S. Marke vſeth a more emphaticall word, ſignifying, to ruſh out with haſte, or with a ſpeedie violence: hee came in peakingly, and by leaue and leaſure; but he goeth out with a witneſſe, as if he would haue broken downe the doore, if it had been ſhut againſt him.
            
               Doct.Whereby we learne, that it is a ſinguler teſtimonie of true Repentance, for a man to hate, and auoyde all the meanes and occaſions of ſinne; the Prouerbe is, The burnt Child, will beware of the Fire: We ſee by experience, the Horſe will not be forced to the Ditch, where he hath been plunged; and the Dogge will not come neare, nor abide the man, that hath beat him: the Bird will come no more to the ſhrape, that hath once been in the Nette; the Fiſh will bite no more, that hath been once wounded with Hooke; yea, the Marriner that hath once ſuffered ſhip wracke, will not onely auoyde thoſe Rockes and Sandes, but is alſo afrayde euen in greateſt calmes: Tranquillas etiam naufragus horret. aquas. Ouid. Now amongſt all the occaſions of ſinne, there is none more dangerous then euill

company; for can a man take Coales in his boſome, and not be burnt? or handle Pitch, and not be defiled? or fly with Oſtriges and Pellicanes, and not grow wilde? or dwell in the Tentes of Wickedneſſe, and not learne to be Wicked? Aſſuredly, there is no ſpedier coniunction betwixt Fire & Tow, Tinder or Gunpowder, or any other ſuch combuſtible matter, then there is betwixt our corrupt Nature and Sinne, vpon the leaſt occaſion, vnleſſe the grace of God doe preuent it; which thing the true penitent, by woeful experience finding, as God biddeth, Come out; ſo with Peter, they runne out, and come no more amongſt ſuch, as it is a thouſand to one, he ſhall doe no good vnto, but take much hurt from. Rerum natura ſic eſt, vt quoties bonus malo coniungitur, non ex bono malus oritur ſed ex malo bonus contaminetur, Chryſost. So much for the firſt Teſtification of his Repentance.
            
               (And wept bitterly.) Wherein two thinges are to be conſidered, viz. firſt, his Weeping; ſecond, the manner how, (Bitterly.) For the firſt, it is ſayd, (That he wept) or, (as the word ſignifieth) he ſhedde teares aboundantly. Lachrymor, fleo, quaſi fluo. 
               Dauid had ſo long wept for his fins,2. Tectificatiō of repentance. & mingled his drinke with teares, that his moyſture was turned into the drought of Sommer, and his very boanes burnt like an hearth: Pſal. 102.3.9. 
               Peter beginneth but now to weepe for his ſinnes, but his drought is turned into the moyſture of Winter; the Clouds returne after the raine; Eccleſ. 12.3. one ſhower of teares followeth another, as if his eyes were fountaines of brine, ſo he wept, as if with Niobe he would transforme himſelfe into a Rocke, and become a right Peter indeed; or as hauing loſt the power of Baptiſme in Water, hee would now be baptiſed in a flood of teares.
            When Chriſt was borne, it was a ioyfull time, and there was great mirth; Simeon ſung, and Annah ſung, yea the Angels of Heauen ſung, and bade the Shepheardes ſing, for they brought them tydinges of great ioy, which ſhould be to all the people: Luk. 2.10.13. but when

Chriſt ſuffered, it was a dolefull time, and there was much weeping; Chriſt him-ſelfe wept, Luk. 19.41. yea, and prayed with ſtrong crying and teares vnto him that was able to ſaue him from death: Heb. 5.7. the Diſciples, they wept; Mar 16.10. the Daughters of Ieruſalem, they wept; Luk. 23.27. the Sunne was darckned, and that wept; Luk. 23 45. the Temple rent it Vaile, and that wept: the Stones were clouen aſunder, and they wept; Math. 27.51.yea, all ſenſeles creatures in their kindes did lament the paſsion of their maker: but Peter wept bitterly: others wept chiefly for Chriſt; but Peter chiefly for himſelfe, as his Maiſter counſailed, Weepe not for me, but weepe for your ſelues: 
               Luk. 23.28. 
               Peter wept in paſsion, others wept but in compaſsion: nay, herein was Peters compaſsion true, becauſe it began at himſelfe, for howſoeuer, it is good to pittie others, and to wipe away teares from their eyes with the ſpunge of compaſsion; as the Apoſtle biddeth, weepe with them that weepe;Rom. 12.15. yet the greateſt compaſsion, and beſt pleaſing vnto God, is for a man to haue pittie on himſelfe, as the wiſe-man biddeth:Eccle. 30.23. and to open his owne heart veine, with the launce of cōpunction; how could Peter haue had pittie on his Maiſter, if he had had none of himſelfe? Wherefore he beginneth right; firſt, for himſelfe, and his owne ſinnes, he wept bitterly. Which thing, he well learned from his Cocke▪ which by clapping his winges to his owne ſides, firſt wakened himſelfe, and then Peter.
            
            There are three thinges required to make the loue of Chriſt perfect in vs: 1 Trueth: 2. Wiſedome: 3. Courage: Ad perfectam dei dilectione tria requiruntur, 1. Veritas, 2. Prudentia, 3. Fortitudo. Ferus de paſs. pag 277.
               for ſo ſaith the Law, Thou ſhast loue the Lord thy God, 1. with all thine Heart, 1. truely: 2. With all thy Soule, 1. wiſely: 3. with all thy Strength,
               Deut 65. 1. valiantly, and couragiouſly: when Peter ſayd to his Maiſter, pittie thy ſelfe, this ſhall not be vnto thee;Mat. 16.22.23. he loued him truely, but not wiſely, therfore his Maiſter rebuked him, Get thee behynd me Sathan: When he put vp his ſword and followed

Chriſt; Math. 26.58. he loued him truly and wiſely (hauing learned not to hinder, but to imitate,) Vera eſt prudentia paſsione non impedire. ſed etiam imitari. but he loued him not valiantly, he denied his Maiſter, and wept, that his loue was no perfecter: but after his reſurrection, by his threefold confeſsion, John. 21.17. he declared, that he had attayned the third degree of perfection in loue, he loued him, as valiantly, as he did truely, and wiſely: ſome (I know not in what beſotted charitie, or prepoſtrous Zeale) haue gone about to excuſe, or (at leaſt) extenuate Peters fault; that he might ſay, he knew not the 
                     •
                  a; for he knew and had confeſſed him to be God: Neſcio hominem, quia ſcio 
                     •
                  eum Hill. 
                     •
                  mb Copus. vide Iuel defenſe. Apolog. pag. 665.
                but (ſayth another) we muſt take heed, we do not ſo iuſtifye the Apoſtle, as we condemne Chriſt of a lye, who was the trueth it ſelfe; for he told Peter, thou ſhalt denye (Mee) he ſayth not, my manhood, but (Mee.) 
               Me negabis, non hominem. Heiron. Chriſt knew beſt, that he would do, and Peter knew next that he had done; and in the guilt of a great ſinne wept bitterly, and with his teares, doth ſufficiently reprehend thoſe that would defend him.Lachrymis, ſuos defenſore
                     •
                   arguit. Auguſt Expoſit. in Pſ. 140. et tract. in Johann 66.
               
            
            It is obſerued by ſome, that Peter wept, but ſpake not a word; and indeed, it may ſeeme ſtrange, for Daui
                     •
                  
                confeſſed,2. Sam 12.13 the Mariners cried,Ionah. 1.14. and the Publicane prayed, God be mercifull to me a ſinner,Luk. 18.13. and Peter doſt thou hold thy peace, thou that criedſt ſo earneſtly to Chriſt, when but thy body was in daunger of drowning? Maiſter ſaue me: doſt thou now hold thy peace, when as thy ſoule is in daunger of deſtroying? What though he that made the heart and tongue vnderſtand the language of both alike; and is as neare to our reines as our lipps, the voyce of the one being no more audible to him that heareth without eares, then the intention of the other? Hath the tongue therfore immunitie from doing that homage to the Lord, which he hath enioyned it? No verily, as we muſt beleeue with the heart, ſo muſt we make confeſsiō with the mouth;Rom. 10.1
                     •
                  . as Gods prieſtes, were appoynted to weepe betwixt

the Porch and Altar, euen in the Body and Nauell of the Church; ſo alſo to ſpeake, ſpare thy people, ô Lord:Ioel. 2.17. Wherfore let vs learne, (ſpecially in the houſe of prayer) to pray with Dauid, Lord open our mouthes, and our lippes ſhall ſhew foorth thy prayſe: Pſal. 51.15. but of Peters ſilence, at this time there may be theſe three Reaſons rendred.
            
               Firſt reaſon of Peters ſilence.Firſt, the Greatneſſe of his Griefe; which was ſuch, as ſtopped the courſe of his ſpeach, Curae leues loquuntur. Senec. now to remember, vpon ſo ſmall an occaſion, in ſo ſhort a time, to deny, yea and forſweare his louing Maiſter; yea, his bleſſed Sauiour. Oh Lord, how it aſtoniſhed him! ſo as for the time, he could not poſsibly ſpeake, but weepe.
            
               2. Reaſon.Secondly, the Greatneſſe of his Shame for his ſinne; which was ſuch, as he was aſhamed to ſpeake of it vnto God or men; but it is no ſhame to weepe for that ſinne, which it is a ſhame to confeſſe: Bene fleuit, et tacuit, lauat enim lachryma delictum, quod voce pudoreſt, confiteri. Amb. Wherefore Peter doth well to weepe, and hold his peace.
            Thirdly, the Greatneſſe of his Sinne required great interceſsion for pardon; wherefore he ſendeth not meſſengers of ordinarie nature, as a few penitent wordes, J haue ſinned,
               3. Reaſon. ſayd Pharaoh and Saul;) but he diſpatcheth his Teares as his Embaſſadours, Mittit legatos lachrymas. Cypr. lib. 2. Epiſt. 7.
                that (if it were poſſible) before the cry of his ſinne ſhould be heard in the high Court of Heauen, his Teares might pray & plead for pardon: where, of all Meſſengers, they are moſt gracious, being (as one ſayth) Barn. in Cantic. the Blood of the ſoule, and Wine of the Angels: which, flowing from the Wine-preſſe of a bruſed and contrite ſpirit, are more forcible to perſwade God, then all the Eloquence, then all the Rhetoricke in the world; 
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  . Cypr. therefore ſayth God to Ezekiah, J haue ſeene thy Teares: Eſay. 38.5. as if theſe Embaſſadours can no ſooner appeare, but Gods gracious Eye is vpon them. Yea Dauid ſayth, God heard the voyce of his weeping: Pſal. 6.8. wherevpon one demaundeth this Queſtion,

What ſhould the meaning of this be, trow you? Haue Teares Tongues, I maruell; or can they ſpeake, that they may be heard? and returneth this Anſwere; The cloud-cleauing Thunder of the Almightie, cannot make ſuch a ratling ſound, and roaring noyſe in the eares of man, as our Teares doe, in the eares of God: D. Playf. Serm. meane in mourning. pag. 19. ſo truely, the Heathen man hath ſayd, they are waightie wordes. Interdū lachrymae, pondera vocis habent. Ouid. de Pont. lib. 3. Eleg. 1.
            
            It is no diſgrace then (as the Heathen man imagined) Nihil viro turpius muliebri fletu. Natt. de immortal▪ anim. lib. 1. for a man to weepe; nay, how many Examples haue we in the word, of men of great courage and valour, as Dauid, Ezekiah, Ioſiah, Manaſses, Peter, and others, who could hardly for any wordly occaſion, no not for feare of death, haue wrung foorth one Teare; yet for their ſinnes, haue wept moſt bitterly, and plentifully, as if they had a certaine pleaſure in weeping, Eſt piis, quaedam etiam flendi voluptas. Amb. de obit. valent. and had teares at commaund.
            Yet muſt I not thus commend all manner of teares, without difference, for the Apoſtle ſayth, there is a worldly ſorrow, which cauſeth death, 2. Cor. 7.10. 
               Cayn, Saul, & Judas, were thus ſorry, yea Eſau, ſought the bleſsing with teares, yet found no place to repentance, Heb. 12.17. wherefore, if we would haue our teares acceptable vnto God, & put into his bottle, as the Pſalmiſt ſpeaketh, Pſal. 56.8. & haue them comfortably wiped from our eyes,Reu. 21.4. they muſt be faythfull, and true, and declared to the world to be ſo, by bringing fourth fruites worthie of amendment of life; Nihil proſunt lamenta▪ vbi explicantur peccata. Aug. as Peter, who for the world, would not ſo ſinne agayne; Yea was euer after this time, ſo farre from boaſting of himſelfe, that he would neuer compare with any man; Iohn. 21.15. ſo farre from denying his Maiſter, that he did moſt boldly confeſſe him and his trueth, to the beards of his greateſt enemyes, euen when their hands, and ſpeare, did reake with his blood; Act. 2.23. and ſo of a denyer, was made a paſtor; by his tongue to gouerne others,Alios regen. dos accepit, qui prius ſe nō rexit. Amb. who could not gouerne his owne:
            
               
               Exhortation.Let vs not then mocke God, with a counterfeit repentaunce, Jrriſor est, non vere paenitens, qui adhuc agit, quod peniteat. Bara. medit. carrying ſinne in one hand, & ſorrow in another; with teares waſhing away our former ſinnes, and yet dayly defyling our ſelues, with the filth thereof; but let vs become new Creatures, of proud, humble; of hurtful, harmeles; of cruel, meeke; of Woolues, Lambes; of Adulterers, chaſt liuers; of Drunckerds, ſober men; of ſwearers, reuerent ſpeakers; of deſpyſers, embracers; of ſcoffers and hators of Gods trueth, friends and louers: then ſhall God be glorified, the deuill confounded, the world amazed, and our ſaluation exceedingly furthered, Lapſus ſanctorum vtilis eſt. Amb. cōment. in Luc. lib. 10. audeo dicere, ſuperbis vtile eſſe cadere in aliquod apertū peccatum, vnde ſibi diſpliceant. Auguſt. de ciuti. lib. 14. c. 13
                though with Peter we haue ſinned, if with him, we haue truely wept and repented.
            
               (Bitterly.) This word declareth the manner of Peters weeping, viz. hauing greiuouſly ſinned, hee now as greatly lamented them: which teacheth vs, that true repentaunce is a bitter, yea and a paynefull thing, the paynes of whipping the body, as the Flagellants doe, or of launcing it with kniues, as the Prieſtes of Baa did;Doct. or of ſickneſſes, ach, famine; are not comparable to the paynes of true repentaunce; which thing, the titles and Epithites thereof do declare: the Prophet calleth it a renting of the heart; Ioel. 2.13. what a payne is it to haue the heart rent, and (as it were) racked vpon tenter-hookes, and torne with grypes and conuulſions? And Dauid ſaith a mans heart, muſt be contryte and broken, Pſa. 51.19. euen (as it were) beaten to pouder, with Godly ſorrow: the Grecians call it, by ſuch a word as ſignifieth, a carefull griefe, & ſorrow of heart, the Latines call it, by ſuch a word as ſignifyeth, payne or torment; Paenitentia, a paena: paenitet, quem paena tenet. Auguſt. Examples of true penitentes, ſhew no leſſe: it is ſaid of Dauid, that his heart did ſmite him, or ſcourge him: 2. Sam. 24.10 A fit metaphore to expreſſe the nature of Repentance; which is the very ſcourge of the ſoule.
                  Flagellum animae. D. Deniſon of ſinne againſt ye holy Ghoſt pag. 63. In what paine was the Prophet, when he complained,

               My leanneſse, my leanneſſe, woe is mee? 
               Eſay. 24.16. And that other Prophet, when he complayned, My belly, my belly; I am payned euen at my very heart, mine heart is troubled within me, J can not be still. 
               Ierom. 4.19. And to conclude with our owne Example, in what paine was Peter, when (as if all were turned into Gall or Worme-wood) he wept bitterly?
            The Reaſon of this Doctrine, is worthy our conſideration; which is, becauſe in Repentance,Reaſon. the ſpirit is wounded with the liuely ſenſe and apprehenſion of Gods wrath againſt ſinne, which in other Plagues of the body it is not; and therefore in greateſt diſtemperatures of the body, when the Bones are broken, Loines filled with a ſore Diſeaſe, Woundes ſtincke and are corrupt, Pſal 38.5. and that a man may truely ſay with him in the Comedie; Mine Heart is ſicke, my Reynes are ſicke, my Spleene is ſicke, my Liuer is ſicke, and all other partes are out of frame; Cor dolet, renes dolent. Plaut. yet if a man haue peace with God, his Spirit will beare his infirmities: but if the Soule be ſicke, and the Spirit it ſelfe wounded, who can beare it? Prou. 18.14. Theſe are the onely paynes, which are like the paines of Hell, whence the Prouerbe came; That good men haue their Hell in this life; meaning, that the paines of Repentance, are ſo ſmart vnto them, that it differeth many times very little, from the Plagues of the other life: Which doctrine thus confirmed, yeeldeth two very neceſſary vſes.
            Firſt,Firſt vſe. it may ſerue to reforme the erroneous Iudgementes of many, concerning Repentance. Some thinke, that euery Sorrow is Repentance; but then ſhould Worldlinges repent. Some thinke euery Confeſsion, to be Repentance: then ſhould Pharaoh and Saul repent; ſome thinke euery weeping, repentaunce,M. Dent. Ser. of repent. pag. 7. then ſhould Eſau repent; ſome thinke euery little humiliation repentance, then ſhould Achab repent; ſome thinke euery good word & promiſe repentaunce, then ſhould moſt ſicke men repent; ſome thinke to crie God mercy,

is repentaunce; then ſhould euery Foole repent: but if we remember what hath been ſayd, true Repentance is more then the hanging downe of the head like a Bulruſh, or to wring out a Teare, or weare Haire-cloth, or from the teeth outward to cry, Lord haue mercy on me, and ſo away. Oh it is a ſcourging, a renting, a racking of the very Soule, and a filling of the Reynes with exceeding bitterneſſe, and griefe for ſinne.
            
               Second vſe.Secondly, heere is matter of great comfort for the godly, who are perplexed with the terrours of God, and troubled mindes, for ſinne; that they can truly ſay, The paines of Hell came about vs: Pſal. 18.5. Let them remember what Chriſt hath ſayd, Bleſsed are they that ſo mourne, for they ſhall reioyce: 
               Math. 5.4. 
               Heauineſſe ſhall endure but for a night;Pſal. 30.5. the time is at hand, when all ſighing ſhall be turned into ſinging, lamentation into laughing; All Teares wiped from their eyes: Reu. 21.4. and thoſe which they haue ſhedde, be rewarded with an eternall weight of comfort and glory.2. Cor. 4.17.
            
            
               (Bitterly,) but not immoderately, like Heraclitus, or Niobe; for Nature, Reaſon, and Religion, forbidde ſuch immoderate weeping: Nature, (as the Philoſophers haue obſerued) hath giuen vnto the Eye, twiſe as many dry Skinnes or Filmes, like Sluces, to damme vp the courſe of Teares; as moyſt humours like Channels, to let them runne forth; but three of theſe, and ſixe of the other: Tol. in lib. 2. Ariſtot. de anima. Reaſon, ſayth to much of a thing is naught; Ne quid nimis. too many droops of ſweete honny are not good; Prou. 25.27. much leſſe too many teares as bitter as wormewood: but Religion goeth further, and forbiddeth Chriſtians to weepe, as thoſe that haue no hope; 1. Theſſ. 4.13 ſo that nature, which teacheth all things; reaſon, which teacheth all men; and Religion, which teacheth all Chriſtians; do ioyne togeather to teach this leſſon, we muſt weepe bitterly but not Immoderatly; for it is the manner, not the meaſure; the qualitie, not the quantitie

of our teares, which God reſpecteth: yea euen three ſillables pronounced with one true teare, are more powrefull with God; Quantum valent tres ſillabae, peccaui. Amb. Then tenne thouſand confeſsions, vttered with a flood of deteſtable, Deteſtandae lachrimae, quae non habent modum. Hierom. hippocritycall, teares:
            Laſtly, he wept (bitterly) but not deſperatly, as Eſau and Judas did; Peter, hath ſinned, and that was the death of his ſoule, but there was mercy with God, to reuyue it agayne, but had he deſpayred he had deſcended into hell, forth of which, there is no Redemption: Some are bold to affirme, that Iudas ſinned more in deſpayring of mercy, then in betraying of his Maiſter; for in this, he did but chiefly wornge his humanitie, and bring vpon it that death which his Father had euerlaſtingly appoynted; Act. 4.28. but in the other, he wronged his deitie, as if this ſinne were greater, then his infinite mercy could forgiue.Iicron. in pſ. 108.
            
            The hope of a Chriſtian, is very nicely and fearefully placed betwixt two extremities; bold preſumption, and timerous deſperation: only, ſhee is accompanyed with two Siſters to keepe her from this Scylla and Charibdis where ſo many poore ſoules ſuffer ſhipwracke & ouerthrow; viz. Faith and Loue; Faith layeth hold vpon the mercies of God, and keepeth from deſpaire: and Loue, teacheth to keepe the commaundements of God, and beware of a ſinfull and lycentious life, D. King on Ion. Lect. 27. pag 364. whatſoeuer then our ſinne be, let vs beware of deſpaire; which (as it were) bindeth Gods Armes, and ſhutteth the Doore of Gods gracious Indulgencie againſt vs; and is therefore a wound which can neuer be cured.Plaga inſanabilis. Apoſtrophe.
            
            Say we vnto Chriſt, Oh ſweete Ieſu, thou cameſt to ſaue ſinners: 1. Timo. 1.15. If I were not a ſinner, thou couldſt not be my Sauiour: Thou calleſt all ſuch as trauell and are heauie loaden; Math. 11. penult. and promiſeſt to caſt away none that come vnto thee: Iohn. 6.37. Thou dideſt not caſt away the

Theeſe vpon the Croſſe, confeſsing: Luk. 23.41. nor Mathew ſitting at the receipt of Cuſtome: Math. 9.9. nor the Woman waſhing thy feete with Teares: Luk. 7.38. nor the Canaanite, begging for her Daughter: Math. 15.28. nor the Publicane ſtanding a farre off: Luk. 18.13. nor Peter denying, nor Paul perſecuting, the ſauiour of theſe Examples; make mee to loue thee, and run after thee. Barn. Serm. in Cantic. 22. in odore horū currimus. Say we vnto God; O Lord, thy name is Jehouah, 
               Exod. 3.14. thou art a God not in ſhew, but in ſubſtaunce: not for a ſeaſon, but in continuaunce: thy nature, is rich in Mercie; Ephe 2 4. thou art rich in Power, rich in Wiſedome, rich in Iuſtice; yea infinitely rich in whatſoeuer may be ſayd, thou art: but as thy Mercie is ouer all thy Workes; Pſa. 145 9. and as the Oyle, which couereth all Liquors; ſo is the riches of thy Mercie, aboue all other thy Riches: Thy Couenaunt is, I will be thy God, and the God of thy ſeed: Gen. 17.7. thy Promiſe is, At what time (Whenſoeuer) a ſinner (Whoſoeuer) ſhall repent of his ſinne, (Whatſoeuer) thou wilt forgiue and forget it Pſal. 119.49. Lord remember thy Name, remember thy Nature; remember thy Couenant, remember thy Promiſe; for theſe thinges haue cauſed mee to truſt in thee: And though thou killeſt me, I will truſt in thee Iob. 13.15.
            
            Say we to Peter, Oh bleſſed man, Chriſt hath ſuffered Sathan to giue thee the foyle; but he hath rayſed thee he hath ſuffered thee to ſhame thy ſelfe, that he might crowne thee with Glory: thou haſt ſinned, and haſt ſorrowed; thou denyedſt, and haſt wept bitterly: thou offendedſt in thy Tongue and thine Heart hath been rent for it: thy Teares are come vp into remembrance with God, and the guilt & puniſhment▪ ſhame and diſgrace of thy ſinne, are gone with God, Angels, and men: ſo long as the World ſtandeth, thou ſhalt be honoured in the Church as a chiefe Apoſtle: Gall. 2.9. Now are all Teares wiped from thine eyes; and now thou keepeſt turnes with thoſe Angels, which did ioy in thy repentance; yea, art admitted into the bottomleſſe and

bounleſſe ioyes of thy Maiſter, for euer. Non intrabit gaudium in gaudentes, ſed totì gaudentes, in gaudium domini. Auguſt. tuan. Concluſion.
            
            To conclude, wee haue all ſinned, ſome one way, ſome another; moſt, many wayes; but few haue yet ſorrowed and repented: they can weepe extreamely for any worldly Croſſe or Calamitie, euen as Rachel did for her Children, and would not be comforted; Math. 2.18 but for their ſinnes, they haue no touch, no remorſe, no compunction at all; their heartes are of as inuincible hardnes as the Adamant, which can neither be ſoftned with Fire, nor wrought with Hammer: and their eyes as dry as Pumieſt ſtones:Corda Adamantiua et oculos Pumi ceos. Plant. nay, I wold there were not a generatiō ſo far paſt grace, as in ſtead of ſorrowing for ſinnes, to glory in them, & to ſay vnto them, as God did to his Creatures, Increaſe and multiply; Gen. 1.22. proclayming, as with a trumpet, their owne damnation: well, the night of ignoraunce and ſinne is almoſt ouer, Rom. 13.12. yea all time is wel-nigh gone, Reu. 10.6. the day beginneth to dawne, the Cocks do crow thicke and ſhrill, Repent, Repent, for the Kingdome of Heauen is at hand; Mat. 3.2.4.17. there remayneth no more but the crow of the laſt trumpet, which ſhall be ſo loude and ſhrill, as ſhall awaken all that ſleepe in the duſt of the Earth, 
               Eſay. 26.19. and cauſe ſuch as would not weepe for their ſinnes in this world, to weepe and waile, and gnaſh their teeth in hell for euer. Math. 22.13.
            
            Were I then, as happie as Salomon to haue whatſoeuer I would aske,1. King. 3.5. this is the greateſt bleſſing which I would or could deſire for vs all, that with the crowing of the Cocke this day, he would be pleaſed graciouſly to looke vpon vs, & ſo effectually to touch our ſoules with his holy ſpirit, that from them might flow ryuers of teares of true repentannce, that ſo ſorrowing with Peter, we might be forgiuen, and for euer comforted with him: Which God, for his infinite mercie graunt vnto vs all, Amen.
            FINIS.
         
      
   