
      
         
            
            By the Lord Deputie and Councell.
            
               
                  ❧ A Proclamation for the Baniſhment of Ieſuites and Prieſts, &c.
            
            
               HENRY FALKLAND.
            
            
               IT is well knowne, by daily experience, what intolerable miſchiefes and inconueniences haue growne vpon this Realme, through the extraordinary reſort of ſuch perſons hither as are commonly called titulary popiſh Archbiſhops, Biſhops, Vicars generall, Abbots, Priors, Deanes, Jeſuites, Fryers, Seminary prieſts, and others of that Sect, who ſeeking to ſet vp and maintaine a forreine power and authority within this his Maieſties Dominion, The ſaid Biſhops, by pretence thereof, haue vſurped and exerciſed Eccleſiaſticall Juriſdiction within this Kingdome in all ſpirituall and Eccleſiaſticall cauſes, to the great derogation of his Maieſties imperiall Crowne. And the ſaid inferiour Secular Prieſts haue likewiſe exerciſed all ſpirituall and Sacerdotall functions, as chriſtening, marrying, and ſuch like, and by colour there of haue taken and exacted ſundry ſpirituall duties, from ſuch as are ſeduced by them, to the intolerable grieuance and impoueriſhing of this poore nation, And they all ſeeking and daily endeuouring to peruert the hearts of his Maieſties ſubiects, and to draw them from the true Religion here eſtabliſhed, to blindneſſe and ſuperſtition, & to alienate their affections from their Souereigne liege Lord the Kings Maieſtie, and to ſubiect them to the ſaid forreine authoritie, to the generall diſturbance of the common peace and tranquillitie of this Kingdome. For reformation of which abuſes, and auoiding of ſuch ſeditious perſons, ſundry Proclamations haue beene iſſued and publiſhed in this Kingdome: ſome by immediate warrant from his Maieſtie out of England, and others by authoritie of the Lord Deputie and Councell of this Kingdome for the time being, thereby ſtrictly charging and commanding them forthwith, or within ſome ſhort time then after (and now long ſithence expired) to depart out of this Kingdome, and neuer to returne hither againe, vnleſſe they ſhould conforme themſelues to the Religion here eſtabliſhed, and repaire to the Church duely and orderly: vpon paine of his Maieſties high indignation, and ſuch puniſhments as might iuſtly bee inflicted vpon the wilfull contemners of his Maieſties Royall command. All which notwithſtanding, his Maieſtie is informed that the ſaid popiſh titularie Biſhops, Vicars generall, Prieſts, Jeſuites, and other perſons before mentioned, haue of late flocked hither in greater numbers then at any time heretofore, And that ſuch Jeſuites, Seminary Prieſts, and other Prieſts, Fryers, Vicars generall, Abbots, Priors, and Biſhops ſo ordayned by forreine authoritie, which did before time ſecretly lurke in ſundry parts of this Kingdome, haue of late time mo
                  •
               e boldly and preſumptuouſly ſhewed and declared themſelues in the vſe and exerciſe of their functions in open Aſſemblies, whereby his Maieſties ſubiects haue beene generally more ſeduced and confirmed in their diſobedience and obſtinacie againſt his Highneſſe Lawes and Royall commandements (in contempt of his Maieſtie and the ſaid former Proclamations) and are like to breed more and greater mifchiefes, if they be ſuffered to abide and continue here any longer: Of which increaſe and inſolence of the ſaid popiſh Biſhops, Prieſts, and others as aforeſaid, his Maieſtie hauing taken ſpeciall notice, hath ſignified his high diſpleaſure thereat, and hath thereupon commanded Vs to put all Lawes in execution (that are in force in this Kingdome) that inflict any puniſhment vpon ſuch as exerciſe any thing to extoll or maintaine the power or iuriſdiction Spirituall or Eccleſiaſticall of any forreine Prince or Prelate, within this Kingdome, and to reuiue the Proclamation to remoue and exclude all popiſh Biſhops, Priefts, Vicars generall, and others as aforeſaid, out of the ſame, as the principall ſupporters and maintayners of the ſaid vſurped Authoritie.
            Know yee therefore, that Wee in obedience vnto his Maieſties Royall command, and for abſolute warning to bee giuen in this kind, doe denounce, and in his Maieſties name ſtrictly charge and command, That they ſhall all of them, that is to ſay, all titulary popiſh Archbiſhops, Biſhops, Vicars generall, Abbots, Pryors, Deanes, Jeſuites, Fryers, Seminary Prieſts, and other Prieſts whatſoeuer, regular or ſecular (being made or ordeyned by any authoritie, deriued or pretended to be deriued from the See of Rome, or by any other forreine authority whatſoeuer) depart out of this Kingdome of Ireland forthwith, or within fortie dayes next enſuing, at the fartheſt, after the date hereof. And that no ſuch titulary Biſhops, Vicars generall, Abbots, Pryors, Deanes, Jeſuites, Seminary prieſts, or other prieſts or Fryers, ordayned by forreine authoritie as aforeſaid, ſhall from and after the ſaid fortie dayes, repaire, come or returne into this Kingdome, vpon paine of his Maieſties high diſpleaſure and indignation, and vpon ſuch further paine and penaltie as may bee iuſtly inflicted vpon them by the Lawes and Statutes of this Kingdome. And vpon the like paine, Wee doe in his Maieſties Name expreſſely forbid all, and all manner of perſons whatſoeuer within this Kingdome, to receiue, relieue, or conuerſe with, bee ordered by, or receiue inſtruction from any ſuch popiſh titulary Archbiſhop, Biſhop, Vicar generall, Abbot, Pryor, Deane, Fryer, Seminary prieſt, or other prieſt which after the ſaid fortie dayes ſhall remayne and abide in this Kingdome, or come into the ſame or any part thereof, contrarie to the intent of this Proclamation. And We doe further in his Maieſties name declare, publiſh, and command, that if any ſuch popiſh titulary Archbiſhop, Biſhop, Vicar generall, Abbot, Pryor, Deane, Jeſuite, Fryer, Seminary prieſt, or other prieſt, ſhall wilfully abide and continue in this Kingdome after the ſaid fortie dayes, or ſhall voluntarily repayre or returne into this Kingdome, or any part thereof: or if any perſon or perſons ſhall receiue, relieue, conuerſe with, bee ordered by, or receiue inſtruction from any ſuch popiſh titulary Archbiſhop, Biſhop, Vicar generall, Abbot, Pryor, Deane, Jeſuite, Fryer, Seminary prieſt, or other prieſt, That then all and euery Prouinciall Gouernors, Sheriffs, Juſtices of peace, Mayors, Soueraignes, Portrieffs, Conſtables, and all others his Maieſties officers and loyall ſubiects in this Kingdome, ſhall vſe their beſt diligence and indeauours, to apprehend all and euery ſuch popiſh titulary Archbiſhop, Biſhop, Vicar generall, Abbot, Prior, Deane, Jeſuite, Fryer, Seminary prieſt▪ and other prieſt ordayned by forreine Authority as aforeſaid, and all and euery of their receiuers, relieuers, and followers▪ and them and euery of them to commit to ſome ſafe and ſtrict priſon, to the end ſuch further order may be taken for their puniſhment, as to Vs the Lord Deputie and Councell ſhall be thought fit. And We require them and euery of them, to bee ſeuere to put this his Maieſties commandement in full execution, as they and euery of them will anſwer the contrary to his Maieſtie, who will call them and euery of them to a ſtrict account touching the performance of their duties in this behalfe.
            Prouided alwayes, That if any of the ſaid titulary Archbiſhops, Biſhops, Vicars generall, Abbots, Pryors, Deanes, Jeſuites, Fryers, Seminary prieſts, or other ſuch prieſts whatſoeuer ſhall before the ſaid forty dayes, or within ten dayes next after his or their repayre or returne into this kingdome, ſubmit themſelues before Vs the now Lo: Deputy, or to the Lo: Deputy or other chiefe Gouernour of this kingdome for the time being, or other the Gouernour of any Prouince, or before any of his Maieſties priuy Councell in this kingdome, and ſhall thereupon conforme themſelues, and repayre to the Church duly and orderly, according to the intent of his Maieſties Lawes, That then it ſhall and may be lawfull for all and euery ſuch popiſh titulary Archbiſhop, Biſhop, Vicar generall, Abbot, Pryor, Deane, Jeſuite, Fryer, Seminary prieſt, or other prieſt that ſhall ſo ſubmit and conforme themſelues, to abide and continue in this kingdome, and to repayre and returne into the ſame, and to haue and enioy the benefit of his Maieſties Lawes and Royall protection, in as free and ample manner as any other loyall ſubiect, ſo long as they or any of them ſhall continue in ſuch conformitie.
            
               Giuen at his Maieſties Caſtle of Dublin, the one and twentieth day of January. 1623.
               
               
                  
                     Adam Loftus Canc. 
                     
                     Hen: Valentia.
                     Fra: Aungier.
                     Fra: Blundell.
                     Geo: Shurley.
                     I. Blener Hayſet.
                     Dudly Norton.
                     Fra: Anneſley.
                     William Parſons.
                     Roger Iones.
                     I. King.
                     Adam Loftus.
                  
               
               God ſaue the King.
            
         
      
      
         
            Imprinted at Dublin by the Societie of Stationers. Anno Domini M. D. c. XXIII.
         
      
   