
      
         
            
            
               ❧ The true deſcription of a monſterous Chylde / Borne in the Ile of wight, in this preſent yeare of oure Lord God, M. D. LXIIII. the month of October, after this forme with a cluſter of longe heare about the Nauell, the Fathers name is Iames Iohnſun, in the parys of Freſwater.
            
               
                  depiction of deformed infant
               
            
            
               
                  FOr mercy Lorde, with one accorde,
               To the we call and crye:
               That ſo doth ſhow, in earth below,
               Thy wonderous workes daylye.
            
            
               Within the raſe, of fyue yeres ſpace
               Moche monſterous ſights hath byn:
               Of ſundry kynde, man bare in mynde,
               And ſone turne from thy ſyn.
            
            
               Repent and pray, a mende I ſay,
               Leue of thy wicked wayes:
               The tyme drawes on, thou muſt be gone,
               Beholde this later dayes.
            
            
               Of Infans yonge, agone not longe,
               With calues and pigges which were:
               The tookens loo, miſhappen ſoo,
               Whiche cryeth to vs great feare.
            
            
               Now this late ſyght in Ile of Wight,
               Straungely it is to tell:
               Two children borne, neuer beforne.
               Suche wonders there be fell.
            
            
               The one I fynde, of Woman kynde,
               Hauyng her ſhape all right:
               The other is, tranſpoſed this,
               As pleaſeth the Lorde of myght.
            
            
               Where natures art, doth not her part.
               In workyng of her ſkylle:
               To ſhape a right, eche lyucly wight,
               Beholde it is Gods wyll.
            
            
               Loo here you ſee, before your eye,
               A man childe to beholde:
               A babe gylties, deformyd this.
               Moſte wonderous to be tolde.
            
            
               No caruer can, nor paynter then,
               The ſhape more vgly make:
               As it ſelfe dothe, declare the truthe,
               A ſyghte to make vs quake.
            
            
               Let vs all feare, and in mynde beare,
               This forme ſo monſterous:
               That no hurt wraught, nor euill hath thaught,
               What ſhall become of vs.
            
            
               That doth ſtill ſyn, and neuer lyn,
               As men heapyng vp treaſure:
               Agaynſt the day, of wrath for aye,
               Of Gods heauy diſpleaſure.
            
            
               Nowe praye wee all, bothe great and ſmall,
               Unto the Lorde of might:
               To gyue vs grace in Heauen a place,
               There to attayne his ſight.
            
         
         
            
               
                  ALl ye that dothe beholde and ſee, this monſtrous ſight ſo ſtraunge,
               Let it to you a preachyng be, from ſynfull lyfe to chaunge:
               For in this latter dayes trulye, the Lord ſtraunge ſyghts doth ſhowe,
               By tokens in the Heauens hye, and on the yearth belowe.
               This dothe demonſtrate to vs, the lyfe whiche we lyue in,
               A Monſter oughly to beholde, conceyued was in ſyn:
               In ſhape vnparfett here to vewe, that nature hathe not dreſt,
               A chylde now borne by porte moſte true, this from the mothers breſt:
               For he that doth this ſhape beholde, and his owne ſtate will knowe,
               Will make the proude Pecocke ſo bolde, beare downe his tayll full lowe;
               Nowe Lorde ſende downe thy holy ſpryte, the Confortor of Ioye,
               For to direct owr wayes aright, to dwell with thee for aye:
               And graunt we maye amende our lyfe, accordyng to thy worde,
               In euery age bothe Manne and Wyfe, nowe graunt vs this good Lorde.
            
            Finis
            quod Iohn Barkar.
         
      
      
         
            ¶ Imprynted at London in Fleteſtrete: at the Sygne of the Faucon, by Wylliam Gryffith, and are to be ſolde at his ſhop in ſaint Donſtons churchyarde, in the weſt of London, the .viii. daye of Nouember.
         
      
   