
      
         
            
            A Balade declaryng how neybourhed
loue, and trew dealyng is gone.
            NOw ſtraunge it is, to men of age
            the which they ſe, before their face.
            This world to be, in ſuch outrage,
            It was neuer ſene, in ſo bad caſe,
            Neibourhed nor loue is none
            trew dealyng now is fled & gone
            ¶Where ſhall one fynde, a man to truſt,
            Alwaye to ſtande, in tyme of neede.
            The moſt parte now, they are vniuſt
            Fayre in wordes, but falſe in deede:
            Neybourhed. nor loue is none
            True dealyng now is fled and gone.
            ¶who can flatter, now beſt ſhall ſpeede,
            who can deceyue, is gaynes well won
            Of deceytfull tongues, who can take hede
            Many a man, they haue vndone,
            Neibourhed, nor loue is none, &c,
            ¶The wickedneſſe, that doth abounde,
            More then I can, with tongue expreſſe,
            To ſee vnfaithfull men are founde,
            of frendſhip there was neuer leſſe:
            Neiborhed, nor loue is none. &c.
            ¶On couetouſneſſe, moſt men deſyre,
            Their neibours houſe, ſome doth procure.
            And ouer his hed, they wyll it hyre,
            Or bye a leace, to make it ſure,
            Neiborhed, nor loue is none. &c.
            ¶To pourchace and bye, for lucre & gaine
            Both leace & houſe, both wood & grounde,
            Thei double the rent, to poore mens payne
            of landlordes nowe, fewe good are founde
            Neiborhed, nor loue is none. &c.
            ¶This is vſed now euery where,
            And wyll be tyll we haue redreſſe,
            with them I thought, the Lorde dyd fere
            Becauſe his worde they doo profeſſe:
            neiborhed, nor loue is none. &c.
            ¶what neiborhed is this you call,
            That one another doth backbite
            And daily wyll both ſkolde and brall,
            with ſlaunderous wordes, in moſt deſpite:
            neyborhed, nor loue is none. &c.
            ¶For matters ſmall, ſome ſuffre wronge,
            Vpon diſpleaſure, in priſon caſt,
            And there ſhall lye, without pitie long
            tyll that his goodes are ſpent and waſt:
            neyborhed nor loue is none. &c,
            ¶Thungodly riche, the poore opppreſſe.
            On them few haue compaſſion,
            Their cauſe is here, remedileſſe
            without all conſolacion:
            neyborhed nor loue is none. &c.
            
               ❧ If any membre be hurte in man,
            The whole body lamentes therfore:
            the poore oppreſt who cureth than
            Or helpes him for to ſalue his ſore:
            neiborhed nor loue is none, &c,
            ¶The percialneſſe that now doth raigne
            with ſome that haue, ſuche cauſe in hande
            The riche men doth, the poore diſdayne
            And ſekes the meanes, to make them band
            neyborhed not loue is none, &c.
            ¶Truly to deale one with another,
            In theſe dayes now ar very fewe,
            the Siſter wyll begyle the brother,
            the brother agayne, deceyte wyll ſhewe
            neyborhed nor loue is none. &c.
            ¶The father wyll deceyue the chylde,
            the chylde the father likewiſe agayne,
            thus one another dothe begylde
            By falſe deceyt, that now doth raigne:
            neyborhed nor loue is none. &c.
            ¶To ſpeake ſomwhat of vſurye,
            the whiche the Lorde doth daily curſe
            yet ſome doo vſe it priuely
            to fyll their vncontented purſe,
            neyborhed nor loue is none. &c.
            To ſtriue or ſpeake, it is no boote,
            In couetouſneſſe, there is no order
            of miſchiefe it is the very roote,
            All thinges it ſpoyles, in euery border:
            neyborhed nor loue is none. &c,
            Our Preachers with gods word doth cry
            on couetouſmen, that wyll not ceſſe,
            their wordes are herde, with yeres ſo ſlye,
            their filthy gaynes, they ſtyll encreſſe:
            neybourhed nor loue is none. &c.
            How many doth their rentes abate,
            or now a dayes, their tenentes eaſe,
            they ſet their rentes, at a new rate
            Both fines and leaſſes, they daily reaſe.
            Neybourhed nor loue is none. &c.
            Couetouſneſſe hathe now the way
            wronge & briberye dothe not refrayne,
            In euery coſt, pride bereth the ſway,
            Amonges the whole▪ now it doth raygne
            Neybourhed nor loue is none. &c.
            What is the cauſe, neibourhed is gone,
            which here hath reigned many a daye
            I heare the poore men make great mone,
            And ſayth hit is, falne in decaye:
            Neibourhed nor loue is none, &c,
            True dealyng dare not once appeare
            Deceit hath put him out of place,
            Euery where both farre and nere,
            He raigneth now in moſt mens face:
            Neibourhed nor loue is none. &c.
            Graunt oh God, for thy mercyes ſake
            That neigbourhed, and dealyng trewe
            May once agayne, our ſprites awake,
            That we our lyues may chaunge a new
            that neybourhed and loue a lone
            may come agayne to euery one.
            
               qd. Ihon Barker.
            
         
      
      
         
            Imprinted at London
by Richard Lant.
         
      
   