
      
         
            
            
               ❧ The Plagues of Northomberland.
            To the tune of Appelles.
            
               
               
               
               
               
            
            
               WHen that the Moone, in Northomberland,
               After the chaynge, in age well conne,
               Did riſe with force, then to with ſtande,
               The lyght and bright beames of the Sonne
               The ſorowfull dolers ſoone began,
               Through Percies pryde to many a man.
            
            
               But then a none the Weſtmere Bull,
               Behelde the ryſinge of this Moone,
               Thinking that ſhee had byn at full,
               He haſtyd then a none full ſoone,
               With horſe, and Armes, and all his might,
               From parfect daye, to vncertaine lyght.
            
            
               When they in one, conſent were pyght,
               With them was many an ignorant man,
               The Romyſhe Lawes, they wold redyght
               Through councell of ſome blind Syr Iohn,
               Who neuer knewe godes veryte,
               But to Rebellion then dyd a gree.
            
            
               For if they would of gods word knowen.
               Longe. xxx. yeres they haue had tyme,
               Rebellion then had not byn ſowen,
               To brynge ther countre in ſuch cryme,
               Their poyſon now, all men may ſee,
               That vnder Suger longe did lie.
            
            
               ¶ What myſchyfe mouid the Perſies hart,
               This enterpryſe to take in hand,
               This for to playe a Rebelles parte,
               In raiſinge vp Northomberland,
               But looke what ſeede, by hym is ſowen,
               With ſharp ſythes downe it was ſoone mowen.
            
            
               ¶ That countre is, in full ſore plyght,
               That doth a gaynſt their Prynce contend,
               Seeking their owne dreames to redyght,
               The Popes precepts for to defend,
               Lyke brutyſhe peruerſt ignorant men,
               That ſeekes before a lawe to ten.
            
            
               ¶ This venym longe a breedinge was
               Which in the Perſies breſte did growe,
               The Bull in bellinge did not ceaſſe,
               Till that the poyſon oute did flowe
               So farr a broade the ſtreames did ronne,
               That backe a gayne cold not retourne.
            
            
               ¶ This hatefull poyſon longe was hyde,
               Under the cloake of amytie,
               The outward Treaſone was not ſpyde,
               But couerid with all courteſie,
               Their cloſe vnlawfull conſpitacion,
               Hath brought them to great dyſolacion.
            
            
               ¶ The hope vnſure was tranſytorye,
               The which was in that clowdy Moone,
               Her falſe eclypes with all the glorye,
               Her ioye vnſtable was endid ſoone
               Her ſudden chaynge now tells vs all,
               That Suger ſweet was blent with Gall.
            
            
               ¶ What ſtate now maye hym ſelfe aſſure,
               Longe here to lyue in quyetnes,
               What worldely toye maye here in dure,
               In thoſe where is no ſtablenes,
               Wher Lords, and Yerles, in welth doth flowe
               From their hye ſtate muſt fall downe lowe.
            
            
               ¶ Now by their fall learne to be wyſe,
               Both hye and lowe in eche degree,
               Let no falſe lyght deceaue your eyes,
               As it hath done of late you ſee.
               The falſe beames of the glyſtringe Moone,
               Now many a man it hath vndoone.
            
            
               ¶ For in the north the did ſhine longe,
               But now eclypſyd is her lyght,
               The Weſtmere Bull that held ſo ſtronge,
               Hee is depreuyd of his myght,
               For many tongs of them will tell,
               How theſe to Yerles falſe did Rebell.
            
            
               And many a man more as I heare,
               That with theſe Rebelles did take part,
               Which can not thinke them ſelues now cleare
               That in breſt beares a doble hart,
               But as you haue be gonne to brewe,
               So are you found Rebelles vntrue.
            
            
               ¶ The countre cleane you haue vndone,
               The Lord graunt therſome better ſtaye,
               Or els will many a mothers ſonne,
               For this curſſe you a nother daye,
               You leaue your wyues and childrene deare,
               Lamentinge in moſt wofull cheare.
            
            
               ¶ Now let vs praye as we are bound,
               All for our Queenes hyghe maieſte,
               That ſhee her enemies may confound,
               And all that to Rebelles agre,
               And plant true men vp in their place,
               The Lord from heauen now gyue her grace.
            
            Finis.
            
               ꝙ. Iohn Barker,
            
         
      
      
         
            ¶ Imprinted at London in Fleeteſtreate beneath the Conduyt, at the ſigne of ſaint, Iohn Euangeliſt, by Thomas Colwell.
         
      
   