
      
         
            
            
            NAZARETH AND BETHLEHEM, OR, ISRAELS PORTION IN THE SONNE OF IESSE. AND, MANKINDS COMFORT FROM THE WEAKER SEXE. TVVO SERMONS PREACHED IN St Maryes Church in Oxford. BY THOMAS IACKSON, Bachelour of Divinitie, and Fellow of Corpus Chriſti College in Oxford.
            1. TIM. 3.16.
            Without controverſie, great is the myſtery of godlineſſe: God is manifeſt in the fleſh.
            AT OXFORD, Printed by Iohn Lichfield, and william Wrench. 1617.
         
         
            
            
            TO THE RIGHT REVEREND Father in God, and my very good Lord, JAMES, by divine providence Lord Biſhop of Wincheſter T. J. wiſheth all Grace and Happineſſe. RIGHT REVEREND And HONOVRABLE,
            
               SInce it hath pleaſed ſuch as haue hitherto beene ſpectators, as well of my weakneſſe, as of my induſtry in the Ministery, to pardon the one for the others ſake; it is, and ever ſhall be my care, to haue your Lordſhip, (vnder whoſe patronage, as Honourable Succeſſor to my worthie Founder, I now enioy the continuance of former opportunities) no witneſſe of my ſloth, or idleneſſe. Yet theſe papers I produce not, either in testimonie of my paines, which in ſo little a worke cannot be great; or as a proofe of my diligence in poliſhing what hereafter I meane to ſet forth. Rather out of indulgence to my bodily indiſpoſition, & diligent fore cast how long my iourny is like to bee, I haue begunne after ſuch a manner, as by Gods aſsiſtance, and your Lordſhips wonted coūtenance, I may hope to cōtinue. To leaue ſome fuller explication, then I haue found,

of the admirable conſonancie betweene ancient praeſignifications, whether propheticall, typicall, or hiſtoricall, and Evangelicall relations, concerning our Saviours conception, his birth, his baptiſme, paſſion, reſurrection, and aſcenſion (or other like parts of his humiliation, and exaltation) is the point, whereto my ſtudies haue beene conſecrated, and my obſervations principally directed, ſince I vndertooke the miniſtery. And in this reſpect, I may truly call my meditations in this kind, the firſt fruits of all my labours. Now of this crop, which, with reference to my poore harveſt, is like to be very great, as much at leaſt as all the reſt, and as I truſt moſt acceptable to my God; I haue brought this little Sheafe vnto your Lordſhip, humbly deſiring that you would vouchſafe to offer it vp vnto Him, by whoſe only bleſſing all the rest muſt bee ſanctified. Thus omitting longer preface, vntill I may fit it with a larger worke, I humbly commend your Lordſhip to the gratious protection of our Heavenly Father, and this ſlender pledge of my moſt intire obſervance to your benigne acceptance. 
            
               From my ſtudy in CORPVS CHRISTI COLLEGE in Oxford: 
                  Septemb. 6. 1617.
                
               
                  Your Honours, in all duty and ſervice to be commanded, THOMAS JACKSON.
               
            
         
      
      
         
            
            
               JEREMIAH 31. VER. 21.22.
               Turne againe O Virgin of Iſrael, turne againe to theſe thy cities. How long wilt thou goe aſtray O thou rebellious daughter? For the Lord hath created a new thing in the earth, a woman ſhall compaſſe a man.
            
            1 IT is the obſervation of a moſt ancient Father. Irenem. 
               Omnis Prophetia priuſquā impleatur aenigma eſt. Every prophecy before it be fulfilled is a riddle. And amongſt prophecies the latter part of this Text not the leaſt aenigmatical. For our better vnderſtanding the true meaning of theſe words in themſelues, their coherence with the former, and my Prophets drift or ſcope in all: may it pleaſe you (Men, Fathers, and Brethren) to conſider the time was now come, wherein the Lord had put Iudah alſo out of his ſight, and caſt of Ieruſalem the citie which he had choſen. Beniamin was become Ben-oni, a ſonne of ſorrow vnto his mother. Chap. 31. verſ. 15. For a voice was heard in Ramah mourning and bitter weeping, Rahel weeping for her children refuſed to be comforted becauſe they were not, in the land of her buriall & their fathers birth. But the Lord alwaies

more tender and compaſſionate towards his chidren, then a woman towards the children of her wombe, yea then tender hearted Rahel her ſelfe towards her deareſt ſonne, whoſe birth had coſt her life, in the midſt, yea even in the firſt beginning of theſe his iudgements remembers mercy. He now ſends Iudah into captivitie after Iſrael, but as a ſecond arrow to finde out a former loſt. And Beniamin muſt goe, though as ſore againſt his owne will into Chaldaea, as hee had done ſometimes againſt his Fathers into Egypt; yet in the Almighties determination as well now as then to redeem his brother from that thraldome, wherein he had been long detained. For the Lord had put vp Ephraims lamentation, with Rahels teares for Beniamin, diſirous, as he himſelfe in the verſes following proteſts, to prepare one & the ſame medicine for both their maladies. Chap. 31. verſ. 18. 
               Refraine thy voice from weeping Rahel, and thine eies from teares, for thy work ſhall be rewarded, ſaith the Lord. And they ſhall come againe from the land of the enemie: and there is hope in thine end, ſaith the Lord, that thy children ſhal come againe to their owne borders. I haue heard Ephraim bemoaning himſelfe thus, thou hadſt corrected me, and I was chaſtiſed, &c.
            
            2 But as Ephraims intemperancie had beene greater, more wilfull, and of longer continuance, then Iudahs or Beniamins had beene, to his recoverie was now more difficult, and put his heavenly phyſitian to a greater plunge then whē it enforc'd

him to cry out, Hoſ. 6. v. 4. 
               O Ephraim what ſhall I doe vnto thee? He was become as a man whoſe nature is ſo farre ſpent that no phyſicke can be ſafely adminiſtred to him. Long calamitie and diſtreſſe brings oftimes the ſoules of Gods children ſo farre out of raſt with his ſweeteſt mercies, that they loath their very proffer no leſſe then ſicke men doe the ſight of meat. Iudges 6. ver. 12. 
               The Lord is with thee thou valiant man, ſaith the Angel of the Lord to Gedeon: But he replies. Ah my Lord, if the Lord be with vs, why then is all this come vpon vs? and where be all his miracles, which our fathers told vs of and ſaid. Did not the Lord bring vs out of Aegypt? but now the Lord hath forſaken vs, and deliuered vs into the hands of the Midianites. More wayward & diffident, my Prophet fore ſaw, Ephraim or Iſrael, for the moſt part, would bee. The beſt of them albeit they miſtruſt not the truth of Gods promiſes vnto Abraham; yet doubt whether theirs and their fathers ſinnes haue not forfaited their intereſt in thē. If they acknowledge Gods ſummons for Iudahs returne & theirs to be the ſame, yet with old Anchiſes in like caſe, they finde a difference in their eſtates,

                  —Virg. Aen. 2.
                     Vos ô quibus integer aeui
                  Sanguis ait ſoliáae
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      ſuo ſtant robore vires
                  Vos agitate fugam.—
               
            
            Such as bad freſh and liuely ſpirits to weild their ſtrong and able limmes, ſeeing their armes could not defend their country from the violence of their enimies, might vſe the benefit of their legs

to eſcape their buriall in her ruines.

                  Me ſi caelicole volniſsent ducere vitam,
                  Has mihi ſervaſsent ſedes.
               
But ſure, if the Gods intended Anchiſes any longer leaſe of his life, they would allow houſe-rome to his aged bones in Troy. Thus why Iudah and Beniamin ſhould returne vnto their borders, diſtruſtfull Ephraim could conceaue theſe or like reaſons. The time of their captivitie is not ſet ſo long▪ but many which haue ſeene Ieruſalem in her glorie, may liue to ſee the Ier. 30. v. 18. 
               citie built vp vpon her owne heape, and her palaces remaining after their wonted maner. 
               Verſ. 21. 
               Their children ſhall be as aforetime, their noble ruler ſhall be of themſelues, their gouernour ſhall proceed from among them. But as for Ephraim, our fathers ſaid it in their haſt and furie, and we their poſteritie muſt for ever bee bound vnto the bargaine. 1. Kings, ch. 12. verſ. 16.
               What portion haue we in Dauid? we haue no inheritance in the ſonne of Ieſſe. Many of his goodly ſtemms, now planted by the palmes of Babel, may take root againe in their natiue ſoile, and bee as a ſhelter to the tender graffes that muſt ſprout out of the lower ſhrubs of Iudah: but he that ſhall looke vpon the remedileſſe ſpoile and waſt, long ſince made throughout all the mountaines of Samariah; will he not take vp his parable and ſay, Ephraim is as a wood deſtroyed, wherein is never a Samplar left? The youngeſt ſprig that was removed thence, is now doated or withered with Eld in a ſtrange and wearyiſh ſoile. How many of our

fathers, which had never ſeene the light in the land of their conception, being brought captiues hither in the wombe, haue wee ſeene, (after their ſight had failed them, for very age and long expectation of returne) encloſed in the bowels of a forraigne earth; yet now no more a ſtepmother to vs their children that are left behind. An hundred yeares are paſt and gone, ſince our fathers were rooted out of their natiue land, & ſeaventie more are yet to come before our promiſed deliverance be accompliſhed. And what comfort can it bee to any of Ephraims race, to returne after ſo long time, into the land of Iſrael, now as ſtrange and vncouth vnto vs, as Media and Aſsyria were to our fathers.
            3 That Ephraim was thus affected, the iſſue did too well proue; for few, if any of this tribe did returne with the captivitie of Sion, & ſuch of them as afterwards return'd; did, for the moſt part, inhabit Galilie, or regions allotted to other tribes. This backwardneſſe, whether general in Iſrael, or more particular in Ephraim, was portended in the ominous character of this prophecie: wherein that God, which was a louing father to all the ſonnes of Abraham, appeares more anxious and ſollicitous for Ephraim, then for Iudah and Beniamin, whoſe returne from captivitie was more ſpeedie and entire. And my Prophet from foreknowledge of this diſtruſtfull temper in Ephraim, makes triall of ſo many courſes to make him relliſh Gods promiſes,

which he condites of purpoſe for his palate in ſweeteſt tearmes of deareſt loue; ſometimes intreating him vnder the name of Ephraim, ſometimes vnder the name of Iſrael, as if hee would trie whether the one were not more luckie then the other. Sometimes wooing him with faireſt promiſes of gratious favours to come. Ier. 31. v. 4. 
               I will build thee and thou ſhalt bee builded ô virgin Iſrael: thou ſhalt ſtill be adorned with thy timbrels, and goe forth in the daunces of them that be ioyfull. Thou ſhalt yet plant vines vpon the mountaines of Samaria, and the planters that plant them ſhall make them common. Sometimes recounting his former kindneſſe. 
                  Ver. 9. Why Ephraim is called Gods firſt. borne.
               I am a father to Iſrael, and Ephraim is my firſt borne: for when I ſhared Rubens dignitie amongſt his brethren, did I not ſo eſteeme of Ephraim? Levi had his prieſthood, and Iudah his kingdome; but the double portion was reſerued for Ioſeph: and the lot, whoſe diſpoſition belongs to mee, fell to Ephraim, though the younger brother; in the fairer and larger ground. Sometimes againe, like a penſiue father iealous of every occaſion that might ſcarre a fugitiue, wild vntamed ſonne from approaching his preſence, he proteſts his ſorrow for his ſevere chaſtiſements paſt. Ier. 31. v. 20. 
               Is Ephraim my deare ſonne? is hee my pleaſant child? Should I tell him ſo, his bitter correction would not ſuffer him to beleeue it. Yet ſince I ſpake vnto him, I ſtill remembred him, my bowels are troubled for him. I will ſurely haue mercy on him, ſaith the Lord. If the difficultie of

the way deterre thee, thou ſhalt not wander as thy fathers did in the wilderneſſe: whiles the paths by which the ſpoilers led thee are in freſh memory, Verſ. 21. 
               ſet thee vp way-markes, & make thee high heapes for thy direction, and ſet thine heart towards the pathway that thou haſt walked. Thy returne ſhall bee as quicke and ſpeedie as thy departure. Or if the mountaines of Ephraim bee polluted, Tabor and Hermon are not ſo. Zabulon and Nepthalim muſt yet ſee a wondrous light. Let Ephraim, if hee loath his owne inheritance as vncleane, take poſſeſſion among his brethren; or in caſe he linger behind, as diſdaining that Iudah ſhould be his leader, let not his bad example entice the other ſonnes of Iacob to drawe backe, as it ſometimes did them to revolt from David. Turne againe O virgin Iſrael (for thou ſhalt no more be obbraided with the adulteries of Samariah) turne againe to theſe thy cities my beloued daughter, my pleaſant child only refractorie and rebellious in this, that thou wilt not haſten thy retire, when as the Lord hath purpoſed to create a new thing in thy territorie, there the woman ſhall incompaſse the man. This is the vpſhot of all my Prophets ſweet and patheticall invitations of Iſrael to returne from captivitie. This new and ſtrange event of a woman incompaſsing a man is as a peereleſſe garland, profferd, firſt to Ephraim as the head of his brethren, or in the ſecond place, vnto ſuch of the ten Tribes as would bee moſt forward to vndertake the courſe. Wee muſt needs then with venerable antiquitie,

and ſome moſt Pomeranus. ancient reformers of the religion, which we profeſſe, acknowledge ſome extraordinarie matter to be here promiſed. Howſoever ſundry learned interpreters of latter times ſeeme not to account it ſuch: but as if they had begon to ſlumber, when they came to the words of my text, (diſpoſed to take a nap with my Prophet, or with him of whom he ſpake v. 26. Vpon this I awaked and beheld, and my ſleepe was ſweet vnto mee) they paſſe over this myſterie as in a dreame.
            4 For the right vnfolding whereof, foure words there be in the originall of remarkable vſe, and we may well diſpence with ordinarie tranſlations, for not fully expreſſing them, when as many learned Commentators otherwiſe very skilful in the Hebrew, ſcarce deigne to take notice of their true and proper grammaticall value, much leſſe of their prophetical references or importances. The firſt 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                tranſlated as you haue heard, in the earth, which phraſe in our Engliſh is vſually as much as if he had ſaid, in orbe terrarū, in the world; whereas by the circumſtances of the place, and conſonancie to the Hebrew dialect (moſt frequēt in propheticall writings) it muſt be reſtrained vnto that part of the earth, wherevnto hee ſollicits theſe Iſraelites, returne. I create a new thing in the land, to wit, of Iſrael, or the kingdome of Ephraim, as it is oppoſed vnto the two other Tribes: as Pomeranus hath learnedly obſerued. The ſecond originall word is here rendred (as well as conveniently

it could be in one word) by woman: yet is it not 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                or 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                but 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                as if he had ſaid, THE FEMALE SHALL COMPASSE THE MALE; though ſome what more bee included in the word 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                then a male, or man.
            5 The ſacred myſterie of this ſpeech may beſt appeare by comparing this new creation of the ſecond Adam in the Virgins wombe, with the creation of the firſt woman in Adam: with reference wherevnto this is called a new creation, wherein the order of the former is inverted. It is ſaid Geneſ. 1. 
               Gen. 1.27. 
               In his image created he him, he created them male and female. The reaſon of which aenigmaticall ſpeech (whence Plato, as I thinke, took his fable of Androgyni) is becauſe Moſes there ſpeakes of Adams creation onely, in whom notwithſtanding Eue was in a ſort created or encloſed as bone of his bone, and fleſh of his fleſh: Hee ſpeakes of him in both numbers, as of vnum actu, which was potentia plura. The like manner of ſpeech he vſeth in the firſt verſe. In the beginning God created the heauen, and the earth. Yet neither, was then diſtinctly created but the maſſe, whence both were afterwards diſtinguiſhed as it were into male and female: that is, into ſuch heavens, as now are the agents, and ſuch an earth, as now is the mother, whence all earthly creatures are produced. In this new creation the Lord encloſeth not Zakor Iſh or Adam, not maſculus only but Gever (i) vir fortis, the valiant or ſtrong man, the grand heroicke of

the world, in the female or weaker veſſell. The female ſhall incompaſſe the male, not after the vſuall manner of childrens encloſure in the wombe, but as Evah was encloſed in Adam, or as the ſhell encloſeth the kernell; whoſe firſt root of exiſtence is from within, not from without; whoſe encloſure every way is entire, never opened to receiue what it encloſeth, but only to haue it taken forth. This, I take it, is the naturall and true meaning of theſe words in this ſubiect, whereof wee ſpeake, conſidered, with ſuch references as haue beene ſpecified.
            6 Our ſmall acquaintance, whether with the peculiar ſignes of theſe ancient times, or with many common prenotions (concerning the manner of Meſsiahs birth or conception) which either my Prophet might preſuppoſe as ſufficiently knowne to them for whoſe good hee wrote, or this prophecie occaſion their ſucceſſors to enquire after againſt the time appointed, will not ſuffer vs to apprehend, either the appoſiteneſſe, or efficacie of theſe breefe perſwaſions, ſo fully as the obſervant Iſraelites, before, or about our Saviours comming might eaſily haue done. Yet, if we may geſſe at the force of his argument, by ſuch references and circumſtances, as haue left ſome print behind them in the revolutions of times vnfolding this prediction, which hee had wrapt vp in aenigmaticall generalities, it is more fully thus.
            Doſt thou therefore ſtand off, and diſdaine thy

returne to theſe thy cities, O thou Virgin, but haughtie and rebellious Iſraël becauſe the glory of Shiloes birth ſhall be thy ſiſter Iudahs and not thine? Doth it greiue thee that Bethlem Ephratah ſometimes ſo little amongſt the thouſands of Iudah, ſhould now overtop the chiefe cities of Samaria? A Prophet from the mouth of the Lord hath ſaid it, and it muſt of neceſſitie come to paſſe, Micah. 5. v. 2.
               that out of Bethlem, he ſhal come forth that ſhal beare rule in Iſrael; whoſe goings forth haue beene from the beginning, and from everlasting. Ephratah it was rightly called of old, and it happily height Bethlem ſince, ordein'd from eternitie to bring forth the bread of life: but neither hath Iſrael born Ephraims name for naught. Fruitfulneſſe alſo is with thee. Theſe thy Cities, though little and barren in thy ſight, are not forſaken of thy God: thou haſt likewiſe a Prophets word for thy aſſurance, that albeit Iudah muſt bring him forth, yet Iſrael ſhall bee the land of his conception, of whoſe kingdome there ſhall be no end. Account it not blind chance but thy good hap, that thy name is firſt mentioned in the reeſtabliſhing of my ancient grant.Ier. 33. verſ. 14.15. 
               Behold the daies come (ſaith the Lord) that I will performe that good thing which I haue promiſed vnto the houſe of Iſrael, and to the houſe of Iudah. In thoſe daies and at that time will I cauſe the branch of Righteouſneſſe to growe vp vnto David, and hee ſhall execute iudgement and righteouſneſse in the land, Ierem. 33. v. 14, 15. Search the Prophets at the time appointed,

and it ſhall be ſhewed thee, that whilſt one of them made this glorious promiſe, in my name, to Bethlem, 
               Eſa. 11. v. 1. another (no enemie to the houſe of Iudah) did foretell thy fathers, that the root of Ieſſe ſhould recover his ſap, and giue firſt beginning of life to the branch of Righteouſneſſe, within thy borders. Though by birth hee muſt bee a Bethlemite, and of Davids linage, yet the name by which hee muſt be beſt knowne ſhall bee taken from one of thy Cities, wherein Eſa. 53. v. 2. 
               being first conceiued, he ſhall growe vp as a branch out of a decayed trunke, or as a root out of a dry ground, not as a young plant from the liue ſeed of a former tree: That this place of his conception is not ſo cleerely named by Iſaiah, as the place of his birth by Micah; doth this diſmay thee? The greater ſecrecie is a ſigne of a greater myſterie. I knowe thee of old, thou art coy, thou art ſtrange, and muſt bee wooed with rarities and new wonderments. And what wonder ſince the world began hath beene heard of like to this new thing which I create in theſe thy Cities, that a woman (without the conſort of man) ſhould encloſe him in her wombe, whoſe outgoings haue beene from euerlaſting. The creation of heauen and earth may in compariſon of this new creation be held ſtale and triviall.
            7 Of this Aenigma in my text, & that other forementioned Chap. 33. we may ſay as Ioſeph did of Pharaohs dreames both are one. So is that nurſerie of myſteries Iſaiah, 11. v. 1. wherein the place of his conception & education is ſecretly named:

and the like Iſaiah. 53. of a root growing vp out of a drie ground. This metaphor of the root, as alſo the emphaſis of that ſpeech deliuered in Gods own perſon: I will cauſe the branch of righteouſneſſe to growe vp, aenigmatically fore-ſhadowe,Ier. 33. v. 15. that this grouth ſhould not be by ordinarie generation, but by Creation; that as trees and plants in the firſt creation did meerely growe vp out of their mother earth, without ſeed precedent; ſo ſhould this branch of Righteouſneſse, this root of Life, take his whole ſubſtance from his earthly mother by the ſole immediate power of his heavenly father.
            Thus much of the coherence of theſe words with the former, the true meaning of this aenigma, and of the Prophets drift and ſcope in this place: which is to aſſure Ephraim or Iſrael that he ſhould ſhare with Iudah in the glory of their Meſſiah, as after he did in his conception and education. It remaines that wee proſecute the manner how this prophecie was fulfilled in the myſtery of our Saviours conception, & other ſuch accidents as fell out in Iſrael, well deſeruing their ſpeedie returne.
            8 The Iewiſh Rabbins haue a tradition, that God before he made this great world, did trie his skill in making many leſſer. But this, I am ſure, you al deteſt as a fable in it ſelfe moſt impious, becauſe it impeacheth Gods omnipotencie: moſt frivolous, becauſe preiudiciall to his wiſdome, which worketh all things for teſtification of his glory, or

confirmation of his creatures faith; neither of which could haue any place before men & Angels were created. But it is a point well fitting our meditations at this ſeaſon, to conſider how the Lord in ſundrie ages, ſince the firſt promiſe of mans redemption by the womans ſeed, did giue illuſtrious documents as of his power, ſo of his purpoſe to effect this NEW CREATION: delighting to raiſe ſtrength out of weakneſſe, and by knowne effects of this nature, to purchaſe vnto himſelfe that title (often inſerted amongſt his moſt glorious attributes) of making the barren wombe to beare, and become a ioyfull mother of children. He foreſaw as his Prophet Iſaias complaines, with what difficultie the world would beleeue his Prophets reports of their Meſsias growing vp as a branch out of a drie ground: and for this purpoſe he ſought by famous experiments of their conceptions, that were moſt liuely types of Him, to traine vp his peoples hearts to firme beleefe of his future ſtrange miraculous conception.
            
               Gen. 18. v. 109 I will come vnto thee (ſaith the Angell of the Lord to Abraham) according to the time of life, and loe Sarah thy wife ſhall haue a ſonne; This meſſage ſeem'd ſo ſtrange to Sarah, who overheard it, that ſhee ſhewes by her laughing how glad ſhee could be if it might bee ſo, rather then apprehend any probabilitie that ſo it ſhould bee. Hence the Angell reproues her ſlowneſſe to beleeue. Shall any thing be hard to the Lord?
               Verſ. 14. And as if it had beene a

matter of greater difficulty to rowſe her dul faith, then to quicken her dead wombe, he reiterates his meſſage againe, At the time appointed I will returne vnto thee, euen according to the time of life, & Sarah ſhall haue a ſonne. This ſtrange worke of the Lord once accompliſhed, was to bee as a perpetuall ſigne for confirmation of his peoples faith in the expectation of a farre ſtranger, in due time to bee effected. For this vſe Iſaiah made of it. Eſa. 51. v. 2. 
               Heare me, yee that follow after righteouſneſse, and yee that ſeeke the Lord, looke vnto the rocke whence yee were hewen, & ad ciſternam perforatam vnde exciſi eſtis: alluding vnto the dead wombe of Sarah, as hee expounds himſelfe in the next words; Conſider Abraham your father, and Sarah that bare you, for I called him alone, and encreaſed him. The end which the Prophet aimes at throughout that Chapter, is to rectifie and eſtabliſh their conceipt of Gods power, who was able even of ſtones to raiſe vp children vnto Abraham: intimating withal that Chriſts Church, though farre ſurpaſſing the amplitude of Abrahams preſent ſeed, was to bee raiſed, from materials more weake and ſlender in the ſight of man.
            10 Againe, Manoahs wife had as little hopes to conceaue a ſonne as Sarah had, much leſſe to conceaue ſuch a child or Geber as ſhould beginne that which the Geber here mentioned in my text, was to finiſh, that is, to redeeme Iſrael from the oppreſſion of their enemies. And the Angell of the Lord, deſirous to avert ſuch a miſtruſtfull reply

as Sarah had given, prevents it by inſinuating his knowledge of what ſhe could pretend: for ſo he begins his meſſage. Iudg. 13.3. 
               Behold now thou art barren and beareſt not, but thou ſhalt conceaue & beare a ſon, the child ſhall be a Nazarite to God from his birth; and he ſhall begin to ſaue Iſrael out of the hand of the Philiſtines.
            
            As little hope was there of Hannahs barren wombe, vntill out of the fulneſſe of ſorrowe for her forlorne eſtate, ſhe conceaues faith, that God was able (as in her ſong ſhee expreſſeth) to make the barren beare ſeauen children. Perhaps ſhe meant Benſhebang, ſeptenarium filium, one that ſhould bee of better ſteed to Iſraël then any other ſeaven; a governour of Gods people, a liuely type of her long expected redeemer.
            11 But leaſt theſe examples of Iſaacs, Sampſons, and Samuels birth, all ſonnes of barrenneſſe, might in the fulneſſe of time, haue leſſe force vpon mens hearts, by reaſon of their diſtance: the Lord will haue Chriſts forerunner Iohn Baptist to be conceaued of a woman more vnlikely to beare, in their ſight that meaſure all things by humane probabilitie or experiments of preſent times. So ſtrange theſe newes did ſeeme to Zacharie his Father, that when the Angell told him his prayers were heard, and his wife Elizabeth ſhould conceaue and beare a ſonne, one that ſhould bee filled with the holy Ghoſt from his mothers wombe, he is not yet ſatisfied but demands. Luk. 1.18. 
               Whereby ſhall

I knowe this for I am an old man, and my wife is of a great age. This diſtruſtful demand, was, at this time, (wherein God had determined to exact of all his people, great and ſmall, outward confeſſion of inward beleefe vnto a farre more ſtrange and miraculous conception) ſo vnſeaſonable and prepoſterous, that in ſigne of his power to take away the barrenneſſe of Elizabeths wombe, hee ſeales vp the prieſts lips, diſenabling him to bring forth one word, vntill his wife, according to the word of the Lord, had brought forth her promiſed ſonn. Now the famouſneſſe of this event throughout Iurie ſhould haue ſerued for a ſigne, to confirme mens faith of Chriſts conception.
            12 If one of Ieruſalems devouteſts Prieſts, come ſo farre ſhort of Abrahams readineſſe to beleeue Gods promiſes: no marvel if the beſt of women bewray ſome ſpice of her mother Sarahs miſtruſt. But it is farre from my diſpoſition at any time, or my purpoſe at this, to vrge, farther to aggravate the infirmitie of a veſſell ſo ſanctified, elect, and pretious. And I am perſwaded the Euangeliſt did not ſo much intend to diſparage hers, as to confirme our beleefe, by relating her doubtfull queſtion, and the Angels reply; the one being but Sarahs miſtruſt refined with maidenly modeſtie, the other Sarahs check mitigated and qualified by the Angell. Gen. 18. v. 12 
               After I am waxed old and my Lord alſo ſhall I haue lust? ſaith Sarah! as you heard before: thus checked by the Angell, Wherefore did Sarah

laugh: ſhall any thing be hard to the Lord? The bleſſed Virgin, vpon a more ſtrange ſalutation, onely demands of the Angell. Luk. 1. v. 34 
               How ſhall this bee, ſeeing I knowe not a man? And the Angell anſwered her, not by way of reproofe or interrogation, but for her inſtruction,Verſ. 36. 
               giuing her a further ſigne. Behold thy Couſin Elizabeth, ſhe hath alſo conceaued a ſonne in her old age, and this is her ſixth month, which was called barren: for with God nothing ſhall bee impoſsible. This heavenly dialogue was firſt vttered, and in ſuch particular ſort related by St 
               Luke, to inſtruct vs, that as the Virgin did now with better grace and decency act that part, which Sarah had before ſomewhat miſacted: ſo this her ſonne, was that promiſed ſeed, whereof Iſaac was but the type, & his ſtrange and vnvſuall conception as it were a praeludium to this miraculous conception of our Saviour, foretold by Ieremie, and thus related by the Evangeliſt.
            
            Inſteed of an exhortation or applicatorie vſe (which my text being it ſelfe an exhortation directed to another people, and out of date in theſe our daies, will hardly yeeld without wringing) giue me leaue to ſpend the ſhort remainder of time in propoſing matter of admiration, eſpecially to yonger ſtudents, happily not ſo well acquainted with the manner of our Saviours conception, birth, and education, or how farre Iſraël ſhared with Iudah, or Nazareth with Bethlem in theſe circumſtances or the like.
            
               13 I knowe by the folly of my youth, how ready yong wits, againſt this good time would be to ſee Menechmus or ſome more queint comoedie of like errors acted: wherein no one particular, conſidered alone, is worth the noting; onely the dependance of one vpon another, being vnvſuall, makes the whole contrivance pleaſant: yet ſuch as can breed no firme perſwaſion of anie hiſtoricall truth, but rather bewraies it ſelfe to bee a fiction. And no fiction can yeeld delight or pleaſure, ſaue only ex hypotheſi, in as much as our imagination ſuppoſeth that as true, wherein there appeareth no repugnancie or impoſſibilitie why it might not bee ſuch as the repreſentation makes ſhew of. As poems vſually delight more then true ſtories, only becauſe the Poets faigne a likeneſſe or image of more amiable and admirable truths, then can ordinarily bee found or obſerued in the common courſe of life. Yet even in their rareſt inventions, the Orators argument holds ſtill true of the ſpectators. If they can afford applauſe in re ficta, how would the like reall truth it ſelfe affect them? what would they doe if they ſhould ſee a ſolide and ſubſtantiall edifice, more beautifull and proportionall in every part, then the ſuperficiall platforme or draught which they ſo liked. Shall wee then applaud the curious fictions of humane fancie, and not be raviſht with admiration at the reall & moſt truely admirable effects of the Almighties providence in our Saviours conception? This would be

infinitely more prepoſterous and phantaſtique, then if you ſhould loath or ſcorne the rareſt liue-beautie of moſt amiable reaſonable creatures, ſuch as your ſelues, and runne madde with loue of Babo
                     •
                  nes ſhadowes, or for an Ape or Monkies picture. What effect either ſo admirable in it ſelfe, or of ſuch vnſpeakable conſequence for our good, was ever preſented on the ſtage of earth, ſeene, or heard within the circumference of this mightie amphitheatre, or is poſſible to bee conceaued by the heart of man, as the birth and conception of our Saviour Chriſt? yet is the concurrence or contrivance of all circumſtances precedent or conſequent, ſo vnuſuall, ſo farre ſurpaſſing humane expectation, that if we compare their whole frame, with the moſt curious forme of any humane invention extant: Illam homines dicas, hanc poſuiſſe Deum: you will ſay that the one might eaſily bee invented by ſuch as your ſelues, but that the other could not be forecaſt, contriued, and acted without the all ſeeing wiſdome of the Almighty God. And I am fully perſwaded that if either Iewe or Atheiſt would but ſearch the Scriptures with harts as devoid of preiudice, and mindes as free from other thoughts and cares, as moſt men bring to famous plaies or Comoedies: this contemplation would enforce the one to acknowledge, that prophecies in old time came not by the will of man: the other, that Ieſus the ſonne of Marie was he, of whom Moſes and all the Prophets ſpake.
            
               14 Firſt Iſaiah foretells the condition or eſtate of his mother: Micah the place of his nativitie; Ieremie the place and manner of his conception; the two former more then ſix, the laſt fiue hū
               dred yeares, before, hee was conceiued or borne. What hopes could the bleſſed Virgin haue either in her owne, or others ſight to bee the mother of ſo great a Monarch? you will ſay ſhe was of the linage or ſtocke of David: ſo were many more of farre greater place and dignitie then ſhe, all ſeated in Iurie about Bethlem or Hieruſalem, the ſuppoſed places of his conception and education, vntill the event did proue the contrarie. Suppoſe old Samael had beene then liuing, and the governours of Iudah ſhould haue preſented ſuch of the daughters of Ieſſe as they thought moſt likely, to ſee whome he would nominate to bee their Meſsias mother: the election doubtleſſe would haue beene farre longer then Davids was to the crowne of Iſraël. To haue fought the bleſſed amongſt women in Galile, would haue ſeem'd more ſtrange to the mē of Iudah, thē the ſeeking out of their king amongſt the ſheepfolds, did to Ieſſe and the men of Bethlehem. But God who ſees not as man ſeeth, vſually delighteth to croſſe our expectation whether of good or bad, by contrarie ſucceſſe. It was the abſolute nullitie rather then improbability of any ſuch hopes as are now ſuggeſted, which had excluded Marie from the princely tribe, contented to liue an obſcure life with her husband in Nazareth a

poore Cittie of Zabulon, as moſt thinke, or as others, bordering on Zabulon in the tribe of Nephthalie; however within the kingdome of Ephraim, or Iſrael. And thither the Angell of the Lord repaires vnto her. The effect of his embaſſage being to vnfold this aenigmaticall prophecie, which had beene ſealed vp vntill this time appointed, for the fulfilling of it. Luk. 1. v. 26. 
               In the ſixth month (ſaith the Evangeliſt) the Angell Gabriel was ſent from God, vnto a Citie of Galile named Nazareth, to a virgin eſpouſed to a man, whoſe name was Ioſeph of the houſe of David. Here ſome profane companions captiouſly demand, ſeeing it was Gods will to haue his ſonne, (as Iſay had foretold) borne of a pure virgin, why would hee not make choice of a maid or woman vnbetroathed, of whom there could be leſſe ſuſpicion? As paſſengers of good reſpect, would oftē paſſe by vnregarded by poore Cottagers, did not ill nurtured curres notifie their approach by barking: ſo many divine myſteries would bee leſſe obſerued then they are, did not prophane obiectors become our remembrancers. As the former captious demand, to what intent ſoever conceiu'd by vnbeleeuers, doth but ſollicite this anſwer from the Orthodoxe. The firſt promiſe was made vnder this ſtile; Semen mulieris: The ſeed of the womā eſpouſed, though a virgin (ſuch as Eue was when ſhe ſinned) ſhall cruſh the ſerpents head. Yet the mouth of prophanes not herewith ſtopt is more ready to quarrell with the meſſage it ſelfe, as too vulgar

for an embaſſadour of ſuch ſtate as the Angel Gabriel▪ Behold: what ſhould ſhee behold? thou ſhalt conceaue in thy wombe and bring forth a ſonne. Why? doe not all women conceiue before they bring forth children, or, doe others conceaue in their aprons? But to diſmiſſe this audience of the Atheiſts falſe deſcant, or diviſion vpon this plaine ſong, as he eſteemed it. Is the phraſe in many profeſt interpreters iudgement any better, then a tautologie, or, at the beſt, then an Hebrew Pleonaſme? yet even tautologies in ſacred language, ſeldome want their weight, or obſervation. And Hebrew Pleonaſmes, in Propheticall or Evangelicall writings, are oft times full of myſteries. Or what if this phraſe be ſometimes vulgarly vſed in vulgar narrations? yet in extraordinarie ſubiects, it may, and by the analogie of orthodoxall interpretation, ought to bee taken in the moſt proper & remarkable ſence, whereto it can literally be extended. The expreſſe mention of the vſuall place 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                excludes the ordinarie cauſe▪ and implies an vnuſuall maner of conception. The interpoſition of the primitiue 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                which was emphatically expreſt in the ſalutation 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               , and muſt here bee repeated 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               , will much alter the ſence or importance of the phraſe. So doth the dependance which the demonſtratiue ecce hath with the words which went before. Feare not Mary for thou haſt found favour with God, 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                   Behold thou ſhalt cō
                  ceaue in thy wombe, [not from without.] The importance

is fully aequivalent to the Hebrew Tes
                     •
                  beb in my Text, (thy fruit ſhall be encloſed in thy womb▪ yet ſhalt thou not bee leſſe fruitfull then ſhee that conceaueth by a conſort. For thou ſhalt bring forth not a daughter, not a male child only, but ſuch a ſonne as may well brooke the name of Saviour for he ſhall be great,
               Verſ. 32. 
               and be called the ſonne of the moſt high. And is not this as much as Geber?
            
            15 And yet God in his wiſdome would haue the bleſſed virgin her ſelfe to be, for a while, ignorant of this conſtruction, that her doubtfull reply might occaſion the Angell to enlarge his Comments vpon my Prophets riddle.Verſ. 34. 
               Then ſaid Mary vnto the Angell how ſhall this be, ſeeing I knowe not a man? And the Angell anſwered and ſaid vnto her the holy Ghoſt ſhall come vpon thee, and the power of the higheſt ſhall over ſhadowe thee. As if he had ſaid, what haſt thou to doe with a man? who haſt found this favour with God, that it ſhall not bee with thee, as with other women? thy conception of this thy ſonne is a worke new and vnheard of hetherto in Iſrael: a worke not of generation but of creation; it muſt be wrought by the immediate hand of God. But let it not ſeeme ſo impoſſible, as new and ſtrange, ſeeing he hath foretold it by his Prophets, who is able to bring to paſſe what ever he fortells. Nor would the Evangeliſt in my opinion haue beene ſo carefull to ſpecifie the Angels name, in theſe two ſtories of Iohn Baptiſts, & our Sauviours conceptions, without reference to his

principall meſſage or office; which was to annunciate his birth, to whom this name Gabriel did beſt agree; one that ſhould bee Geber-ell, the ſtrong God, or the ſtrength of God.
            Thus you ſee how this prophecie of the Females encloſing the mightie man, or heroick, by way of creation, not of generation, in the land of Iſraël is in due time fulfilled, beyond her expectation that did conceaue him, vntill the Angell did inſtruct her.
            16 And now it ſeemes ſhee apprehends as much, as the Angell had told her and no more, That the Lord would giue the throne of David to her ſonne; and whether from expreſſe notice of Ezechiels words, or rather from the ſame ſpirit, wherby he ſpake: She makes part of his menacing prophecie a ſtraine of her ioyfull ſong, ſo inverting his words, as the Lord had done the line of David; making firſt, laſt; and laſt, firſt. Ezek. 21.26. 
               Exalt him that is low (ſaith the Prophet) and abaſe him that is high. 
               Luke. 1. v. 52▪
                
               He hath put downe the mightie from their ſeat (ſaith the bleſſed Virgin) and exalted them of lowe degree. The abaſing of the high and mightie was verified, whilſt Ezechiel liued, in the ſodaine depoſition of Zedechiah: ſo, perhaps, was the exalting of him that was lowe, hiſtorically experienced in the exaltation of2. kings. 25. v. 27. 
               Iehoiakin, but not fulfilled vntill this time, wherein God, from the wombe of his poore handmaid, raiſed vp this light to Dauid, vnto whō the Ezek. 21. v. 27. 
               Diadem of right belonged. Yet all this time

ſhe thinkes as little how Micahs prophecie ſhould be fulfilled, as ſhee had done before of Ieremies or Iſaies: ſhe had gone indeed, not long after this cō
               ception, into Iury, to conferre with her Couſin Elizabeth; but as the Evangelist tells vs, ſhe was returned againe to Nazareth, whence ſhee and her huſband departed a little after, againſt their wills. For, vnleſſe Auguſtus at this very time, had giuen out his commandment, for taxing al that were ſubiect to the Romane Empire, there is no intimation of any purpoſe either in Mary or Ioſeph to repaire to Bethlehem Ephrata the Citie of David. But the leſſe they minded it before, the more they are confirmed by the experience of the event, and the manner how Gods prophecies are fulfilled.
            17 Thus by the diſpoſition of the Almighty, not by any purpoſe of Auguſtus, or conſultation of man, the ſonne of God is come firſt into his owne Citie, but his owne receaue him not; hee hath not ſo much as houſe roome fit for man; an ill omen that his ſubiects will not acknowledge their allegiance to him. For as the Lord long ſince had complained of their more then brutiſh ignorance and ſtupiditie. Iſaiah. 1. v. 3. 
               The Oxe knoweth his owner, and the Aſse his maſters cribbe, but Iſraël hath not knowne, my people hath not vnderſtaod. What did not Iſraël knowe? or what would not his people vnderſtand? It is the note of a iudicious convert Hebrew (and I now remember not wether he giue any further reaſon of it) that the verbs 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                and 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               
               
there vſed, are tranſitiues, and muſt bee referred to that, which went before, Iſraël hath not knowne his owner, my people will not acknowledge him for their maſter, that lies ſwadled in a cratch or manger. This is a ſtumbling blocke to the prowd & haughtie Iew, that fixeth his eies on loftie towers, and ſtately palaces, as if theſe were the places of his Meſſiahs birth; who in his prime, muſt come to Zion, as one too meeke and humble to minde ſuch matters; as one that would teſtifie the place of his birth by Zach. 9. v. 9. 
               riding vpon an Aſse, and vpon a colt, the foale of an Aſse. But though Iudah and Iſraël bee more ſtupid then the Oxe or Aſſe, yet even in this humilitie of his birth Arabia and Sheba ſhall bring gifts to him, as to their king. Yet ſo provident is the Lord, leaſt any hand of man ſhould ſhew it ſelf in his exaltation, that theſe forraigne Princes opē profeſſion of allegiance to this new borne child, indangers his innocent and harmleſſe life. But what wil the Atheiſt ſay? Cannot God protect his ſonne from all likelyhood or approach of danger? yes he could, but his purpoſe was now to ſhewe his wiſdome, not his power, in defeating great Herods vigilant and anxious care, and all the ſubtileſt proiects of his cunningſt polititians, by the coūterplots of a poore dreaming man. Rahel muſt haue cauſe againe to weep for her children about the borders of Beniamin: and Herod by ſtriking at the ſonne of God, muſt kill his owne ſonne: whilſt hee that was indeed a father to all the ſonnes of

men, becauſe the true and naturall ſonne of God, he, in whoſe right, Iſrael inioy'd the promiſes, and had an adoptiue title to bee called the ſon of God, muſt in part of his nonage be ſuſtain'd in Aegypt, as Iſraël had beene, by a Ioſeph; that ſo, what was verified of the one, as in the type, might be fulfilled in the other, as the ſubſtance. Hoſea. II.VI 
               Out of Aegypt haue I called my ſonne.
            
            18 But whither did God cal his ſonne? ſure if his ſuppoſed father Ioſeph do not with yong Samuel miſtake the callers voice, he was to returne into Iudaea, the fitteſt place, in his apprehenſion, for the education of him, that was borne vnto the crown of David; a place, wherein if Herods firſt deſignes had ſtood firme and ſure, hee might haue liued ſecurely. But God that directed Iacobs right hand to the head of Ephraim, contrary to his father Ioſephs expectation; hath turned the heart of Ioſephus. lib. 17. c. 10.
                
               Herod on a ſuddaine to affect him moſt in the laſt draught of his will and teſtament, whom hee had reſpected but in the ſecond place in the former. And Ioſeph approaching the Coaſts of Iury, advertiſed that Herod had a ſucceſſour there, not Antipas, as hee perhaps with others had expected, but Archelaus as bloodie a villaine as the Father, ſuſpects (as it ſeemes) either the truth of his admonition by a dreame in Aegypt; or his conſtruction of it. Hee doubts whether they be dead, that ſought the life of the child: for as the Evangeliſt ſaith. Mat. 2. v. 22. 
               Hee was afraid to goe into Iudaea. 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , Yet ſeeing

he had beene warned in a dreame, (or perhaps being warned againe) though he avoid Iudah, he will at leaſt goe into ſome part of Iſraël. If he had two warnings, this latter was to inſtruct him in the true meaning of the former, whereby he was not directed to Iudaea in particular▪ but into the land of Iſraël, as I take it, with oppoſition to the land of Iudaea. And ſo ſaith the Evangeliſt, he left his purpoſe for Iudaea, and turned aſide into the parts of Galil
                     •
                  , to the place of Chriſts conception.Ibid. And thus by his doubtfull reſolution; the will of the Lord, which he had ſpoken by the Prophet is vndoubtly fulfilled; to wit, that Chriſt from the place of his conception and education ſhould be called Nazaraeus. A name (in their intendment that ſought to faſten it firſt vpon him) of diſgrace and ſcorne, but by the diſpoſition of the Almightie, a knowne title of greateſt honour, convicting ſuch as vſed it otherwiſe, even whilſt they ſpake it, of blaſphemie; which way ſoever wee interpret the meaning of it. For if this Cities name, whoſe Etymologie is hardly found in the old Teſtament, were Natſoreth, or Natzareth, or as Dicunt Chriſtiani Ieſum natum eſſe in Bethlehem & educatum fuiſſe in civitate, quae in lingua eorum Nazareth in noſtra vero Nezer vocatur. 
               Elias Leuita ſaith, Netzer (t
                  ••
                word which Iſaias vſeth) it is by interpretatiō the City of plants or grafts; in plain engliſh Graftowne. Whence if the Iew captiouſly demand: was it ever heard that any Prophet ſhould ariſe out of Nazareth? Wee may anſwere (as our Sauiour did Pilate) Infidell, thou haſt ſaid it, though vnwittingly, as Caiphas thy predeceſſour

did foretel his dying for the people. For didſt thou never heare of a man, whoſe name was the branch; never of a plant Netzer that ſhould growe out of the root of Iſhai? What if thou canſt not revile this Ieſus, whom we preach, but thou muſt acknowledge him Hanotzeri ſurculus ille, or ſurcularius ille, or germen illud; The PLANT, THE BRANCH. For though the obiectour mean to diſgrace him, yet God had ordained his glorie as well out of his enemies mouths that meant him miſchiefe, as out of the mouthes of ſilly babes, that meant him neither good nor ill. And it is very ſuitable to the waies of Gods providence, to ſuggeſt, by ambiguous words or ſpeeches, vnto the attentiue hearer, conceipts quite contrary to their meaning that vtter them.Appian. So Craſsus in his Parthian voyage, wills his ſouldiers (diſheartned with a diſmall way, which Abgarus had led thē) to be of good cheere; they ſhould not come that way backe againe: his meaning was they ſhould returne a better, but they take this as the ſentence of death from their Generals mouth; and ſo march on drouping, in ſuch dead ſilence to their miſerable diſaſtre, as mē condemned doe to the place of 
                  ••
               ecution. This ſpeech of Craſſus was worſe taken, then it was meant: but many of like obſervation I could here alleage, which ill meant by ſuch as vttered them, haue beene well interpreted by the parties whom they concern'd:Val. Max. lib. 1. c. 5.
                as the Apollonians, ſolliciting aid of the Epidamnians againſt the Illyrians, finally,

put off with this flowting anſwere. VVee will ſend 
               
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                (ſo was the river call'd which ranne by their Citie) to your ſuccour: cheerefully accept the offer, and take heart and courage at the very mention of 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               , as if Aiax (who height ſo in Greeke) had bin reviu'd to bee their leader. And their confident hopes, conceiu'd vpon the imaginarie conduct of ſuch a noble Generall, did, by divine providence, bring forth reall ſucceſſe, and vnexpected victory. And ſo no doubt the faithfull Hebrewes, as oft as they heard the Iewes call our Saviour in contempt, Hanotzeri, did interpret their ſpeech, otherwiſe then they meant it, as S. Iohn did that of Caiaphas. And this was the Evangelists meaning, when hee ſaith, our Saviour went to Nazareth, that he might be knowne by this name, vſed both by his followers and his enemies.
            19 Yet doe I no way reiect, but moſt willingly embrace their interpretation of this place, who thinke that ſpeech of the Angell vnto Sampſons mother.Iudg. 13. v. 5. 
               And he ſhall be a Nazarite from his birth was fulfilled of Chriſt, who was the true Nazarite indeed. Nor is this interpretation, (as moſt think) incompatible with the former: both are branches of the tree of life, in both ſhine moſt glorious rayes of the divine providence, would not men be more contradictious then their opinions. For, firſt it is a needleſſe doubt moued by the one, whether this Cities name in Hebrew were writtē with Z.TS. 
               Zaiin, or with Tſadhi; and it is an impertinent

obſervation of the other, to tell vs that Nazaraeus or Nazarenus for a Nazarite, comes not from the Hebrew Natzar, but from Nazar: for the Evangeliſts and Greek writers of the new Teſtament, not our of ignorance, but by the direction of the holy Ghoſt, and of purpoſe, vſe the Hebrew names as they are mollified by the Septuagints, for the more facile pronunciation of the Gentiles: as the famous Rainolds wiſely admoniſhed Iunius, for this reaſon to vſe Samaria for Someron; & the like; ſeeing the holy Ghoſt had ſo ſpoken. It will ſuffice then, for our purpoſe, that the words ſignifying an inhabitant of this Citie and a Nazarite, ſuch as Sampſon was, are one and the ſame in the Greeke and Latine. As for that different character, which ſome obſerue by writing the one Naziraeus, and the other Nazaraeus, or Nazarenus, I haue iuſt reaſon to ſuſpect it for Criticks coyne; firſt invented, and ſince obſerued by ſuch as had better marked the different character of the Hebrew words, whence they are deriued, then the diſpoſition of the divine providence in ſuffering no difference betwixt them in the Greeke and Latine. It is a point (I knowe) very behoofful in arts, or ſciences, or humane hiſtories to diſtinguiſh ſuch aequivoca àcaſu, as often fall out in tranſlations, or corruption of ſpeech, by ſome note of difference in the originall character. But theſe words Nazaraeus or Nazaraenus we ſuppoſe to be aequivoca, not àcaſu, but à conſilio divino, by the divine providence,

which oftimes in the ambiguity of ſpeeches, hath intendments quite contrary to the ill meaning of ſuch as ſpeake them; as in bad actions hee vſually hath an end much different from the purpoſe of the doer. And for mine owne part, I never could more fully comprehend how incomprehenſible God was in his wiſdome, nor how inſcrutable in his wayes, then whilſt I conſider, how foreſeeing from al eternities, that the cheife thing which either the proud or ſtubborne Iewe, the curious Graecian, the haughtie and ſtatelie politique Romane, could obiect againſt his ſonne, exhibited in the infirmitie of our fleſh would be the meaneſſe of his parentage and education; hee could yet ſo diſpoſe that he ſhould bee conceiu'd and brought vp in ſuch a Citie, as if his adverſaries would vpbraid him with the baſeneſſe of it in Hebrew, they ſhould withall, though vnwittingly, enſtile him by that glorious name, which Iſay, Ieremie, and Zacbarie had appropriated to the Meſsias: that is, hee ſhould bee publikely knowne by the name of the branch, or plant of Ieſse. Or if they would nickname him from it in Greeke, or Latine, they ſhould withall, though vnwittingly, acknowledge him to bee that Nazarite of God, of whome Sampſon was but the type▪ or to vſe his owne words, Ioh. 10.36. 
               
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                
               illum, quem pater ſanctificauit, thus turning the note, or article of diſgrace, to ſignifie the quite contrary 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               . And for this purpoſe the Lord in his divine providence, would haue as well this

title of Nazarite. Ieſus Nazarenus, written in Hebrew, Greeke, and Latine capitall letters, vpon the Croſſe, as the title of King. Now we all know that even the title of King, was, by ſuch as procured the inſcription, intended by way of ſcorne, or contempt: but yet in the Almighties diſpoſition; this inſcription in theſe three famous tongues, was as a publike authentique proclamation of his right vnto the Crowne of David: ſuch a teſtimonie that he was heire of all things in heaven and earth, as ſhall condemne all ſuch, throughout the world, of rebellion, as haue not vnfainedly acknowledged allegiance to him, as to their ſupreame Lord & King. In like ſort, whatſoever they intended by this title of Nazarenus, vnto the faithfull it muſt ſerue, as a publique and authentique teſtimonie, that Chriſt Ieſus was the man, which was to bee knowne by the name of branch, the branch of righteouſneſse, the Netzer of Ieſse, the Nazarite, the holy one of God. The cheefe reaſon that moues mee to embrace this interpretation, is, becauſe theſe two words Natzar and Nazir, with their derivatiues, or words of aequivalent ſignification, are the very titles, wherein the holy Ghoſt ſeemes to delight, when he deſcribes the kingdome of Chriſt. His very Crowne is called by a word of the ſame Roote with Nazaraeus or Nazarenus the Nazarite, as Pſ. 132. Vpon him ſhall his Crowne flouriſh. Nor doe I ſee what can be obiected againſt vs, ſaue only this. If what was ſaid of Sampſon as the type, bee fulfilled

in Chriſt, as in the body or ſubſtance: then Chriſt ſhould haue been a true Nazarite as Sampſon was. Out of doubt hee was ſo; but as hee was a true and perfect Prieſt, though no legall Prieſt after the order of Aaron, but according to the order of Melchiſedeek, which was more eminent and excellent: ſo he was a true and perfect Nazarite (though no legall Nazarite from his birth) or rather the perfection or Idaea of Nazarites, & therefore to be ſeparated from that concretion of ceremoniall matters, wherein the forme and eſſence of legall Nazarites devotion did conſiſt. And yet, as it became the Prince and crowned King of Nazarites the 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                and 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                of Nazarites 
               
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               , or him, on whoſe head the Nazarites crown was to flouriſh, he performed the legall rites of Nazaritiſme by his Embaſſadour Iohn Baptiſt, in whom he ſet an end to thoſe legall rites. As for the manner of their birth, and the Angelicall predictions, with other occurrences; no type in Scripture agrees better with the Idaea or prototypon, then Sampſon, and Iohn Baptiſt, with our Saviour: How that which was litterally meant of Sampſon, may bee ſaid to bee principally meant of Chriſt, ſhall elſewhere (God willing) appeare. I would now onely requeſt you to obſerue that in ſome Copies of the 70, it is ſaid that Sampſon ſhould be 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               , in others (retaining the ſence or expoſition, not the Etymologie) it is ſaid he ſhould be 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               , or ſanctificatio Domini (i) Domino ſanctificatus. And ſo

the holy Ghoſt, when he giues vs the true expoſition of the Greeke 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                as by the diſpoſition of the divine providence it ſhould ſound to vs, extorts this confeſſion from the vncleane ſpirit. What haue we to doe with thee Ieſus Nazarene, I know thee who thou art,
               Luk. 4. v. 34. If the wicked ſpirit did ſpeak this in Greeke he ſpake according to the vſe of the word Nazarenus in the Septuagint not ſimply 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                as it was ſaid of Sampſon, but 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               , that holy one, of whome Sampſon, and legall Nazarites were but types. Againe, where it is foretold by the Angell, that Sampſon ſhould beginne to ſaue Iſraël out of the hands of the Philiſtins, this ſpeech, mee thinkes, ſhould implie a relation to ſome greater Saviour, that was ro accompliſh this ſalvation of Iſraël frō the hands of their enemies. And beſides the ſpirituall redemption of them and vs, (of all the Iſraël of God) accompliſhed by Chriſt, and prefigured by Sampſons temporall ſaving of them from the Philiſtines: to my ſimplicitie, it ſeemes not altogether void of obſervation, that as Sampſon was borne when the Iſraelites were firſt oppreſſed by the Philiſtins, ſo Chriſt likewiſe was then borne, when Herod an aliant, and a Philiſtin by birth, was tyrant as well of Iudaea as Palaſtina.
            
            20 That I may conclude in one word, as I intended, with you noble ſtemmes, or other hopefull plants here ſeated in this famous nurſerie of arts; whoſe grouth I wiſh in all the knowledge of forraigne nations; onely, in the bowels of Chriſt Ieſus our Saviour, let me beſeech you, and in his name, as his vnworthy Miniſter,

charge you: that neither out of phantaſticke doating loue, to forraigne nations, or naturall pride of your hearts, you ever ſay with that Syrian Courtier. Are not Iſther Po and Maeander, the beautified ſubiects of delicate Graecian or Italian wits, better then Iordan or Kedron, then all the waters of Iſraël? Slander not the mountaines of Samaria (no not in your ſecret thoughts) for dry and barren in reſpect of Parnaſſus or Cythaeron: but though with Ephraim, you wander to view the glorious ſights, or learne ſuch choice experience, as the famous monarchies of Aſsyria, Babylon, Greece, or Italy can afford you: yet let not your ſoules, which God by Chriſt doth wooe more earneſtly, then hee did Ephraim by my Prophet, bee ever affianced to theſe Aliants: but returne at length to theſe your Cities of Iſraël; and viſite Nazareth wherein the Lord hath wrought his wonders, wherein the rod of Ieſſe ſprung vp. And what way ſoever you bend your courſe, take Gods providence for your pilot, and let Ieſus of Nazareth, the ſtarre of Iacob, the branch of David, and Nazarite of God, in whom all the Prophecies of different ages meet as lines in their center; for the making vp of whoſe glory, as well the ſcurrilous appellations of his deadly enemies, as the glorious ſalutations of his followers, concurre as the diverſe Meridians, of diſtant Regions, or oppoſite hemiſpheares in the pole; be alwaies Load-ſtarre of your thoughts.
         
         
            
            THE WOMAN A TRVE HELPE TO MAN, OR MANKINDS comfort from the weaker ſexe.
            
               GALAT. 4. VER. 4.5.
               
                  4 But when the fulneſse of time was come, God ſent forth his Sonne made of a woman, made vnder the Law.
                  5 To redeeme them that were vnder the Law, that we might receaue the adoption of Sonnes.
               
            
            1 ALL things naturally deſire their preſervation. There is as true a longing of bad humours, to feede and ſtrengthen themſelues by ſemblable nutriment, as of nature, to expell them. And ſince the corruption of nature, became, in a manner, naturall to the ſonnes of Adam, it hath ever beene the property of it, if not altogether to loath the food of life; yet to mingle it with ſuch ſauces, as ſtrengthen the fleſh to reſiſt the working of the ſpirit.
            A dangerous ſpice of this intemperancie, you may behold in theſe Galatians, now ſeeking to allay

the ſweet promiſes of the Goſpell, which their corrupt taſt could not relliſh, with the bitter threars and curſes of the Law. The pretences, vſed by favorers of Circumciſion, to colour this ill cō
               pounded receit, might bee more then can poſſibly come to this ages notice. Two more principal, are ſufficiently, though implicitly, notefied vnto vs by our Apoſtles anſwers, or preventions. The former is drawne from the glorious teſtimonies, giuen by Gods Saints to the Law, before the revelation of the Goſpell. For, taking theſe Iewes, as they were, many hundreds of yeares before Chriſt was born. Pſ. 147. v. 20. 
               The Lord had not dealt ſo with any nation, as for his iudgements they had not knowne them. And can theſe Galatians, by nature Gentiles, the ofſpring of Heathens, excell Iſraël, without obſervation of that Law, by which Iſraël had ſo farre exceeded all the nations of the world?
            2 But as the dawning, though in reſpect of former darkneſſe, it may ſeeme as day, compared to the bright ſunſhine following, is rather to bee reputed part of night: So the ſtate of the Iewes vnder the Law, although a freedome in reſpect of that thrall and ignorance, wherein they had liued in Aegypt, was but bondage and ſlaverie to the liberty of the Goſpell. And theſe Galatians, in turning to the Law, after they had beene ſo well entered in the Goſpell, renued the Iſraëlits ſinne; who being on their way to Canaan, reſolued to turne backe to the houſe of bondage, whence the Lord

had freed them. Or, to make the beſt that may bee of their opinion; ſay they did not indeed (as in expreſſe words they did not) vtterly revoke the Goſpell, but onely couple it with the Law: yet even t
                  •
               is their errour and diſobedience, is the very ſame as if the Iſraëlites ſhould haue reſolued not to vſe Manna, which God ſent them from Heauen, for bread, vnleſſe they might haue Onions & Garlicke and the fleſh-pots of Aegypt for their meat.
            3 The ſecond argument, wherewith theſe Iewiſh ſeducers had bewitched theſe fooliſh Galatians (as we may gather from our Apoſtles praeoccupation in this preſent Chapter) was much what the ſame with that maine charme, wherewith the Romane Sorcerers ſo mightily prevaile with the ignorant of our times.
            Theſe, or the like quaeries, you may imagine, were often propounded to theſe late converts, by the Iewes. Whoſe ſucceſſours would Paul, would Apolloes, would others, which abandon Circumciſion, or the Ceremoniall Law, be reputed? Doe they not cal themſelues the children of Prophets? Would they not bee accounted the ſonnes of Gods choſen people? And what religion (I pray) did the Prophets, or their godly forefathers profeſſe? Did they not all ſubſcribe to the Ceremonies giuen by Moſes? Did they not liue and die in theſe practiſes, which wee perſwade you to? And ſo liuing, & ſo dying, did they liue or die like ſlaues or bondmen; or as free borne ſonnes of Abraham;

and heires of the everlaſting promiſes?
            4 To bring this controverſie, betweene our Apoſtle and theſe ſeducers, to a more ſhort and diſtinct iſſue. Firſt, they agree, that only ſuch, as liued vnder the Law, were the true Church and people of God. Secondly, that onely the true Church and people of God, were the ſonnes of Abraham, and heires of the everlaſting promiſes. But from theſe grants or ſuppoſitions, our Apoſtle thus inferres.
            As every other heire, ſo the Church of God was to haue a time of non-age, before ſhee could come to her full age, or bee enſtated in the inheritance bequeathed; that during this non-age, the ſtate or condition of Gods Church and people, as of all other heires in their childhood, did nothing differ from the condition of ſervants. Whence againe it will follow, that as the authoritie of Tutors, of Gardians, and Feoffees in truſt (though, for the times being, moſt abſolute) is vtterly to expire and determine, at the time, by the Teſtator or Doner appointed for the heire to enter vpon his inheritance: ſo the Law of ordinances, which God himſelfe had given by Moſes, though, during the time of the Churches non age, moſt abſolute and ſoveraigne, was to be repealed and cancelled, at the fulneſſe of time (i) at the time appointed by God for the full age of the Church. Where it wil be no digreſſion by the way to obſerue, that the period of other heires non age, was not alwaies

preciſely determined by humane Laws; but might be longer or ſhorter according to the appointment of the Doner. Laſtly, as ſecular heires, by not entring vpon their inheritance at the time appointed, doe much preiudice their title, and deſerue (as wee ſay) to bee beg'd for fooles; ſo the Church and people of God, by not abandoning the yoke of the Law, at the time appointed by God for their full age, did thereby make themſelues vncapable of the bleſſing beſtowed on thē in the Goſpell.
            5 This is the point moſt preſſed by our Apoſtle in this and the Chapter following.Chap. 5. v. 1. 
               Stand faſt therefore in the libertie wherewith Christ hath made you free, and be not intangled againe by the yoke of bondage: behold, I Paul ſay vnto you, that if yee be circumciſed, Christ ſhall profit you nothing: for I teſtifie againe to every man, that is circumciſed, that hee is a debter to doe the whole Law: Chriſt is become of no effect vnto you, whoſoeuer of you are iuſtified by the Law: yee are fallen from grace.
            
            Now that which determined the Churches non age, and did ipſo facto extinguiſh the ſoueraigne authoritie of the Law, was the ſending forth of the ſonne of God, who was heire of all things. But when the fulneſse of time was come, God ſent forth his ſonne, made of a woman, made vnder the Law, to redeeme them that were vnder the Law, that we might receaue the adoption of ſonnes. Or according to the dialect of our engliſh Law, that the inheritance

of ſonnes might be cōveied or made over vnto vs (for ſo much the Greeke, 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               , may import:) and it was to bee convaied vnto vs, not by right of birth (all of vs being children of wrath) but by adoption. Now, adoption is the ingraffing of a forrainer, into a better ſtocke or familie. The only ſtocke whereinto we (which were not ſonnes, but ſervants) could bee ingraffed, was the true and naturall ſonne of God. He alone could ſet Gentiles free from the bondage of ſinne, & Iews from the curſe of the Law, which was added becauſe of tranſgreſsion. The ſumme then of our Apoſtles doctrine in this place, is the ſame with our Saviours. Verily, verily I ſay vnto you (that boaſt of Abrahams ſeed,Ioh. 8 v. 33. & never were in ſubiection to any) to you, I ſay, that whoeuer committeth ſinne, is the ſervant of ſinne, and the ſeruant abideth not in the houſe foreuer, but the ſonne abideth euer. If the ſonne therefore make you free, yee ſhall be free indeed.
            
            6 Referring the act of redemption, and this glorious prerogatiue of being the ſonnes of God vnto ſome better occaſion; giue me leaue, firſt, to vnfold, what the ſonne of God hath done for his part, that he might be a perfect and vnpartiall redeemer: ſecondly what is on our parts required, that we might be capable of his redemption.
            In the former I ſhall endeavour to ſtirre vp admiration at the wiſdome and loue of God; the vſe whereof ſhall be to kindle loue and thankfulneſſe in our ſelues, and to incite our alacritie in performing

ſuch duties as are required at our hands.
            The ſumme of that, which the ſonne of God hath vndertaken for vs, is by our Apoſtle gathered to theſe three heads.

                  1 He was ſent forth into the world.
                  
                  2 He was made of a woman.
                  
                  3 He was made vnder the Law.
                  
               
Of theſe in their order: and of their ſeverall neceſſities & conveniences.
            To bee a ſonne, neceſſarily preſuppoſeth a begetting. If then we be the ſonnes of God, we muſt be begotten by him; and of vs that are his childrē by adoption,Iam. 1. v. 18. ſaith St 
               Iames, He begate vs with the word of truth, that we ſhould be the firſt fruits of his creatures. This word of truth, by which wee muſt be begotten, muſt firſt be conceaued by vs; and yet is it the principall of thoſe good & perfect gifts, al & every one of which (as the Iame Apoſtle ſpeaks) are from aboue,
               Verſ. 17. 
               and deſcend to vs from the father of light. But who ſhal aſcend vp into heaven to fetch them thence? No man (ſaith our Saviour) aſcendeth vp to heauen,
               Ioh. 3. v. 13. 
               but he that deſcended from heauen, the ſonne of man which is in heauen. When he diſcourſed of heauenly myſteries: He ſpake what hee knewe, and teſtified what he had ſeene; others ſpake but by geſſe or heare-ſay, as they had beene taught. No man (ſaith St 
               Iohn) hath ſeene God at any time,
               Chap. 1. v. 18. 
               but the only begotten ſonne, which was in the boſome of the father, he hath declared him. Being in the boſome of the Father from everlaſting, hee could not but

knowe him, and his will concerning man from everlaſting. But ſo long as hee remained in the boſome of God, not manifeſted to the world, wee could no more approach the place of his dwelling, then we could the dwelling of his father; we were as vncapable of his inſtructions, as of his fathers.
            7 Requiſite therefore it was hee ſhould bee ſent forth, that hee might bee our teacher; ſuch a mature authenticke teacher, as ſauing truth, able to beget ſonnes vnto God, ſhould iſſue as naturally frō his mouth, as ripe ſeed, apt for propagation, doth from fruitfull trees. From this his efficacie in teaching, did the people admire God, ſpeaking in him, for hee taught not as the Scribes and Phariſees,
               Mat. 7. v. 29. 
               but as one that had authoritie; being indeed the author of that doctrine, which he taught; one from whoſe fulneſſe all former teachers had receaued their meaſure of knowledge. Moſes himſelfe that gaue the Law, much more the Scribes and Phariſees, the expounders of it, were but as ordinarie ſchoolemaſters; their beſt auditors but as ſchooleboyes, or grammar-ſchollers, labouring all their life times, to learne the firſt rudiments or elements of ſauing knowledge. But after the DIVINE WORD had ſpoken to the world by the mouth of man, Great was the number of Preachers:
               Epheſ. 4. v. 11. 
               Hee gaue ſome Apoſtles, and ſome Prophets, and ſome Evangelists, and ſome Paſtours and Teachers: Of ſuch myſteries, as no ſecular Artiſts, nor children of Prophets,
               
could ever attain vnto; nor did they which taught the world theſe myſteries, learne them by rule or method.
            8 But you will ſay, all this might haue beene done, although hee had beene ſent in the forme of an Angel, wherin he appeared vnto the Fathers. Hee that taught Moſes without the ſubſtance of man, could haue taught the Apostles and Evangeliſts, the whole doctrine of the Goſpell, although he had not beene borne of a woman: he that overthrew Pharaoh and all his hoſt in the red ſea, put the Cananites, & other enemies of Iſ
                     •
                  aël to flight, by his ſole inviſible preſence: could not hee haue vanquiſhed ſinne and Sathan without the aſſumption of our nature? doth the fleſh adde ſtrength vnto the ſpirit?
            The queſtion is not what he could haue done by his Almightie power, but what in his wiſdome was moſt fit and convenient for our redemption. Now, this wee ſay, that by the eternall rules of equitie, which God obſerues in all his waies, it was not onely convenient but neceſſarie (though not for our inſtruction, yet for our redemption & ſanctification) that his ſonne ſhould be not only man, but man made of a woman: and our Apoſtle in ſaying thus, ſaith a great deale more, then if hee had ſaid, borne of a woman.
            9 Every man, except the firſt man Adam, is borne of a woman, but no man beſides the ſonne of God, by whom man and all things were made,

was made of a womā. The myſteries contained in this manner of ſpeech, cannot bee duely valued or vnfolded, without ſome explication of that peculiar reference, which theſe words, in the Apoſtles intent and meaning, haue to the firſt creation of man and woman.
            10 And here I muſt intreat you of the weaker ſexe, to obſerue with me, that our Apoſtle, aſwell to put you in mind of that duty which you owe to your huſbands, as alſo to ſtirre vp your thankfulneſſe towards God, for your redemption; ſtill referres you to the maner of your mother Eues creation, and tranſgreſſion. Two teſtimonies ſhall at this time ſuffice, for the eſtabliſhing of this truth; both taken from our Apoſtles writings. Of which the one beſt expounds the true force & meaning of this phraſe; Made of a woman: The other vnfolds the myſterie therein contained.
            The former is 1. Cor. 11. v. 7. &c. For a man indeed ought not to couer his head, for aſmuch as he is the image and glory of God, but the woman is the glory of the man; for the man is not of the woman, but the woman of the man; neither was the man created for the woman, but the woman for the man. Thus he deriues your ſubordination to your husbands, from the firſt originall of your ſexe: this methode & manner of inſtruction hee learned from our Saviour, who reſolued the difficultie propoſed concerning divorce, from the Canon, or Inſtitution of Matrimonie, enacted by God, with Adams conſent, and

voice, whilſt Eue was formed. Nevertheleſſe, to qualifie and moderate this authoritie, which the man by priority of creation, hath over the womā, the Apoſtle adds;Verſ. 11. 
               Neither is the man without the woman, nor the woman without the man in the Lord: for as the woman is of the man, even ſo is the man alſo by the woman; but all things of God. The firſt woman then, was made of the firſt man; all men ſince haue come into the world by the woman: but the ſonne of God came not only by the woman, but was made of the woman; as the firſt woman was of the firſt man. This great myſtery was preciſely, fore told by the Prophet Ieremie, though not ſo plainly, as many at the firſt ſight would obſerue it. The Lord hath created a new thing in the earth, a woman ſhall compaſſe a man,Ierem. 31. v. 22. 
               or the female ſhall incloſe the male, or man of ſtrength. It is called a new creation, with reference to the firſt creation, wherein the woman was incloſed in the man; as here quite cō
               trary, the man is incloſed in the woman, by the immediate hand of God, conceau'd and borne without any concurrence of man; as the firſt woman was brought forth out of the ſubſtance of man, without the helpe or conſort of a woman.
            11 The ſecond place in our Apoſtles writings, which trulieſt explicates the meaning of the myſterie contained here in my Text, or in the place of Ieremie laſt cited; and beſt ſets forth the incomprehenſible wiſdome of Gods proceedings in the admirable worke of mans redemption, is

1. Tim. 2.11. Let the woman learne in ſilence with all ſubiection, but I ſuffer not a woman to teach, nor to vſurpe authoritie over the man, but to bee in ſilence: Why is her vſurpation of authoritie over the mā, ſo inſufferable? the reaſon in the next words is given, in part from the order of her creation, for Adam was firſt formed then Eue. This proues that ſhe ſhould haue beene vnder mans authoritie, though neither he nor ſhe had ſinned. But the principall reaſon why ſhee is put to ſilence, eſpecially in the Church, is from the manner of her tranſgreſſion, in the verſe following: And Adam was not deceaved, but the woman being deceaued was in the tranſgreſsiō. Becauſe ſhe had boldly adventured to hold partly with the old ſerpent without her husbands leaue, and contracted with ſo great danger to all mankind, without his inſtructions; becauſe this done ſhe tooke vpon her to be the ſerpents agent to bring over her husband (whom ſhee was to counſell, when her advice was demanded, not to lead,) into the ſame combination; therefore is this modeſtie and ſilence which the Apoſtle ſpeakes of, inioyned the whole ſexe, by way of puniſhmēt, or at leaſt, to put them in minde of their mothers firſt tranſgreſſion. For Eues diſeaſe, or ſurfeit of the forbidden fruit (vntill God in his infinite wiſdome found out a ſoveraigne remedie by the contrarie) was more dangerous & preiudicious to the whole ſexe, then Adams was to his ſonnes.
            This truth is included in the laſt clauſe of our

Apoſtles diſcourſe, concerning this point, 1. Tim. 2.15. Nevertheleſse ſhe ſhall be ſaued. This adverſatiue particle (Nevertheleſſe) ſuppoſeth a tacite obiection; this or the like: But is there no meanes left for Eues ſalvation, as well as for Adams; though ſhe only were ſeduced by the ſerpent? or ſhall not the woman which is in ſubiection, be ſaued as wel as the man, which hath authoritie over her? Yes, ſhe ſhall be ſaued too; but by what meanes? 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               , through child bearing: but alaſſe, what ſhall then become of the barren wombe, or of her that beareth no children?
            12 Cornelius à lapide, a late Ieſuite, would haue the paines of child birth, to be in this place eſtabliſhed as a Purgatorie, without which this ſexe could not enter into heauen. Muſt then the exceſſiue, or extraordinarie ſufferings of ſome mothers, ſupererrogate for other women that beare no children? I ſhall not need to trouble my ſelfe with remouing this ſtone of offence, which can ſtumble none but the daughters of the blind Church. I will paſſe over it, and proceed: As this place of Timothie beſt expounds the words of my Text, ſo may theſe words in it 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                beſt be expounded by another place in this Epistle, wherein the Apoſtle,Gen. 22.18. diſcourſing of that promiſe of God to Abraham, (In thy ſeed ſhall all the nations of the earth be bleſſed;) excellently obſerues (what the matter & circumſtance of the text, not the grammatical ſingularity of number doth neceſſarily inferre,)

this is not ſpoken to his ſeed as of many,
               Gal. 3.16. 
               but as of one and to thy ſeede, which is Chriſt; To comment therefore vpon St 
               Paule, by the analogie of his Comments vpon Moſes; hee ſaith not in this place, the woman ſhall be ſaued through bearing of children, as ſpeaking of many, but through her childbirth, as meaning one, which is Chriſt; the Sonne of God, made of a woman, without man.
            13 It is vſuall with the Hebrewes, to put the abſtract for the concrete, ſubſtantiues for adiectiues. 
               Pſ. 126. v. 4. 
               Cauſe our captiuitie to returne like the Rivers in the South; (that is) bring home our captiues with ſpeed: ſo Salvation is often put for Saviour; Glory for glorious, Iuſtice for iuſt, &c. Now by the ſame priviledge, which admitteth captivity for captiues, or ſanctificatio domini, for domino ſanctificatus; muſt 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               , child-birth, go in this place for as much as 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                is all one with 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               , ſhee ſhall be ſaued by her child. Briefly, the womans child-birth is as much as the womans child, & the womans child is ſomewhat more than the womans ſeed. For, that the womans ſeed which was to cruſh the ſerpents head, ſhould become a child and be brought forth by his mother, not conceiued only, is no paradox of our invention. It was the meaning of Gods promiſe, when firſt he made it, that this ſeed ſhould be ſuch a child, ſo conceived and brought forth, as might truely call a woman his mother, but no man on earth his father.
            
               14 To giue you a more diſtinct view of Gods wiſdome, in contriuing the meanes of our ſalvation. The firſt woman, by yeelding her conſent to the wicked ſpirit, eares of the forbidden fruit, in hope ſhe and her husband ſhould become Gods, and their ofſpring like young Gods, knowing good and evill. The iſſue of this adulterous compact with the ſerpent, was, that ſhee conceaued ſinne and brought forth death, before ſhe was a mother of children. And her children with their poſteritie, were by nature the ſonnes of wrath, the ſerpents ſeed, and heires of his everlaſting curſe. To cure this maladie by the contrarie; God in his wiſdome, ſo ordaines, that another of the weaker ſexe, of a temper quite contrarie to her mother Eue; one as lowly as ſhe was prowd, whom the old ſerpent had never tempted with dreames of being a Queene, much leſſe of being a Goddeſſe on earth; one whoſe ſpirit reioyced in the lowly eſtate of an handmaid, ſhould, by yeelding conſent to the bleſſed ſpirit, conceaue him that was the ſonne of God, the tree of life, in whom as many as beleeue, receaue the adoption of ſonnes, and are co-heires with him of everlaſting bliſſe. No marvaile if the iſſues of their cōſents ſhould be ſo cō
               trary, when as the principall agents, with whom they contracted, were ſuch oppoſites; the one was the SPIRIT of TRVTH, the author of life, and GOD of LIGHT: the other the ſpirit of falſhood, the father of lies, and prince of darkneſſe. Laſtly, the firſt

woman, did thus adulterate her ſoule, by contracting with Satan without advice or conſent of her husband: and this is that which made her eſtate, & the ſtate of her ſexe, farre more deſperate then Adams was. For, as Divines obſerue, the wicked Angels, becauſe they ſinned wittingly and willingly, without a tempter, are left without all meanes of a mediatour, or redeemer. Now the woman, in that ſhe did partake more deeply of this their ſin, (for being tempted by them, ſhe forthwith turn'd tempter with them) was more liable to their remedileſſe puniſhments then the man: vntill the Lord in mercy, found out the meanes, here mentioned by our Apoſtle to releiue her. The concluſion intended by him in that diſcourſe, is, to aſſure woman kinde, that Evahs aſſenting to Satan, without the adviſe of her husband, was not more available to condemne the ſexe, then the bleſſed Virgins bringing forth of her firſt borne, whom ſhe conceiu'd by meere reliance on Gods promiſe, without the concurrence or furtherance of man, was to redeeme it.
            15 This expoſition of the place in Timothie is ſo cleere and naturall, that not the meaneſt ſtudent here preſent (ſo hee will marke the former references to the firſt creation) but may well wonder how any profeſſed interpreter could omit it. Imagine with me, that the whole tenour of this aſſurance, deviſed in tearmes moſt exquiſite, for ſecuritie and comfort of the weaker ſexe; were to

be pervſed by any ordinarie Lawier, but with halfe the diligence men vſe to examine Leaſes, or other Evidences concerning their private commodities: The principall clauſe, or demiſe it ſelfe, would, at firſt ſight, appeare to be contained in theſe words, 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               . It would likewiſe be as apparent, that faith, loue, holineſse, ſobrietie, and temperance, did follow onely by way of condition or proviſo. Or to ſpeake in our owne dialect: Seeing faith, loue, &c. are added as cōditions, or qualificaons on the womans part, who is the ſubiect or patient; the meanes or meritorious cauſe of ſalvation, being emphatically aſſigned vnder ſcholaſticke character in the clauſe precedent, 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               : this hath alwaies ſeem'd to me, a demō
               ſtration as evident as any can be, ab effectu, that the principall obiect or foundation of ſauing faith, (the promiſed womans ſeed) muſt needs bee compriſed in the word 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               . Gal. 5.6. 
               In Ieſus Chriſt (ſaith the Apoſtle) neither circumciſion availeth any thing, nor vncircumciſion, but faith which worketh by loue. But neither loue, nor faith working by loue, can availe more without Chriſt Ieſus, then circumciſion in Chriſt Ieſus. And bootleſſe it had beene to haue added this cōditional, (if they continue in faith, &c) vnleſſe the foundation of faith, and ſalvation had beene compriſed in the former words, She ſhall bee ſaued by her child birth. Now as fidelitie, chaſtity, & practiſes of charitie, are neceſſarie to all, but in a peculiar and remarkable ſort neceſſarie to thoſe,

whoſe forefathers haue beene perfidious, adulterours, and oppreſſors: ſo, albeit none can be ſaued without theſe virtues here mentioned, (faith, charitie, holineſse, temperance) yet are theſe peculiarly neceſſarie to the weaker ſexe, in reſpect of the firſt womans ſinne: to the ſeverall parts or degrees whereof they are moſt divinely and accurately ſuited and ranked by our Apoſtle. One part of her tranſgreſſion (perhaps the firſt) was infidelitie, or diſtruſt to Gods threats and promiſes: therefore it is required as a condition neceſſarie to all women, 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               , that they be conſtant in faith. Another part of the firſt womans ſinne, (beſides diſloialtie) was breach of that ſociall loue, which by order of creation was due vnto her husband. For as ſhee had beginning of being from him, ſo ſhe was not to haue contracted any buſineſſe concerning her eſtate without him. Shee ſhould haue knowne his conſent, before ſhee had preſumed to haue paſſed hers; and becauſe ſhee did not ſo, but brake the bond of ſociall loue; it is required of all women that they continue in loue.
            
            16 Againe, the firſt womā polluted her ſoule with ſpiritual adulterie, by liſtning to Satans impious ſuggeſtions. Hence it is required of the weaker ſexe, that they continue in holineſſe & chaſtity. The claſpe that muſt keepe all theſe ornaments, or ſpirituall habits cloſe about thē, is Temperance. For ſo the Apoſtle concludes; Notwithſtanding they ſhall be ſaued, if they continue in faith & charity,

and holineſſe with temperance. As if hee had ſaid, it was their mother Eues intemperate appetite of the forbidden fruit, faire in ſhew, which did quicken and giue life vnto the firſt tranſgreſſion; whoſe firſt ſeed (perhaps) was pride; and for this reaſon continent eyes, and temperate appetites are on the womans part required in the laſt place, as ſubiection is in the firſt. For concluſion of this point. As this Catalogue of vertues in the laſt clauſe, hath expreſſe reference, to the ſeverall parts of her tranſgreſſion: ſo haue theſe words 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               , as peculiar relation vnto the promiſe concerning the womans ſeed, Gen. 3. v. 15. 
               which was to bruiſe the ſerpents head.
            
            17 I ſhall not need to trouble this learned audience, with a doctrine very frequent, becauſe moſt vſefull in the Primitiue Church. A neceſſitie was laid vpon the Reverend Fathers of thoſe times, to vſe this place, as one, amongſt many, moſt pregnant, for refutation of ſuch heretiques, as held our Saviour did take only the ſhape, and figure, not the true fleſh and ſubſtance of man, from his mother. But ſeeing their heriſies haue for theſe many yeares, ſlept with their bodies: I hold it a ſin to awake them, by entertaining any ſolemne diſpute with them, or making lowd declamation againſt thē. Taking the truth, which theſe men are not able now to contradict for vnqueſtionable (as being the principall ſubiect of all Chriſtian knowledge▪) Their obſervation is neither vnneceſſarie

for any time, nor impertinent to this preſent occaſiō, who out of this phraſe MADE OF A WOMAN, would giue vs the true MEDIVM, or cauſall demonſtration of another concluſion, eſſentially ſubordinate to the fore cited obſervation of the Ancient. The concluſion is, that our Saviour, did with the ſubſtance or fleſh of man, take vpon him all the infirmities, and weakneſſes of our mortall fleſh.
            18 The heathens although they feined Pallas to be a Goddeſſe, yet conceiued her to bee of a maſculine valour and true heroicall ſpirit, as being wholy conceiued and borne of Iupiters ſubſtance, not participating of Iunoes nature, or diſpoſition. That wiſdome in the Greeke tongue is of the feminine gender, was to them a ſufficient Hint, thus to transforme the wiſdome of God, into a Goddeſs of wiſdome. What they ſpake of this Goddeſſe or daughter of Ioue, was moſt true of the wiſdome and Sonne of God. He was begotten from all eternities of his Father without a mother, very God of very God, Geber el, or the ſtrong God. And whilſt He remained in the boſome of his Father onely, ſending forth wiſe men & Prophets vnto his people, he did in no wiſe participate of any infirmitie. But that this wiſdome and Sonne of God, ſhould bee conceiued and borne of a mother, without a father, and ſent forth into the world vpon the ſame embaſſage thar hee had ſent his ſervants; was a ttuth farre remote from that hemiſphere
               
of darkneſſe wherein the heathen ſat; yet a common prenotion amongſt Gods people. And what better proofe can bee deſired for evincing him to be a man (as the Prophet tearmes him) of infirmities, then his taking his whole ſubſtance from the infirmer and weaker ſexe. Iob 14. v. 1. 
               The man that is borne of a woman (ſaith Iob) is of few daies full of trouble; Intimating, as ſome thinke, that as life & ſtrength are from the Father, ſo frailtie and mortality are from the Mother. It is not then ſtrange, if He who took his whole ſubſtance from his mother, were peculiarly capable of infirmities. A drie and wearyiſh ſoile, cannot naturally ſend forth goodly Cedars, full of ſap: nor could the incredulous Iew haue expected, his promiſed Meſſias ſhould bee a Giant, or man of ſtrength, had hee but duly conſidered, that he was to be the womans ſeed, fleſh of her fleſh, and bone of her bone; not ſo of Mans. And more particularly of this ſprig of Ieſſe, ſaith the Prophet, Iſa. 53. v. 2. 
               He ſhall growe vp before him, as a tender plant, & as a root out of a dry ground: hee hath no forme nor comelineſſe, and when we ſhall ſee him, there is no beautie that we ſhould deſire him, hee is deſpiſed and reiected of men, a man of ſorrows and acquainted with griefe.
            
            19 Marriage well fitted is a kind of muſicke, and conſiſts in a true conſort of the ſtronger and weaker ſexe. But in this happie marriage betwixt HEAVEN and EARTH, betweene the Divine, & Humane Nature; the Sonne of God, and the Seed of Abraham, there is a conſort of contrarieties (of

ſtrength and weakneſſe) in their abſtracts. He, that was Geber
                     •
                  el, the ſtrength of God, is indiſſolubly linkt with the weakneſſe of man, with the fleſh and ſubſtance of a womā. He, of whom God might haue ſaid, as Iacob did of Reuben before his fall. Gen. 49. v. 3. 
               My firſt borne, my might, and the beginning of my strength, the excellencie of dignitie, and the excellencie of power, is become (ſinne only excepted) like vnto Reuben, when his dignitie was gone, vnstable as water: The ſonne of God, (not by adoption, but by eternall generation) is ſent forth, made of a woman, and thereby ſubiected to more infirmities, then any man before him, had bin, or after can bee. Strength was thus to ſtoope to Weakneſse, that weakneſſe might become ſtrong; and Aeternitie to match with Mortalitie; that our mortall bodies might be immortall. For as Man and Wife are one fleſh; ſo much more the Sonne of God, and the womans ſeed, make but one Chriſt. And in this conſort, the Spouſe, or weaker nature, Coruſcat Mariti, Titulis is really dignified, with theſe late mentioned, or the like titles of her Lord and husband. Strength is now become her girdle, and immortalitie her wedding garment; freedome, ioy, & happineſſe everlaſting, are made her ioynter, whoſe former ſtate was mortalitie, charged with ſervitude and infirmities.
            20 The former obſervation concerning the importance of the word mulier here vſed, though (in my opinion) not impertinent to our Apoſtles meaning; may in better iudgements, ſeeme rather

to increaſe then diminiſh, a common difficultie. Firſt, were his meaning ſuch as wee ſuppoſe it; hee had ſaid better, 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                then 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               , factum ex foeminâ, rather then ex muliere. For foeminâ being the proper name of the weaker ſexe, ſeemes to import fragilitie, more directly then Mulier doth. Beſides, this phraſe factum ex foemine would haue well conſorted with that principall article of our beleefe, Hee was made and borne of a Virgin: With which, this forme of ſpeech in my text, factum ex muliere, may ſeeme ſcarſe compatible. For virgo and foemina are ſubordinate, every virgo is foemina; but virgo and mulier, or 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                and 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                are rather oppoſites. Some learned Interpreters, notwithſtanding, haue obſerued the Greeke 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               , to be ſometimes taken for 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               , as mulier likewiſe in the Latine is for virgo. And why might not the Apoſtle vſe the like language? Yet in ſaying thus much and no more, they make the maner of his ſpeech more capable of excuſe, then meritorious of admiration; whereas to my apprehenſion, there lies a myſterie in the word 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                as here it is vſed by the Apoſtle, which had not been ſo well expreſt, either by the common name of the ſexe, 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               , foemina, or by 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               , virgo.
            
            For better notification of what I conceiue; you are to conſider, that virgo and mulier (as the words anſwering to them in the Greeke) haue two ſignifications, or rather importances. Virgo ſomtimes implies no more then foeminam intectam, or viri

ignaram, a woman that knowes not a man: ſomtimes it ſignifies, foeminam intactam, nec deſponſatam; a woman not betrothed. Mulier likewiſe implies ſometimes an oppoſition to the firſt importance or ſignification of virgo, and ſignifieth as much as foeminam corruptam, or viri gnaram; ſometimes it imports no more then foeminam viro deſponſatam. And this later vſe or importance whether of the Latine mulier, or of the Greeke 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               , is not oppoſite but coincident to the ſecond vſe or importance of virgo, or 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               . One and the ſame foemina, may be intacta, and yet deſponſata, a wife or woman betrothed vnto a man, & yet a virgin. So Eue is called by the ſeptuagint 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                (in the originall Iſhah) a wife, at her firſt creation: Matrimonie it ſelfe was eſtabliſhed, in her extraction out of Adams ſide. In this ſenſe ſhe was mulier, a wife, when ſhe committed the firſt tranſgreſſion, and yet 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                or foemina intacta a virgin too; for ſhee did not knowe her husband, before ſhee had contaminated her ſoule with luſting after the ſerpents bayts. And for this reaſon, would the wiſdome of God be made man of a virgin, and yet withall ex muliere, of a virgin betroathed vnto an husband, that Eues miſcariage might be regaind in her. Eue was created to be a helpe to Adam, but proued his ruine. The bleſſed virgin muſt likewiſe bee ſolemnly conſecrated for an helpe to Man, but ſo conſecrated, becomes a comforter, not to Ioſeph only, but to all his bretheren, to all the Iſrael of

God, whether they be Iewes or Gentiles.
            
            21 For the wiſdome of God, thus ſolicitouſly and accurately to contriue and plot the meanes of mankinds redemption, it was expedient and neceſſary, in reſpect of that inbred ſuperſtitiō, wherewith both Iewes and Gentiles were deepely tainted. All of vs, from our cradle, from the wombe, are ſicke of our mother Eues diſeaſe; prone, vpon every light accidentall circumſtance, or want of ceremoniall references, to pick occaſion when none is offered, to diſtruſt Gods promiſes for our good. The ſubtletie of the old ſerpent, continues ſtill the ſame, rather increaſt by long experience, then impaired by age. No Sophiſter ſo captious, no Lawier ſo cunning, as He, to miſperſwade men either that the inſtrumēts of their aſſurance want words to carry the inheritance vnto all, or that their Redeemer is vnable or vnwilling to inſtate thē in it; or that ſome, at leaſt in reſpect of their particular conditiō or ſtate of life, are vncapable of the good intended. For prevēting this his cūning, hath God in his wiſdome incompaſt and hedged in all mā
               kind with ſuch a world of references, and admirable alliances vnto his Sonne made man of a woman, as no ſort or condition of men, that frame their aſpect aright, can ſuſpect themſelues to bee excluded. Every circumſtance of his perſon, conception, birth and life, are ſuited, as it were of purpoſe, to giue checke vnto the vtmoſt curioſitie of ſuperſtitious humane fancie.
            
               22 Had our redeemer beene onely man, though a man much more after Gods own heart, then his father Dauid was; wee would haue ſaid of him as we doe of a friend whoſe minde we knowe to be better then his meanes; Surely, hee wiſheth me well, and would lay downe his life to doe mee good: but being once dead, what dominion can he haue over death? Or raiſed againe; yet being farr abſent in the higheſt heavens; how ſhall he guard me againſt Sathan and his Angels, ſtill preſent to aſſault me here on earth? Againe, had he been only the Sonne of God; wee would haue conceaued of him, as we doe of many great ones, whom we acknowledge to be honourably diſpoſed, but not ſo tenderly compaſſionate of poore mens caſes, as might bee wiſht; becauſe they haue no acquaintance with povertie or the miſeries that attend it. To prevent theſe temptations to diſtruſt; God would haue his only Sonne to bee made a Man of ſorrowes, and of entire acquaintance with greefe; a man ſubiect to greater bodily vexations then any in this life can taſt. And yet at laſt to be exalted according to his humane nature vnto glory, that we might haue a ſolicitour in the Court of Heaven, of our owne corporation and ſtocke: one that could pittie our wants, and compaſſionate our grievances, by the liuely experience, and never fading memorie of his owne more grievous ſufferings whilſt he liued on earth; able withall to plead our deliverance from danger, out of that infinite

               wiſdome which He is, and to procure it by that infinite favour and reſpect, which hee hath with his father from everlaſting.
            23 Or if the ſonne of God had beene made man, as Adam was of the earth, or not thus miraculouſly made of a woman: the old ſerpent might eaſily haue brought the weaker ſexe into a relaps of their natiue diſtruſt vnto Gods promiſes. Feare, if not deſpaire, would in temptations haue overtaken them, leaſt Chriſt had beene ſent forth to redeeme the Man onely, whoſe ſexe hee aſſumed, not ſilly woman, to whom hee had no ſpeciall reference. Or had he beene made MAN of a Virgin onely, not of a wife or woman betroathed to an husband; married perſons might haue miſtruſted, leaſt matrimonie had made them more capable of their firſt parents curſe, then of the bleſsing made in the promiſed ſeed
               ▪ or leaſt the coniunction of twaine in one fleſh, might haue cauſed a divorce of both from him, vnto whom whoſoever is conioyned,1. Cor. 6. v. 17. 
               is made one ſpirit w
                     ••
                  h him. Now that the world might knowe marriage to bee honourable among all men; and that the bonds of vndefiled wedlocke, are no ſetters to the ſoule: it pleaſed the wiſdome of God to be conceiued in wedlocke, & borne of a virgin affianced to a man. On the contrary, leaſt the Eunuch, (Hee, I meane, that either by nature is vnfit for marriage, or out of iudicious reſolution and diſcreet choice, holds marriage vnfit, or vnexpedient for him) ſhould take vp his

complaint, and ſay, alaſſe, I am a dry tree, and can bring forth no fruit vnto eternall life: it hath pleaſed the only begotten SONNE of God to grace & ſanctifie ſingle life, by his owne practiſe and example. For though he were made man of a woman, betroathed vnto an husband: yet was he never betroathed vnto any woman: that no humane ſoule of what condition, or ſexe ſoever, might haue occaſion to diſpaire of being eternally betroathed to him. The end and iſſue of his admirable chaſtitie, was to inſtitute, that ſupernaturall and ſacred Polygamie, which was (perhaps) by peculiar indulgence of divine diſpenſation legally foreſhadowed in the multitude of Davids wiues, or in the Polygamie of others, from whom he deſcended. Howſoever,Eſay 54. v. 1. 
               as the deſolate hath more children then ſhe that hath an husband, ſo are the ſpouſes of this chaſt and holy one, more in number, then the wiues and concubines of luxurious Salomon. Hee is that everlaſting bridegroome, whoſe Courts no multiplicitie of conſorts can pollute: there is no ſoule, ſo it bring faith for its dowrie, but may be aſſuredly eſpowſed to him. What was ſpoken of Eue in reſpect of Adam is true of all (be they male or female) that are once eſpowſed to him. They are mē
                  bers of his bodie, (and therefore cannnot bee cut off) of his fleſh, and of his bones: and being ſuch, there is no danger of any Nullitie; they can never be divorced from him; there is nothing that can diminiſh or eſtrange his loue. Barrenneſſe by one womans

child birth, is now no more a reproach vnto the reſt: ſo they be not barrē in faith, the childleſſe are more deare to him than was Hannah to her husband. Virginitie it ſelfe is become exceeding fruitfull, by the fruit of the Virgins wombe. And the Eunuch, which in time paſt, Deut. 23. v. 1 
               might not enter into the Congregation of the Lord, 
               Iſa. 56. v. 5. 
               hath now gotten a place and name in the houſe of God better then of ſonnes and daughters, for there is no name ſo deare and tender as the name of Spowſe; none ſo capable of everlaſting habitation with the immortal king.
            24 But all this being granted, that our Redeemer was made man of a woman, who was both wife and virgin, that hee himſelfe made choice of ſingle life: theſe circumſtances only miniſter hope to both ſexes, or ſtates of life. But he that was thus made and thus lived, is the vndoubted heire and Lord of all things: And what comfort can the deſtreſſed captiue, the poore ſervant or bondſlaue reape, from his incarnation, that is by nature the Sonne of God, King of this world, and Father of the world to come? Surely, as much as any other, if not more, ſo he brooke his eſtate with patience; for it followes: He was made vnder the Law, &c.
            
            25 If ſuch as were vnder the Law, were (as the Apoſtle often inculcates) in bondage, or in the ſtate and condition of pupils, or ſervants: then queſtionleſſe the Sonne of God, in being made vnder the Law, became a ſervāt, for his preſent eſtate and condition, that hee might make ſervants

free men, and ſonnes of God. And this reaſon is expreſt by the Apoſtle, in my text: Beſides this; vnleſſe the ſonne of God had profeſt his obedience, and ſervice vnto the Law, by being circumciſed the eight day: Men of Iewiſh progeny, might haue beene tempted to doubt whether God had not ſet the badge or ſeale of circumciſion vpon their nation, as hee did his marke vpon Cain, in token they ſhould be vagabonds, and fugitiues from his preſence. Indeed the greateſt part of the circumciſion, proued Cains brethren in the event: but that God did not by circumciſion marke them to exile and ſlaughter, is ſufficiently manifeſted in that hee cauſed his only Sonne to be circumciſed. So then he is circumciſed & made vnder the law, that ſuch as were of the circumciſion and vnder the law, might haue full aſſurance he was ſent forth to bee their redeemer. Yet had he been conceiued in the ſame province wherein he was borne and circumciſed: the ten tribes, or kingdome of Iſrael, might well haue doubted, whether Gods promiſes had not beene entailed vnto the tribe of Iuda; whether their fore-Elders had not releaſt their intereſt in them, and foreſpoken all their poſterities hopes, by that deſperate and vnhappie ſpeech, which fell from them when they firſt revolted from Rehoboam: What portion haue we in David?
               1. King. 12.16. 
               neither haue wee inheritance in the ſonne of Ieſse.
            
            26 This, or the like temptation, vpon whatſoever ground conceiued, wrought ſtrongly with

this people whilſt they remained in captivitie▪ and for this reaſon, when God perſwades them to returne with Iuda into the land of promiſe, he is inforced to promiſe them by the Prophet Ieremie, that the expected Meſſias (for whoſe birth Micah had taken vp Bethlehem) ſhould be cōceiu'd & made of a woman in the land of Iſrael. To this purpoſe I haue heretofore, out of this place, expoūded that paſſage, Ier. 31. Turne againe ô virgin of Iſraël, &c. For the Lord hath created a new thing (not in the earth or wide world, at randome: but) in thy land; the female ſhall encloſe the male. His ſpeech is ful, and yet preciſe and warie: for he was onely incloſed in the land of Iſraël, and brought forth in Iuda.
            
            27 But the better right or title theſe circumſtances of Chriſts conception, birth, or circumciſion, convey either to the kingdome of Iſraël, or Iuda ſeverally, or iointly to the whole ſeed of Abraham after the fleſh: the leſſe hope could wee Gentiles haue, of any portion in the ſonne of Ieſſe, had not the Lord, out of his infinite mercy & wiſdome, made the covenant of life and bleſſing with Abraham, before he tooke vpon him the marke of circumciſion; that is, before there was any legall diſtinction betweene the Iew and Gentile. This is a point ſo admirably preſt, by the great Apoſtle of the Gentiles, for their comfort, that it ſhall ſuffice me, to quote ſome few paſſages of his comments vpon Moſes narrations; which I can never read without admiration, and ſecret ioy of heart. And

the Scripture foreſeeing that God would iuſtifie the heathen through faith,
               Gal. 3. v. 8, 9. 
               preached before the Goſpell vnto Abraham, ſaying in thee ſhall all nations bee bleſsed. So then they which be of faith, ſhall bee bleſſed with faithfull Abraham. As hee had ſaid to the like purpoſe before. Abraham beleeued in God, and it was counted to him for righteouſneſse. Knowe yee therefore,
               Verſ. 6.7. 
               that they that be of faith, the ſame are the children of Abraham.
            
            The true iſſue, or 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               , of that great controverſie between him & his countrymē, is, whether Circumciſion and obſervance of that Law whereby the Iew was diſtinguiſhed from the Gentile, or BELEEFE in Gods promiſes cōcerning the ſeed to come, did make men ſonnes of Abraham & of bleſſing. Our Apoſtles plea for BELEEFE is vnanſwerable, becauſe Abraham by beleeuing God, receaued the promiſes in the name and behoofe of the nations, before he received the ſigne of circumciſion: which may hence be argued to bee no infallible ſigne of bleſsing, in that it was imparted as well to Iſmael, Abrahams ſonne; according to the fleſh, as vnto Iſaac, who was the ſonne of promiſe. Much leſſe could the obſervance of the law, which was not giuen till foure hundred and thirtie yeares after the former couenant was eſtabliſhed, make men ſonnes of Abraham, and of bleſſing. Covenants which receaue their whole ſtrength and vertue from the will or purpoſe of men, being once confirmed,
               Gal. 3.15. 
               no man may diſanull, or adde ought to them. The contractors

themſelues muſt change their minds, or revoke their mutual coments, before any other may correct or change their deeds. But Gods promiſe for mans good can neither change of it ſelfe, nor be changed by any. Yet had Abraham not Gods promiſe only, but his ſolemne oath to aſsure the inheritance of bleſsing to him and his ſeed. There is no mention of any releaſe on Abrahams part; and it were impietie to thinke, that God, without ſome releaſe made by him whilſt he liued, would bee ſo iniurious, as to retract, or alter the covenant after his death. Or ſhall a title immediatly grounded on his ſolemne oath, whoſe word alone giues ſtrēgth & being to al things that are, (evē power & authoritie to lawes themſelues) need the corroboration of any Law? To what end thē was the Law giuen ſo long after Abrahams death▪ that his poſteritie might plead their title by it, to the inheritance before promiſed? This is that which our Apoſtle proſecutes, with ſuch deepe, but iuſt indignation, throughout this diſcourſe. For this was in effect to diſtruſt Gods oath, and for their parts, vtterly to renounce all intereſt in the covenant made to Abraham, Iſaac, and Iacob; by ſeeking thus to drawe the free Doner into new legall bonds with Moſes. Yet if the Law added nothing to their former aſſurance, the queſtion ſtill remaines, why it was giuen?Gal. 3. v. 19. the Apoſtle reſolues vs It was added becauſe of tranſgreſsion. In which words hee would giue vs to vnderſtand, that the whole world was

               quoad rem, for its preſent eſtate or condition, vnder the curſe denounced againſt Adam: the beſt of whoſe children were heires of bleſſing, only quoad ſpem; the life of our hope or expectation, being in the promiſed ſeed, which was to come into the world. In the interim, till his comming, God gaue his Law to Abrahams ſeed after the fleſh, that the threats and curſes contained in it, might imprint a liuely ſenſe and feeling of that firſt curſe, vnder which the whole world ſtood; and that the ſenſe or feeling hereof, might bring forth a more eager longing after the ſecond Adam, or promiſed ſeed, who was to propagate the bleſſing vnto mankind: who being manifeſted in the fleſh, was to redeem all from that curſe which had befallen the whole nature in Adam; and being made vnder the Law, was to redeeme the ſeed of Abraham from the particular curſes of the Moſaicall or ceremoniall Law. This Law then, whilſt it laſted, concurr'd no otherwiſe to the adoption of ſonnes then privation doth to the conſtitution of naturall bodies. It was principium tranſmutationis, non conſtitutionis: to vaniſh out of the world whiles the world was regenerated. The principall point whereat our Apoſtle aimes in this Epiſtle, is to aſcertaine both Iew and Gentile, that their deliuerance from the forementioned curſes, was on their parts to be expected, by the ſame meanes, and vpon the ſame condions, that the promiſe of bleſſing had beene eſtabliſhed with Abraham. This is the maine cōcluſiō,

               Wherefore the Law was our ſchoolmaſter to bring vs vnto Chriſt,
               Chap.3.23. &c 
               that we might be iustified by faith. But after that faith is come, we are no longer vnder a ſchoolmaster. For yee are all the children of God by faith in Chriſt Ieſus. For as many of you, as haue beene baptiſed into Chriſt, haue put on Chriſt. There is neither Iewe nor Greeke, there is neither bond nor free, there is neither male nor female, for yee are all one in Chriſt Ieſus. And if yee be Chriſts, then are yee Abrahams ſeed, and heires according to the promiſe.
            
            28 Thus you haue heard rudely, and briefly, what the Sonne of God for his part hath done, that he might be a perfect Redeemer, and vnpartiall Mediator betweene God & man: & you know what on our part, is required, for the accompliſhing of our redemption, Abrahams faith. Now were it as wel knowne, what it is truely to beleeue, as that true beleefe is on our parts only requiſite, for attaining the bleſſing promiſed to Abraham, & to his ſeed; moſt of our miniſteriall labours were at an end. But my time for proviſion hath been ſo ſhort, and my opportunities for intentiue meditations in this ſhort time ſo few, that I could not hope, either much to amend the characters of larger Comments to this purpoſe; or that theſe vnrefined, ſhould make any better impreſſion, whiles I vtter them, in your eares; then they haue done, or may doe, whiles you read them, in your eies. I was the willinger to ſpend the whole time now allotted, in laying theſe foundations; becauſe men vſually

expect ſtrength rather then curioſitie of workmanſhip in foundations ſcarce brought aboue ground. Howbeit, no man would willingly tharch vpon a ſtrong foundation, though rude & plaine. And a better cover I could not in this exigence provide, if I ſhould make vp the ſtructure or application. All I haue to ſay vnto you, is by way of requeſt; that as often as you ſhall compare, or heare liuely faith compared vnto a tree, & good works vnto the fruit; you would vouchſafe to take this note of remembrance from me: Faith is a plant of Paradiſe, which comes not vp by generation, but is herein truely like to trees of the firſt creation, that it doth not ſend forth leaues before bloſſoms, nor bloſſome before it bring ſorth fruit. For it hath his fruit created in it. If you further demande what be the proper fruits of true beleefe, as it is fixt on this peculiar obiect or article of faith, [The ſonne of God, Abrahams ſeed made of a woman:] Hee himſelfe hath reſolued you they are,Mat. 5. v 1, &c. 
               Poverty in ſpirit, godly ſorrow, meekneſſe, hunger, and thirſt after righteouſneſſe, mercifulneſſe, puritie of heart, &c. For that bleſſedneſſe which God did promiſe, without a ſequeſter or mediatour vnto faithful Abraham, and in him to all true beleeuers, is, by this ſonne of God, & ſole fountaine of al bleſſings promiſed, expreſly bequeathed with the mouth of man, vnto the poore in ſpirit, to mourners, to the meeke, to the mercifull, and pure in heart. Albeit the denominations be much different, yet theſe qualifications

differ no more from Abrah
                     •••
                  
                
               
                  •
               aith, then fractions or parcels doe from their proper integr
                     •
                  ms. To beleeue in Chriſt made of a Virgin, is to haue him faſhion'd in our hearts whoſe whole life and converſation was a patterne of ſuch practiſes, as he there commends vnto vs, in the beginning of the Evangelicall i
                  •
               bilie. Now, did wee put Him on as truely in our daily converſation, as wee haue done by profeſſiō
               ▪ at our baptiſme: we might be as well knowne to bee ſonnes of adoption by theſe Chriſtian habits, as Academicks, or Graduats by our weeds and ornaments. But if we ſhould make enquirie after the firſt parcell or f
                  •
               action of true faith in Chriſt (ſuch 
                  〈…〉
                
               & ſpirit as was in the bleſſed virgin; which cōceaued him) amongſt the rich and mightie: wee may perhaps finde ſome ſhadowe of it in their outward complement, like a begger at a potentates gate, within which he may not enter. To giue harbour or lodging to ſuch a baſe geſt in their harts, is a diſparagement to their greatneſſe. Even povertie her ſelfe, may bewaile the paucitie of the poore in ſpirit amongſt her children. Such as haue beene mightely humbled by potent adverſaries, haue iuſter occaſiō to lament the want of true humilitie in their breſts, then the abundance of grievances, or heavy burdens, which others lay vpō their back
                  •
               
               ▪ For the moſt of vs, ſeeing we make our mouthes iſſues either of bitterneſſe, ſcarrility, corrupt communicatiō, or of ieſting which is nor comely▪ ſhall we not

ſinne againſt our own ſouls, and giue the ſpirit of God the lie; if we ſay we are pure in hart? Yet ſaith St 
               Iohn▪ Every one that hath this hope in him (of being the ſons of God by adoption in this life,1 Ioh. 3. v 3. and of ſeeing God in the life to come) doth purifie himſelf as he is pure. What ſhall wee ſay then? Lord if thou wilt thou canst make vs cleane? but alas, how often wouldeſt thou haue purified vs, and we would not be purified? Yet grant, MOST GRATIOVS FATHER, we beſeech thee, that our particular wills & deſires may evermore want ſucceſſe, rather then their accompliſhment ſhould defeat or fruſtrate our generall Deſire, of being bleſſed with faithfull Abraham. Accept This (good Lord) wee intreat thee for our finall deſire, and let it be regiſtred in everlaſting Records, as our laſt wil and Teſtamēt, Not as we will, but as thou wilt, For our wils are tainted with corruptiō, & naturally 
                  •
               end vnto deſtructiō
               ▪ or though they be ſomtimes ſet aright, & freed from error in their actual choiſe; yet their choiſe is alwaies ſubiect to change; as variable as temptations are various. But as thou art, ſo is thy wil, moſt holy & righteous, without ſhadow of chāge, a will of life and ſaluation: Lord let not theſe our corruptible wils, but this thy everlaſting will be fulfilled in vs. AS thou haſt promiſed bleſſednes to faithfull Abraham, & in him to all beleeuers: ſo, we beſeech thee, bleſſe vs with true beleefe, with lowlineſſe of ſpirit, with meeknes, with purity of heart, & with whatſoever other fruits of faith, to which thy Son our Saviour hath bequeathed his bleſſing.
            FINIS.
         
      
   