
      
         
            
            
            AN HELPE TO the beſt Bargaine.
            A Sermon on Mat. 13.46. Preached on Sunday, the 20 of Octob. 1623. in the Cathedrall Church of Chriſt, Canterbury.
            By THOMAS IACKSON, Doct. of Divinitie, and one of the Prebends, and Lecturer there.
            London Printed by NICH. OKES, for Mat. Walbanke, and are to be ſold in Graies-Inne Gate. 1624.
         
         
            
            
            TO THE RIGHT Honourable, and moſt Worthy Lady, Vicounteſſe MAIDSTONE; grace, mercy, and peace, from GOD the Father, through IESVS CHRIST, by the HOLYGHOST be multiplied.
            
               RIGHT NOBLE LADY,
            
            
               GReat is their honour in the eies of Gods Saints, whom God, and the King doe honour; and great is your honour in mine eies, whom birth, & wealth; education, and mariage; vertue, and pietie; God, and King; haue

honoured: it behooued me, hauing receiued ſo many comforts and encouragements; protection, and preferment; from your thrice noble husband, and your honourable ſelfe, (in ſo iuſtly occaſioned common congratulation) to haue gone before others in giuing of honour; Rom. 12.10 but, being with the throng of important occaſions, kept backe, and caſt behinde, yet I preſume of acceptance, being aſſured, that I bring the beſt preſent; for, Solomon hath witneſſed, there is nothing to be compared to this Prou. 3.15..
            Pearles, and Precious ſtones are of great eſteeme among Princes, and Nobles; and ſpecially among Women, who doe naturally delight in ornaments, and in curious

and artificiall decoration:Genus mulierum natura ornamentorum amans, et 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  . Po
                     •
                  n. in Iob. 5.24
                as the Embaſſadour of Chriſt; 2 Cor. 5.20 I commend to your honour, a goodly and precious Pearle, ſuch a Pearle as maketh the wearers of it truly honourable: The Diſciple whom Ieſus loued (whoſe Goſpell your ſoule loueth) hath ſaid; to as many as receiue it, is this priuiledge giuen, to become the ſons of God Ioh. 1.12.. And the Apoſtle witneſſeth of the Bereans; they were more noble then they of Theſſalonica, in that they receiued the word with all readineſſe of minde, and ſearched the Scriptures daily Act. 17.11.. Well may they be eſteemed, high-borne, noble, and happie indeede, whoſe father is God 2 Cor. 6.8.; their brother, Chriſt Rom. 8.2
                     •
                  .; their garments, righteouſneſſe

               Reu. 19.8; their foode, the hidden mannah Reu. 2.17.; their rings, chaines, and iewellsEzech. 16.11, 12.; the graces and gifts of the holy Ghoſt; their attendants, the Angells; their inheritance, heauen Mat. 25.34.; and reward, the crowne of Glorie1 Pet. 5.4.: Oh, this is indeed, the true reſtoring of blood, the beſt part in Noblemens Scutchions, and higheſt ſtemme in their Pedegree; for, be they nere ſo high, and great, and want it, they are but wretched, poore, and miſerable Reu. 3.17.: Alas, what are ſtately houſes; rich furniture; coſtly apparell; delicate fare; delightfull muſicke; all poſſible reuerence with tongue, cap, and knee; multitude of followers; great offices; larger euenues; and all earthly pleaſures that heart

can wiſh (in compariſon) but verie vanity, and vexation of ſpirit? Numquid in honore, ſine dolore. Bern. d
                     •
                   quin
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   negot. Coll. 1718.
               So as Moſes in nothing ſhewed more wiſdome, then refuſing to be called the ſonne of Pharaoh's Daughter; and chooſing rather to ſuffer afflictions with the people of God, then to enioy the pleaſures of ſinne for a ſeaſon; eſteeming the reproach for Chriſt, greater riches then the treaſures of Egypt Heb. 11.24.
            I confeſſe, that honour is Gods ordinance; the reward of vertueV
                     •
                  rtutis premium. Ariſt. Ethic. 4. Aquin. 2.2. queſt. 129. a
                     •
                   
                  4
               ; and of externall good things the beſt: to the pure, all things are pure Tit. 1.15.: yet in holy tongues, the ſame word doth ſignifie both honour and burthen▪
               
                  C hubod. Heb. Honorare & onerare. becauſe according to the height of honour, ſhall be the weight of account at

the laſt day. I doubt not (hauing had ſo many yeares experience) of your Ladiſhips growth in Grace,Quae hic honorant: ibi. onerant. Auguſt. Epiſt. 2
                        •
                     3. Col. 829.
                and in the knowledge of our Lord and Sauiour Ieſus Chriſt 2 Pet. 3. vlt.
               ; yea, I am perſwaded, you ſhall bring forth more fruite in your age: yet, conſidering the times, Virtus paucorum: paucorum inquam preſertim Nobilium Barn. Epiſt. 113
                and our owne corruption, in a godly iealouſie 2 Cor. 11.2., I thought it my duty, to put you in remembrance 2 Pet. 1.13., and to ſtir vp Gods graces in you 2 Tim. 1.6, that as you haue loued Chriſt & his Goſpel in ſincerity Eph. 6. vlt.
                ſo you would do ſo ſtill; yea, and to doe it more, not letting the Pearle lye in the heart, as in a Casket, vnder locke and key; but make a frontlet of it, letting the world ſee, you doe euery way ſeeke his honour, who hath

ſo many waies honoured you.
            It is now full twenty yeares agoe,
                  Aug. 28. 1623. on 1. Cor. 22. ſince preaching in your honours houſe, and commending the ſauing knowledge of Chriſt, your Ladiſhip was pleaſed, to teſtifie your gracious acceptance thereof, both by priuate encouragements, and by ſute in my behalfe, vnto an honourable perſon,My L. Meluin. then preſent; which was the firſt ſtone in the foundation of my preferment; for, as he friendly promiſed, hee faithfully performed; ſo, as I am bound thankfully to acknowledg, from your Ladiſhips firſt motion it came, that now for many years, I haue enioyed my place in this Metropolitan Church, with much comfort in my calling, and particular eſtate. The Lord recompence

an hundred fold, all the kindneſſe I haue receiued from you, and yours, for whoſe proſperitie, I am your daily Orator. C.C.C. Nouemb.
            
            
               T. I.
            
         
      
      
         
            
            AN HELPE TO THE BEST Bargaine.
            
               
                  
                     MAT. 13.46.
                  
                  Who when hee had found one pearle of good price, he went and ſold all that he had and bought it.
               
            
            
               AS diuers ſeruants in the fame Shop, intending their Maiſters gaine, though one, as the Fore-man, may ſhewe the Commodity, and ſet

the price, yet the reſt will further the bargaine, either by commending the goodneſſe of the ware, or ſhewing others that is worſe, yea, naught and counterfeit, and perſwading the Cuſtomer to ſtraine to buy it: So is it my deſire, this day,Coloſſ. 4.7. to be a fellow-ſeruant to helpe to ſtrike vp the beſt bargaine, lately offered in the eminent'ſt place in this Kingdome,O. Hall, to the Court at The
                  
                     •
                  balds, on 
                     •
                  unday, Sept. 
                     ••
                  . 16
                     •
                  3. by a Reuerend & worthy Diuine, mine ancient Colleague 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                
               & Contemporaneus: to whom I ioyfully giue the right-hand of fellowſhip Gal. 2.9.; wee workers together; beſeech you, receiue not the grace of God in vaine 2 Cor. 6.1.. In Court and Countrey, the true

Miniſters of Chriſt ſing but one Song; aime at one Marke, to make their hearers rich in Luk. 12.21.God, and wiſe vnto 2 Tim. 3.15▪
                ſaluatiō, by the purchaſe of truth. We are not like the Prieſts and Ieſuits, who are brethren in euill, though looking diuers wayes, according to their ſeuerall 
                  Aduerſis vultibus et coniunctis caudis. D▪ 
                  King, Serm. a
                     •
                   White-Hall, Nouemb. 5. 1608. p. 11. intereſts, yet, like Samſons Foxes, tyed by the tayles, to carry Firebrands, to ſet Gods Field on fire, & his vineyard in a general combuſtion: but, as the Cherubims looked face to face, and both vpon the Exod. 25.20. Arke; ſo, one preacheth out of the old Teſtament, another out of the New, both looke vpon Chriſt, who is the Creator of the Creed, and circumference

of all holy Scriptures. Solomon biddeth vs, buy the truth, but at no hand, ſell Prou. 23.23. it. A greater then Mat. 12.42. 
               Solomon biddeth vs buy it, though we ſell all we haue for it: the one biddeth vs, buy and not ſell; the other biddeth vs, ſell that wee may buy▪ both of them intend mens happineſſe, by purchaſing one & the ſame truth: that was a precept, this is the practice: that wee muſt obey, and this imitate.
            My Text is part of a Parable, without which, CHRIST ſpake Mar. 4.34. 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  .nothing; moſt powerfull, to command attention; Parabola, Heb. Maſhal. a
                     ••
                  adice Maſhul, regere cum imperio. Buxtorf. Plus mouent figurate dicta. Aug. Epiſt. 119 ad lanuar.
                and effectuall, to moue deuotion. A rich Parable; rich in the hiſtorie, but richer in the

miſtery. Nitet in cortice dulcior in medull. I
                        •
                     ron. Paulin.
                It proponeth, a Pearle of great price; for purchaſe wherof, all muſt be ſold: but, it ſupponeth, a Iewell of ineſtimable pryce, in compariſon whereof, S. Paul eſteemed all goodly things to bee but droſſe and Philip. 3.8. dung.
            Parables are truely called ſacred vailes. Sacra velamina. Dion. Areopag. Myſter. giue me leaue to draw away the vaile, and let you looke into the holieſt of all. This Pearle is, the Truth; in Hebrew, Margerah; in the Greeke, 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               ; in Latine, Vnio: for, there is but one truth in the world: and this Pearle is called, a goodly Pearle, a faire Margarite: 
               
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  . For, euen the naked truth of God, without welt or guard, or any entiſing

words of mans wiſdome,
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  . Iakar. Heb. is moſt louely, and beautifull, yea, it is a Pearle of great price: Dauid eſteemes it dearer then thouſands of gold and Pſal. 119.72. ſiluer: ſo did Salomon eſteeme it, all the things thou canſt deſire are not to be compared vnto Pro. 3.15. it: This goodly precious pearle is (hid) hid from the wiſdome and ſearch of fleſh and blood; CHRIST told Peter when he had found it; Fleſh and blood hath not reuealed this vnto 
               Mat. 16.17. 
               thee. And againe; I thanke thee Lord of heauen and earth, becauſe thou haſt hid theſe things from the wiſe and prudent, and haſt reuealed them to 
               Mat. 11.25. 
               babes. Yea, ſo hid, as there is no finding it without

a guid: the Eunuch knew, he was in the field where the Pearle was, & wanted not for paines taking, yet, Philip aſking him if hee had found it, he anſwered; How can I without a 
               Act. 8.31. 
               guide? And, there is but one Field in all the world, wherin this Pearle is hid, viz. the Word of God, which is therefore called the Word of 2 Cor. 6.7. Truth: which precious Pearle is hid ſo deepe in the field of the ſacred Scripture, that there is no finding of it, without much ſearch, and diging: therefore Chriſt biddeth vs; Search the Ioh. 5.39. Scriptures. And Solomon biddeth: Seeke for wiſdome, as for ſiluer, and ſearch for her as for hidden

treaſure; Prou. 2.4. but as the wiſe Merchant, that after great ſearch, findeth a precious Pearle, hid in a field, will ſell all hee hath to purchaſe that field, & pearle in it: ſo a wiſe Chriſtian, by great ſtudy and meditation, hearing, reading, and praying, hauing found in the field of holy Scriptures, the hidden wiſdome of God, for the ſaluation of man, by IESVS CHRIST, it is a knowledge ſo ſweet and deare vnto him, as hee will eaſily part with all earthly things, that he may enioy the bleſsing of the Word, and thereby encreaſe in the ſauing knowledge of GOD's Truth. So much for the miſtery.
            
               The parts of this Parable are two, viz.
               Diuiſion.
            
            Firſt, the finding of this Pearle.
            Secondly, the procuring of it, that it may be his owne that findeth it.
            I purpoſe by GOD's grace to handle the ſecond part, it being to no purpoſe to find it, vnleſſe wee make it our owne,Non minor eſt virtus, quam quaerere. that we may be enriched by it. The manner how to compaſſe it, our Sauiour expreſſeth figuratiuely, by a bargain, in which bargaine, there are two things done;
            Firſt, Selling.Subdiuiſion.
            
            And ſecondly, Buying; (He ſold all that he had, and bought it.
               The difference betwixt heauenly & earthly purchaſes.)
            In this world, Kings, Princes,

and great rich men, are able to buy goodly precious Pearles, and not ſell any thing, the ouerplus of their great reuenues will compaſſe them; but, in the ſpirituall bargaine for this Pearle, there is no buying of it, but we muſt firſt ſell; it is ſometimes ſo deare, as the richeſt man muſt in action ſell all: and it is neuer cheaper, but he that will haue it, muſt in affection, ſell all that he hath for it: CHRIST our Maſter, hath himſelfe in writing ſet the price, and we his Seruants cannot a bate an haire; If any man come to me, and hate not his father and his mother, and wife, and children, and brethren, and ſiſters; yea, and his owne life alſo, he cannot

be my 
               Luk. 14.2 
               Diſciple: A great price, I confeſſe; yet, leſt any ſhould either ſtick at it, & goe away ſhucking the ſhoulders, as the rich man, that went away ſorrowfull, for hee had great Mat. 19.22 poſſeſsions: or, repent of their bargaine, Chriſt hath aſſured, of all purchaſes, it is the beſt bargaine, and the onely way to bee rich: Euery one that hath forſaken houſes, or brethren, or ſiſters, or father, or mother, or wife, or children, or lands, for my names ſake, and the Goſpels, he ſhall receiue an hundred-fold now in this time, and in the world to come eternal 
               Mat. 19. penult. Mat. 10.30. 
               life. Oh, ſuffer me then to prouoke you in this dead time,Concluſion the Preface. wherein though truth was neuer cheaper,

it is generally thought to be too deare amongſt many cheapners, but few buyers: GOD's ſeruants haue but cold takings, it is much to bee feared, if the market mend not, Chriſt will ſhut vp his ſhopwindows, and offer his Pearle to ſuch as will more eſteem of it: Oh, buy the truth whilſt you may buy it, leſt it prooue ſo ſcanty and deare, that it cannot be had at any rate: And that you may buy, firſt ſell: that is the thing I purpoſe to preſſe at this time.
            
               Firſt part.In Parables, the letter hath the leaſt part: if other haue any▪ this paſſage needeth none, I neede not prouoke men to ſell that they haue, too many

haue done ſo, in theſe late and deare yeares, to buy bread for them & their families▪ others, in this prodigall and luxurious age, ſell more then they haue, both preſent and reuerſion, inheritance, and offices; and run in debt to buy wine, drinke, Tobacco, & ſpend vpon their luſts▪ we had need to read lectures of good husbandrie to ſuch, and pray them to keepe that which they haue, & let nothing be loſt, leſt they pinch with the Prodigall▪ in the end to ſell all is the highway to miſery.
            This ſale, is to enable a man to buy CHRIST, yea, and heauen it ſelfe good husbands may thus ſell; yea, thus to ſell

is the way to bee rich; this is godlineſs, which hath the promiſe of this life, and of that which is to 1 Tim. 4.8 come: all good things of this life are in God's will and Teſtament, entituled to ſuch Prodigals; Hee that will ſell all for Chriſt, ſhall enioy all with 
                  1 Cor. 3. penult. 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  : vendidit. Chriſt. Marke then the words;
            This wiſe-man propoſed for patterne, doth not lay vp, or lend, or morgage, retayning propriety, but doth (Sell) not ſuperfluities, and ſuch things as he can ſpare, or hath no preſent vſe of, but, (All that hee hath 
               
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  : 
                     ••
                  nui
                     •
                   quae habuit..)
            The words being opened, hence we learne,Doct. that whoſoeuer will attaine to the ſauing

knowledge of Chriſt, & him crucified, muſt euer part with all hee hath.
            For the Illuſtration wherof, let it be noted,Illuſtration. that euery godly Chriſtian muſt ſel theſe three things.
            
               Firſt, himſelfe.1. himſelfe.
               
               Secondly, his ſinne.
               Thirdly, his ſubſtance.
            
            Hee that maketh this ſale, ſelleth all, and is able to buy the Pearle. For the firſt:
            Hee muſt ſell himſelfe;Confirmation. What? to become a Bond-ſlaue? No, no, but his owne natural wiſdome, reaſon, will affections, deſires: yea, & confidence in his owne righteouſneſſe.
            This CHRIST expreſſeth,

ſaying; He that will be my Diſciple, let him denie 
               Mat. 16.24 
               himſelfe. And S. Paul; If anie man ſeeme to be wiſe in this world, let him become a foole, that he may be wiſe, for the wiſdome of this world is fooliſhneſſe with 
               1 Cor. 3.18.19. 
               God. Yea, the carnall mind is enmity againſt GOD, it is not ſubiect to the Law of GOD, neither indeede, can Rom. 8.7. bee: euery imagination, and high thing that exalteth it ſelfe againſt the knowledge of GOD, muſt be caſt downe, & euery thought brought into captiuity, to the obedience of 2 Cor. 10.5. Chriſt; and then appeareth Faith, which bringeth forth moſt excellent obedience, though moſt ridiculous in the eies of the worldly

wiſe. Thus Abraham;Good Examples. being called of God out of Caldeah, hauing ſold himſelfe, hee followed God, he knew not whither Gen. 12.1.: Againe, when the Lord promiſed him a Son by Sarah his wife, it was much againſt his naturall reaſon, hee being an hundred yeares old, and Sarah
               Gen. 17.17. ninety; but Abraham had ſold himſelfe, and therefore neither conſidered his owne body, nor Sarah's wombe, which were both as Rom. 4.17.dead, but gaue glory to God being fully perſwaded, that what the Lord had promiſed he was alſo able to Rom. 4 19. perform: when alſo the Lord commanded him, to take his beloued and onely Sonne Iſaac,
               
and ſacrifice him, how contrary was that to his naturall reaſon and affection, for a Father to lay violent hāds on his ſon, and neither ſpare him liuing, nor dead, till hee was burned into aſhes? Yea, what a ſhake was this to his Faith, that hee ſhould kill him, in whom he had receiued the promiſe, that hee and his ſhould be bleſſed? But, hauing ſold himſelfe, hee roſe vp early to doe it; for, he knew, that GOD was able to raiſe him vp from the Gen. 2
                     •
                  .3. Heb. 
                     •
                  1.19. dead; wherefore, being thus prepared, he made an happy market; he beleeued, & it was imputed to him for righteouſneſſe; he became the friēd of God, & father of all thē that Rom. 4.3.beleeue.
            
               But, the Philoſophers are no good Chapmen; for,Euill Examples whereas Chriſt hath pronounced; Bleſſed are they that ſee not, and
               Ioh. 20.29. 
               beleeue. And S. Paul ſaith; We liue by faith, & not by 
               2 Cor. 5.7. 
               fight. They ſeek after1 Cor. 1.22 wiſdom, and will beleeue no more thē they can ſee, or comprehēd by reaſon, & therefore the miſteries of the Goſpel are fooliſh & ridiculous vnto thē: when S. Paul offered this Pearl to the wiſe Philoſophers at Athens, preaching Chriſt, and his reſurrection, they called him babler, and mocked Act. 17.18.32. him neither are the Philoſophying Schoolmen, good Chapmen, becauſe they haue not ſold themſelues, but turn Theology into witty queſtions, and bring the hidden

               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
Myſteries of God within the compaſſe of reaſon, by their ſubtle quiddities, and diſtinctions.
            
               Aggrauation.Yea, we muſt not onely ſell our naturall and vnregenerate wills, and reaſon, but alſo all confidence in our own works, and righteouſneſſe; ſo our Sauiour hath taught vs, when we haue done all wee can, to ſay, Wee are vnprofitable Luk. 17.10. Seruants:Good Example. thus S. Paul became a bleſſed Merchant, who, hauing ſo much to be proud of, and to glory in, and concerning the righteouſneſſe of the Law being vnrebukeable, yet, for this Pearl's ſake, euen the excellency of the knowledge of Chriſt Ieſus, he accounted

it loſſe, and Phil. 3.8. dung; & therfore made a good market, ſaying; I liue by faith in the Sonne of God, who hath loued mee, and giuen himſelfe for 
               Gal. 2.20. 
               me, And againe; To me to liue, is Chriſt, and to dye is 
               Phil. 1.21. 
               gaine. But the Iewes are no Chapmen for this market, for,Euill examples. they going about to eſtabliſh their owne righteouſneſſe, haue not ſubmitted themſelues to the righteouſnes of Rom. 10.3. GOD; in which condition were the Phariſes, and are the Papiſts, who truſting in the merit of their owne Workes, and going about to eſtabliſh their owne inherent, home-made righteouſneſſe, cannot ſubmit themſelues to the righteouſneſſe of God: no

welcome Chapmen to God's ſhop, but ſuch as are humble, poore, and beggerly, that haue ſold themſelues, their reaſon, and righteouſneſſe, workes, and wiſdome; and doe altogether hunger & thirſt after, reioyce and glory in Chriſt, and ſaluation by him.
            
               2. His ſinnes.Secondly, he that will buy the truth, muſt ſell; and ſell all his ſinnes: whereas there are many poore and ſimple people in the world, that haue but a ſmall ſhare, either in the gifts of nature, or good things  of fortune: all men are exceedingly fraught with ſinne; & nothing may more properly  be called a mans owne, then his ſin; a man would thinke

he might wel call ſuch lands and inheritance his owne, as hee can ſhew good euidence for, and is come vnto him by diuers deſcents, and he hath legal writings to ſhew for it, made in ſuch and ſuch a kings raigne, hundreds of yeares agoe. But no man can ſhew ſuch euidence for his lands, as a man may for his ſins: The one can hardly goe ſo far as William the Conqueror, not much aboue 500. yeares: but the other hath his ſin by inheritance from Adam, almoſt 5550 years ſince
            Thirdly, there is nothing doth more beſet a man, or cleaue more faſt to a Heb. 12.5 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  . man, or man can hardly be drawne to leaue, then his ſinne; the leauing of ſome ſins, is as the pulling out of the right

eye, & the cutting off of the right Mat. 18.8.hand: But, righteouſneſſe, & vnrighteouſneſſe cannot dwell 2 Cor. 6.24 together, there is no remedy, hee ſhall neuer haue the Pearle doth not firſt ſell all his ſins. Alas,Obiection. who can doe ſo? Are we not all ſinners? Was there euer any ſo righteous on earth, as ſinned not? I anſwer;Solu. It is one thing to haue ſin dwelling,Senſe. & another to haue it raigning in vs: this is meant of raigning ſinnes: according to which ſence, I will lay downe the doctrine in plaine tearmes, and prooue it; for, in this the very life of religion, and power of godlines doth conſiſt.
            
               Doct.Whoſoeuer will enioy the ſauing truth, with the comforts & benefits of the Goſpell, muſt

haue no raigning ſin; but, for euer renounce and forſake both inward delight, and outward practiſe of euery knowne ſinne. Oh, this is a hard taske: and as it keepeth a great many from market; ſo others that ſeeme faire Chapmen, either to goe away offended; or deceiue themſelues with cunning trickes and ſhifts: Verie few but faile in one point or other of this leſſon: but,Confirma
                     •
                  
                let vs hearken to God's owne precept; Thou ſhalt loue the Lord thy God with all thy ſoule, ſtrength, and 
               Deut. 
               might: Hee that doth ſo, cannot loue any ſin; for, the loue of God, is the fulfilling of theRom. 1 law, whereof ſin is the 1 Ioh. 3 tranſgreſſion. S. Paul biddeth all Chriſtians to glorifie God in their ſouls,

and in their Cor. 6. vlt.
                bodies; & to clenſe themſelues from all filthineſſe of the fleſh, and of the Cor. 7.1. ſpirit. And what hee commandeth, hee elſewhere praieth for; The very God of peace ſanctifie you throughout: and I pray God that your ſoule, and ſpirit, and body may be kept blameleſſe, vnto the comming of our Lord Ieſus 
               Theſ. 5.23. 
               Chriſt. S. Iames alſo biddeth all Chriſtians, Cleanſe their hands, and purge their 
               
                  
                     ••
                  m. 4.8. 
               hearts. Yea, euery page in holy writ is ful of ſuch precepts, though not ſuch full precepts. As, Let your light ſhine before 
               
                  
                     •
                  at. 5.16. 
               men. Let not ſin raigne in your mortall 
               
                  
                     •
                  om. 6.12 
               bodies: Let your conuerſation be ſuch as becommeth the
               
                  
                     •
                  hilip. 
                     •
                  .27. 
               Goſpell. The Grace of God, which bringeth ſaluation to all men, hath appeared, and

teacheth vs to denye all vngodlineſſe, and worldly Luſts, and to liue righteouſly, godly, and ſoberly in this preſent 
               Tit. 2.1 
               world. Be yee holy in all manner of 
               1 Pet. 1. 
               conuerſation. Yea, what is true Repentance, but the conuerſion of the whole man, from all ſinne, vnto GOD? He felleth all his ſinnes.
            Such a ſale holy Dauid made,Example
who had reſpect to all Pſal 119 God's commandements; reſtrained his feet from euery euill way, and vtterly abhorred all falſe Pſal 119.104. waies: And Ioſiah turned to the Lord, with all his heart, & all his ſoule according to all the commandements of 2 King 25. God. And Zacharie and Elizabeth walked in all the commandements and ordinances of God, without Lu. 1.6 rebuke.

               Zacheus, hauing found the Pearl, ſold all his ſinnes, hee ſtood and ſaid; Lord, the halfe of my goods I giue to the poore, and if I haue taken anything from any man, by falſe accuſation, I reſtore it 
               Luk. 19.8. 
               foure-fold. Marie, who had beene a notorious and infamous ſinner, hauing found this Pearle, ſhee ſold all her ſinnes, both for delight and practiſe, vtterly forſooke, and deteſted her former, ſinful, & vnchaſt life; her eies, which had beene full of adultery, became as riuers of teares to waſh Chriſts feete; her haire, which doubtleſs had beene plaited, and laide abroad, an entiſement to ſin, was made a to well to wipe his feete; her face, which had beene impudent, was filled with ſhamefaſtneſſe,

and modeſty, ſhe came behinde Luk. 7. Chriſt: The poore Theefe, finding this Pearl on the Croſſe, how did he ſell all? What a change was there wrought? that little time he had to liue, how well and godly did hee ſpend it, in rebukes, confeſsions, and praiers Luk. 23.? The Iaylor, who doubtleſſe had beene the inſtrument of cruelty in puniſhing the Apoſtles, hauing found this Pearle, hee ſold all his ſinnes, brought them forth of priſon, waſhed their ſtripes, ſet meat before them, and reioyced, that hee & his houſhould beleeued in Act. 16 God. Yea, ſuch as had vſed curious arts, finding this pearl, ſold all their ſins, and in deteſtation thereof burnt their bookes, though worth fifty

thouſand peeces of 
                  
                     •
                  ct. 19.19 ſiluer.
            Oh, theſe were Merchants, and made an happie market indeede! Yea, true repentance worketh ſuch ſhame and Dan. 9 7. confuſion; ſuch zeale, indignation, and Cor. 7.11. reuenge; ſuch beating on the breaſt, with the Luk 18.13. Publican; ſuch ſmiting on the thigh, with 
                  
                     •
                  erom, 1.19 the Prophet; ſuch a change, that their old companions take notice thereof, that they will no longer run into the ſame exceſſe of riot with Pet. 4.4 them. But no maruell; for they haue ſold all their ſinnes, & are become new Cor. 5.17 Creatures. So muſt all doe that will buy the Pearle.
            
               
                  
                     ••
                  plication.But now, alas, how fearefull will the condition of many bee found, if we make application?

Many ſeek for this goodly Pearl ſeeme very deſirous to haue it, commend it, and the ſellers of it; but, will not ſell all they haue. They come to the Church, heare the word diligently, reſpect the Miniſters of the Goſpel reuerently, cheapen faire, and ſtand at offer, and proffer; but they would haue the Pearle, and their ſinnes too; they will by no meanes bee drawne to ſell all them. If you doe remember, there were foure things laid downe in the Doctrine. Firſt, they doe ſell. Secondly, all ſinnes. Thirdly, in regard of inward delight, and outward practiſe. Fourthly, for euer.
            Againſt which,Examination foure ſorts of Chapmen doe offend, who (if they reforme not) ſhall neuer

enioy the Pearle.
            
               Sorte.Firſt, are ſuch as leaue one ſin, and take vp another; and commonly, that they take, is worſe then that they left; ſo, ſome leaue prodigality, and become couetous: luke-warme Proteſtants, become Idolatrous Papiſts: ſome ſuperſtitious, become prophain: and many Atheiſts, turne Heretikes▪ In a word; a great many thinke, they haue made a faire market, when they conſider what they haue beene, but neuer conſider, what they are: what they haue loſt, but not what they haue taken vp; wheras in truth, they haue only made an exchang, and that for the worſe; whereas my Text ſaith; They muſt ſell and deliuer ſeiſon.
            
               Another ſort there is,
                  
                     •
                   Sort. that would ſell, ſome, yea, many, but not all their ſinnes: ſuch a Chapman was Herod, hee did many things, but notMar. 6. 2 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  . all, his heart was ſtill on Herodias; he had not gone ſo far as Dauid, to haue reſpect to all Pſal. 119.
                     •
                  
                Gods commandements; Thou ſhalt not commit adultery, was caſt behind his Pſal. 50.
                     •
                  
                backe, hee could not abide to heare of Luk. 3.15 that: the young man ſuch another, hee offer'd faire, left but one Mat. 19. thing, but would not part with that, but fell off, and miſt the happie bargaine.Applicatio
            
            Alas, this is the wofull condition of many, they will part with ſome ſinnes, yea, not ſticke to part with many, but retaine ſome one ſingular and beloued ſinne,

they will pare fingers and toes to the quicke; yea, launce ſome part till the blood guſh out; but the right eie will not out, the right hand will not Mat. 5.29. off. Such Cuſtomers the Deuill liketh well enough, he careth not how many ſins we part with, ſo hee hold vs faſt but by one; hee knoweth well, that one raigning ſinne ouerthroweth all religion. One would thinke it but a ſmal ſinne, the ſinne of the tongue; yet S. Iames ſaith, If any man ſeeme religious, and refraine not his tongue, this mans religion is 
               Iam. 1. penul.
                
               vaine.
            
            
               Vſe. 
                     •
                  xhortation.Oh, remember this Text, hee that will haue this Pearle, muſt make a full ſale of all. To retaine a part, is not to ſell, but with Ananias
               
to Act. 5.3. diſſemble. He that keepeth ſinne, in any part, looſeth Grace, in whole. To loath ſome ſinne, and loue other, is but halting. One Colloquintida ſpilt the whole meſſe of 2 King. 4.pottage. Is not a ſhip ſuncke by one leake; a beſiedged Citie loſt, by one breach; a bird caught in the ſnare, by one foot, as well as the whole body? a man killed by one diſeaſe? Hee is no good Chapman in God's ſhop, that doth not, with Dauid, Vtterly abhorre all falſe waies; yea, thoſe eſpecially, wherein hee hath ſometime walked with greateſt delight.
            Oh, let vs remember the Preface which Moſes ſetteth before the Law; God ſpake (All) theſe words and ſaide; Hee ſpake not the firſt

and ſecond, no, nor all the commandements of the firſt Table onely, and there left, but he ſpake All; gaue as great a charge to keep euery one, as any one: And S. Iames ſaith; He that breaketh one, is guiltie of 
               Iames 2.10. 
               all. He, that wittingly, and willingly tranſgreſſeth any one, will (if occaſion ſerue) breake euery one: wee ſee that in Herod, though he did many things, yet he made no conſcience to breake the ſeauenth command; he, hauing occaſion, made no conſcience of the third, but ſware to a wanton Dancer to giue what ſhee ſhould aske, though to the halfe of his kingdome: yea, made no conſcience of the ſixt command, but moſt cruelly, for his faithfull dealing,

perſecuted to the death Iohn the Baptiſt, A greater then whom was not borne of
               Mat. 11.11. 
               women
               ▪ ſo dangerous a thing it is, to liue in any knowne ſinne; though a man part with neuer ſo many, yet that one remayning ſinne will (as occaſion ſerueth) bring all the reſt againe; wherfore be ſure ye make a thorough ſale, ſell all your ſins, be faithfull with Moſes, and leaue not an hoofe behinde, Exodus 10.26.
            A third ſort of Chapmen there are, that ſell, and all,3 Sort. in regard of outward and cuſtomable practiſe; in the meane time, there is a ſecret inward pleaſure and delight; oh, there is ſtill a good wil borne to ſuch and ſuch a ſin, if ability, time, and occaſions did

ſerue: the heart wil not ſeale and confirme the bargaine and ſale, but doth rather grudge at it, and ſeeke to picke holes in the euidence▪ but ſuch as will buy the Pearle, muſt be ſure the heart ſell all; for, if luſt and delight raign in the heart, the ſale is nought: as Dauid ſaith; If I regard iniquitie in my heart, God will not heare 
               Pſal 66.18. Obiect. 
               mee.
            
            Oh Lord, will ſome ſay; Who can make ſuch a ſale? Who can ſay;Prou. 20. Solution. 
               Mine heart is cleane? I anſwer, That, as the ſale of all ſinne, doth not import a not ſinning at all, (for, if none but ſuch, then none ſhould buy the Pearle) but not an habituall & cuſtomable ſinning which the Scriptures call; A committing of 
               Ioh. 8.34. 
               ſinne
               ▪ ſo neither doth

this cleanſing of the heart imports an vtter freedom from ſinfull luſts, motions, and deſires, but, a diſlyking, reſiſting, and bewailing of them with the Apoſtle, Oh, wretched man that I 
               Rom. 7. nult.
                
               am! So that if thy ſoule and conſcience can truely witneſſe, there is nothing more grieuous, irkeſome and diſpleaſing vnto thee, then the corruptions of thine heart, which, as they doe appeare▪ thou doſt checke, ſnub, and ſuppreſſe, the ſale is good, and thou ſhalt haue the Pearle.
            A fourth and laſt ſort there are,4 Sort. who ſell all, both for outward practiſe, and inward delight, but not for euer; like Lot's wife, they looke backe Gen. 19.
                     ••
                  
                againe; with Demas, they returne to the world againe

               2. Tim. 4.10.; and, hauing once eſcaped the filthineſſe of the world, yet come to be entangled againe, and are like the Dog, returning to his vomite; and the waſhen Sowe, to wallowing in the mire 2 Pet. 2.20. againe: the conſideration whereof maketh good what I ſaid before; that, of many Chapmen, few buy this Pearle, becauſe few make a perfect (All) of their ſinnes, for ſuch an one ſelleth All, both for outward practiſe, and inward delight, for euer: and yet the bargaine is not made, there is a further ſale yet to be made, viz.
            
            
               All his ſub
                  
                     •••
                  nce.He that will buy this Pearle, muſt ſell all his ſubſtance, and all his worldly goods, and temporall eſtate he hath here.
            Sometimes this Pearle is ſo

deare, as it will coſt all that a man hath; his houſes, lands, goods, honour, peace, libertie, and life; as in the daies of the perſecuting Emperors, and Princes, when goods, libertie, and all were confiſcated, and they cried; Chriſtianos ad Leones. So, truth was deare in this Land,Examples in the daies of Queene Marie; there was a great famine, in her daies, of corne, and they were glad to make breade of Oke cornes (ſaith the Hiſtory) but, the word of God was dearer, and the Pearle of truth more precious, ſo as many holy Martyrs ſold all they had to buy it. Such good chapmen were the Chriſt▪ an Hebrews, who ſuffered with ioy the ſpoile of their Heb. 1
                     •
                  
                goods. and thoſe of whom the ſame Apoſtle

alſo ſpeaketh, who for the Goſpel, and a good conſcience, were tryed with cruell mockings and ſcornings, bonds and impriſonment, they were ſtoned and ſawen aſunder, tempted and ſlaine with the ſword, wandred about in Sheepe-skinnes, and Goat-skins, being deſtitute, afflicted, and tormented; they wandred in deſerts, and mountaines, & in dens Heb. 11.37. 
                     〈◊〉
                   2.45. &c. And ſuch chapmen were the beleuers in the primitiue Church, who ſold their poſſeſsions, and goods, and pauned them to all men, as they had neede. Such a Chapman was S. Paul, who profeſsed, he was not moued to know, that bonds and afflictions did abide him; yea, he did not count his life deare, that

he might finiſh his courſe vvith Act. 20 ioy. And thus rebuked ſuch, as vvith teares beſought him, not to goe vp to Ieruſalem, What mean you to weepe, and to breake mine heart, for, I am readie, not to bee bound onely, but alſo to dye at Ieruſalem, for the name of the Lord 
               Act. 21. 
               Ieſus. Such a franke Chapman was Moſes, who refuſed to bee called the ſonne of Pharaoh's Daughter, and choſe rather to ſuffer afflictions with the people of God, then to enioy the pleaſures of ſin for a Heb 
                     〈…〉
                  
                ſeaſon. Thus you ſee, the Pearle hath bin, and may bee ſo deare, that a man muſt indeed ſel all that he hath in this world, to buy it.
            But, bleſſed be God, in theſe happie daies, this Pearle is cheap;Applicatio
                     •
                  
               
               
wee may buy it at an eaſie rate: now, if euer wee may ſay with the Prophet; Come buy without 
               
                  
                     ••
                  a. 55.1. 
               money: Come, take paines to fetch it, and haue it; you neede not ſell all, nor any thing you haue for it, but keepe it, and all you haue: yea, many by this Pearle, haue beene enriched, and made happie in the world, many a man preferred to great dignity, honour, office, authority, wealth, in Church & Common-wealth, for his profeſsion of Religion and godlineſſe. Oh happy time! But, let me tell you; this Pearle neuer was, is, nor ſhall be cheaper, but he that will buy it, muſt in his affection, ſell all that euer he hath. And God accepteth of affection for action, as God accepted

the full purpoſe and reſolution of Abraham, to ſacrifice his Sonne, as if he had Gen. 22. done it.
            Oh, examine your ſoules,Examinatio
                     •
                  
                what is it you doe chiefly minde? Are your praires, & that in your beds by night, powred out vnto God with ſighs and teares, when no eye ſeeth, no eare heareth you, for the preſeruation of the Goſpell, and truth of God to you and yours? Doe you eſteeme it as the greateſt bleſsing in this world, and ſo, as in compariſon of it, you eſteeme the whole world, with all the pleaſures, profits, honor, and happineſſe thereof, as moſt vile, baſe, and contemptible; and thoſe many good things, which with it you enioy, and they are

deare vnto you, yet, for it you would 
                  •
               ate and become prodigall of. Or, at leaſt, art thou grieued and ſorrie in thy ſoule, that thou diſcerneſt weakeneſſe, and fearefulneſſe, and want of ſuch reſolution; and doſt thou vnfainedly pray to God, to giue thee ſuch loue, zeale, and courage. Oh, then, bee of good comfort, thou haſt made a good market, thou haſt gotten the Pearle, and the Deuill ſhall not bee able to rob thee of it. But, if thou beareſt a faire face, makeſt profeſsion of much loue to the Goſpell, in times of peace, and ſo long as it may ſtand with thine honor, and wealth; but, God knoweth, thou mindeſt earthly things, thou loueſt this world; if times of tryall

ſhould come, thou wilt ſhew thy ſelfe to be but an Huckſter, a Broker, a Mounte banke, and Quack-ſaluer.
            Oh, then, ſee there bee truth and ſincerity in the heart,Exhortation reunite your languiſhing, drooping, and dying zeal to the Goſpell; let your neuer contenting preferments; your neuer ſatisfying pleaſures; your neuer filling profits; your momentany, and euer dying liues, bee eſteemed as dung, in compariſon of the euerlaſting truth of God for the ſaluation of your ſoules.
            Oh,Argument
                     •
                  
                that men knew how inualuable the truth of God is; one iot thereof more worth then heauen & earth! Oh, that men knew how happie they are that haue it!

and how rich, though neuer ſo poore in the world, Reuel. 2.9. Happie is the man that findeth wiſdome, and getteth vnderſtanding, Prou. 3.13. And how poore, and miſerable, & wretched they are that want it, though knowing no end of their worldly wealth? and ſo decked with Pearles, that they gliſter like the Sunne, and dazle mens eies to looke vpon them. Oh, that yee knew this acceptable time, and that God may offer this Pearle to others: Oh, then would you become franke Chapmen, and ſell all yee haue to buy it.
            
               
                  
                     •
                  rouocation.And will you not doe ſo before Market be done, and Shop-windowes ſhut vp? Looke vpon the Idolater, he is a franke Chapman;

he will not ſticke to ſell all hee hath, to ſatiſfie his fleſhly minde (for ſo S. Paul ſaith; Idolatrie is a worke of the 
               Gal. 5.20 
               fleſh,) When the Childrē of Iſrael were ſo earneſt with Aaron, to make them a God; to coole their deſire, and preuent it (as ſome of the Fathers conſtrue it) hee bad them bring, not ordinary gold,Difficilia pre cepil: vt iſto modo, ab illa intentione reuocaret. Aug quaeſt. 141. 
                  
                     •
                   Exod. in wedge or coyne, but Rings, yea, their golden Eare-rings, that were in the eares of their wiues and children; but, did they ſtick at that? No, (ſaith the Text) They did breake them off, and bring 
               Exod. 32. 
               them. An Idolater thinketh nothing too deare for his Idol. Looke vpon the Epicure, he will ſpend all hee hath for his belly. Look vpon the proud perſon, he,

or ſhee, will ſpend all they haue for their backes; to bee clothed gorgeouſly, and phantaſtically. Theſe are frank chapmen indeed, and neuer ſticke at the price. What, ſhall the Idolater ſell all he hath for his Leuit. 17.7. 2 Cron. 11.15 Ezech. 22.3 Diuells, & dunghill gods (as the Scriptures diſgracefully call Idols.) Shall the Epicure ſell all he hath, for the fat and ſweat, to ſacrifice to his belly, his Philip. 3.19 god, which remaineth there but a while, and is purged into the Mat. 15.17. draught. Shall the proud perſon ſell all hee hath for glorious colours, loſt ſometimes with ſhining of the Sunne, or a ſhower of raine; or, for fine apparell, which vſed, is quickly worne to rags; or, layde vp, is eaten of Moths, and ſhall we pinch

to ſell all wee haue to buy the truth of God, for the eternall ſaluation of our ſoules? Shall prodigall ſinners for vanity, errour, falſhood, ſell themſelues, their ſtates, bodyes, ſoules and all? and vvee pinch at the leaſt price, for the eternall verity of God? God forbid; then moſt vnhappie we, that euer it vvas offred vnto vs.
            Oh England,Concluſion. novv this pearle is offred vnto thee, take heed thou foreſloweſt not the Market, it is more worth then mountaines of Indian gold; if God in iuſtice take it away, if euery ſhowre of raine, were a ſhower of gold; and euery ſtone in the Land, as precious as the Rubie, Margarite, Topaz, or Carbuncle; or any other, by Gods appointment, ſet in the

high Prieſts Exod. 28.17. Breſt-plate, thou wilt be poore & beggerly; herein lyeth thy true wealth, for which thou art ſo renowned through the Chriſtian, & heathen world. Oh, buy this Pearle, and weare it; vveare it in thine eare, heare the Word diligently, and reuerently, vveare it in thy forehead, be zealous in the profeſsion of the truth; weare it in thy boſom ſincerely, beleeue and loue the truth; weare it on thy fingers, obey and practiſe it in life and conuerſation; be thou a righteous Nation, keeping the truth,Eſay 26.2. and the GOD of truth will keep thee. AMEN.
            FINIS.
            
         
      
   