
      
         
            
            
            DAVIDS
Paſtorall Poeme:
OR
Sheepeheards Song.
            
            SEVEN SERmons,
on the 23. Pſalme
of Dauid, whereof the last
was preached at Aſhford in
Kent, the day whereon our
gracious King was there
proclaimed.
            By THOMAS IACKSON Preacher of
Gods word at Wie in Kent.
            
            LONDON,
Printed by Thomas Purfoot, and are
to bee ſold by Edmund Weauer at his
ſhop at the great North doore
of Paules Church.
1603.
         
         
            
            
            To the right worſhipful
Robert Honnywood Eſquire
of Hoggeſdon neare London,
and to the vertuous and zealous Gentlewoman
Elizabeth Honnywood his wife, my
Christian deare friends in the Lord, Thomas
Iackſon Preacher of Chriſtes Goſpell, wiſheth
an happie increaſe of all spirituall graces, with
health and proſperitie in this life, and
eternall happineſſe in the
life to come.
            
               SIr, it hath pleaſed
God, that
for ſome certaine
yeares,
there hath bin
a Lecture holden
by fiue others
of my reuerend
brethrē,
and my ſelfe, euerie
Saturday, being the Market day at
Aſhford in Kent, where wee haue a worſhipfull
and Chriſtian auditorie, where (as

my turne came about) I haue handled diuerſe
portions of Scripture, and now laſtly,
in ſeuen Sermons, gone ouer the 23.
Pſalme of Dauid; and by Gods prouidence
it ſo came to paſſe, that my courſe
was to teach on Saturday the 26. of
March, 1603. for which I had alſo prepared
my ſelfe; but hauing certaine intelligence
ouer night, both of the death
of her Maieſtie, and alſo that the high and
mightie Prince, Iames, was proclaimed
for our king, with generall applauſe in
London, (whom God in mercy long preſerue.)
The conſideration of theſe ſudden
and great accidents, and alſo hearing
what a great auditorie there would
be,, both of Knights and Gentlemen, to
proclaime the king there, and alſo of others,
deſirous to heare and ſee, did ſomewhat
aſtoniſh me. But cōſidering firſt, gods
merciful dealing towards this land in this
euill day, which wee haue ſo long feared,
making our comfort ſuddenly to appeare,
as a flaſh of lightning, which breaketh out
of a darke cloude, and ſecondly his prouidence
towards me, who calling mee on
the ſudden, to ſo great and waightie a dutie,
yet eaſed me of halfe the paines by fitting

it ſo, as my ordinarie text and premeditations
(with ſome ſmall chaunge of
phraſes or ſtile) did better agree with
the preſent occaſion, then many others
which might haue beene purpoſely and
curiouſly choſen, I was much encouraged,
and by Gods mercie (to the comfort of
my ſelfe and others) diſcharged that dutie
(his name for euer bee praiſed, who is
alwayes at the right hand of his vnworthie
ſeruants, to helpe them in time of
neede) ſince which time, I haue beene very
earneſtly ſolicited by diuerſe worſhipfull
and Chriſtian good friends, to publiſh
thoſe my Lectures in print, that the
benefite thereof redounding vnto many;
by many, thankes might bee giuen vnto
God; whoſe requeſt for a time, I verie reſolutely
gainſayd, as meeting with many
and thoſe verie waightie diſcouragements:Solet acceptior eſſe ſermo viuus, quam ſcriptus. Ber. epi. 66.
firſt the great difference betwixt
preaching and reading, euen the ſame
matter, whereof one ſaith verie well, The
liuely voyce is more acceptable, than written
wordes.
               Habet neſcio quid latentis 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , viua vox. And another ſaith: Liuely voice
hath a kinde of ſecret force, and powrefull
ſound: And Aſchines when he had read
the oration which Demoſthenes had made

againſt him, and perceiued the people to
wonder at the excellencie of it, he anſwered:
What would you haue thought, if you
had heard him pronounce it himſelfe?
               Quid ſi ipſum audiſſetis ſua verba reſonantem. And
therefore I was loath to chaunge my
tongue into a penne, and laying aſide the
geſture and countenance of a liuing man,
to burie my ſelfe in a dead letter, of farre
leſſe effectuall perſwaſion. Secondly, the
wiſe Preacher hath long ſince ſaid, There
is none end of making of bookes, and much
reading is a wearines of the fleſh. Eccleſ. 12.
12. which is moſt true in this bookiſh
age, wherein as one ſaith, It would require
a mans whole life,
               Vix tota vita indices. 
               but to read ouer the titles
or inſcriptions: for now is the old Poets
ſaying verified,Scribimus indocti doctique Poemata paſſim 
               Learned and vnlearned, euerie
one ſetteth pen to Paper: And hereby
it commeth to paſſe, that the world is
ouerladen, and the Preſſes oppreſſed
with an innumerable companie of friuolous
Pamphlets, the fruits of idle braines,
ſauouring of nothing but vngodlineſſe,
and carnall vanitie, and tend to none other
end but the nouriſhment of all maner
vice and prophaneſſe; oh that there
were amongſt vs, ſome zealous Epheſians,
that bookes of ſo great vanitie might

be burned vp: Acts. 19, 29. Yea, there are
many verie excellent Bookes, Treatiſes,
Sermons, and Catechiſmes, but if there
wanted any, there are many, both in regard
of their abilitie, and leaſure, farre fitter
to employ themſelues this way then
my ſelfe. Thirdly, I feared, both the graue
and wiſe cenſure of the godly learned diuines,
to whom my ſpirit is ſubiect. And
alſo the curious reprehenſions of thoſe
Momi, and malignant ſiniſter ſpirits, who
ſay they would haue nothing printed, (if
diuinitie,) but that which wadeth into the
depth thereof, and containeth the marrow
and quinteſſence of learning, ſuch as
doe profoundly handle deepe poynts, and
ſubtill quiddities of controuerſies, publiſhing
that which was neuer heard or
knowne before. And (if humanitie) then
nothing, but that which is excellent, for
wit; ſingular for learning; rare for knowledge;
and polliſhed with all the ornaments
of eloquence; but in truth there
can be nothing ſo well, learnedly, or godly
done in either, but theſe men (as it were
pining away with enuie at other mens
good) doe either bitterly backebite, reproachfully
ſlaunder, vndeſeruedly reproue,

or maliciouſly defame. What is it
then to publiſh any thing in print, but for
a man to make himſelfe a common byword,
a But for euery man to ſhoot his
arrow at, euen bitter words, yea to offer
himſelfe to bee ſtung and torne, with
the ſharpe and venemous teeth and
tongue of euerie reproachfull ſlaunderer.
            Laſtly, it is no ſmall diſcouragement,
to conſider the vanitie of Readers in theſe
dayes (which is not the leaſt cauſe of ſo
many idle and vaine bookes) who as if
they were poſſeſſed with the Athenian
humour,Poſcimus indocti doctique. to delight in nothing but either
to tell,Act. 17. 21 Quid noui.
                or heare ſome newes: the firſt queſtion
at euery Stacioners ſhoppe is, what
new thing? and if it ſmell of the preſſe,
and haue a goodly title (be the matter neuer
ſo baſe and vnprofitable) it is a booke
for the nonce; but be it neuer ſo good,
if once the Calender be chaunged, that it
beare the date of the former yeare, it is
neuer enquired after, it may ſerue for couers
to euerie immodeſt Poeme, girding
Satyre, or ridiculous fable: and thus moſt
men eſteem of vaine books, more then of
thoſe that are profitable, but none almoſt

eſteeme of the beſt, but as men doe of a
flower, whileſt it is newly gathered, but
afterwards it is throwne in the window
corner,M. Dearing in his Preface to his Catechiſme. and regarded no more; this vanitie
a learned and zealous Diuine, long
ſince lamented; and ſurely it ſtill encreaſeth,
and getteth ground, whereby many
of Gods ſeruants, (moſt dyſirous euery
way, that God hath enabled them to doe
good to his Church) are mightily diſcouraged
from labouring in this kind: diſgrace,
pouertie, contempt and iniurie, being
all the thankes, which many receyue
for their paines, that if there were not other
farre greater conſideration, whereby
theſe former are deuoured, and darkened
as the light of a Candle by the Sunne at
noone day; O Lord, how many excellent
bookes are there, which had periſhed amongſt
the Mothes and Wormes, and neuer
ſeene the light of the Sunne. Firſt it is
the greateſt comfort that many a poore
ſoule hath (next vnto preaching, Gods
ſanctified ordinance) that at leiſure-times
they may read or heare, ſome plaine expoſition
or Sermon, penned to their capacitie,
and wherein many take ixceeding
comfort, delight, and profit. There

are many who for their age, ſickeneſſe,
ſoulneſſe of weather, or other vrgent occaſions,
cannot alwayes heare the word,
where, and when they would, who yet
hauing ſome godly mens labours, may by
the reading of the Scriptures, and them,
in ſome meaſure, ſupplie the want of better
meanes, and increaſe in themſelues
the knowledge, feare and loue of God.
Againe, though there be mo books, godly
and learnedly written, then well read
or vſed; yet ſhall the Church of God, ſo
long as it remaineth on earth, ſtand in
need of new Tractates, Comments, Sermons,
and Catechiſmes, as new reaſons,
illuſtrations, and methodes are inuented,
as new doubts, controuerſies, errours or
hereſies do ariſe, and as men do diuerſly
bend themſelues, to the ſtudying and
handling of particular heads of doctrine,
and parts of the word of God.Non omnia poſſumus omnes. Again, all is
not expected at one mans hands, one may
ſleepe, where another waketh, two eies
ſee more then one,Plus oculi, quā oculus. one may be darke and
conciſe, where another is large and plain,
yea in a word, as in diuerſe ſpeakers, ſo in
diuers writers (handling the ſame doctrine
in generall) we ſhall ſee the admirable

varietie of ſpirituall gifts, each one
differing from other, both in method, and
maner, matter, & argument, whereby we
may bee ſtirred vp to prayſe the great
bountie of God, and alſo. his wiſedome
towards his Church, that whome one
booke ſauoureth not, he may yet like the
taſte of another, the doctrine of godlines
beeing as a large field, wherein manie
thouſands may labour, and yet all haue
elbow roome; and like a great fountaine
or Well, whereout euery man may draw
his Bucket-full, and yet neuer ſee bottome.
Laſtly, ſome men, through ſome
reſpect of kindred, friendſhip, acquaintance,
or others, may bee drawne to reade
ſome booke, whereas they would not
haue regarded any other (though farre to
be preferred) on the ſame argument. The
conſideration whereof, hauing the publike
profite of many, and the eternall glorie
of God (as the propounded ſcope and
end of all my labours) before mine eies,
togither with the importunate perſwaſion
of my deare and Chriſtian friendes
in the Lord, haue drawne mee into the
violent current of this time, to caſt my
mite into the Lords treaſurie, in publiſhing

theſe my poore trauelles,At nunc etiam cilius vereor, quā henc. which
long ſince had come abroad, if I could
haue beene ſooner thereunto perſwaded.
I haue not altered any thing of the matter
which was deliuered; or of the method
which I obſerued therein, onely I haue
added the teſtimonies of certaine godly
and reuerend men, whoſe wordes and
ſentences in teaching I reported (in our
owne naturall mothers tongue) but
concealed both names and places, and the
rather I now ſet them downe, becauſe
many (either ſimple deceiued, or maliciouſly
froward) condemne all ſuch for
meerely ignorant and vnlearned, whoſe
Sermons are not ſtuffed full with ſentences
of a ſtrange and vnknowne language,
alas, who knoweth not that any man but
merely qualified with gifts, and taking any
commendable paines in his ſtudy, may
plentifully alledge the teſtimonies of mē,
if they ſaw the ſame warrantable, or profitable
(and not rather hurtful) to the edification
of the Church of God? But I haue
placed them in the margent, as alſo the
teſtimonies of Scripture, becauſe I would
not haue the ſimple reader any way interrupted,
he may at his pleaſure, hauing only

the matter, make a pawſe for the examination
of any thing auerred by the teſtimonies alledged.
            As for the matter, to commend it, I need
not, for if it be the purePſ. 12. 6. Reu. 3. 18. Pſa. 19. 10. word of GOD,
(as I perſwade my ſelfe it is) then it is
more precious, than fined gold, ſweeter
than honie, and cleerer than the light, if it
bee as comfortable in reading, as thoſe
who haue enforced me to publiſh it, (as
they ſaid) found it in preaching, I doubt
not, but God thereby ſhall bee glorified,
his Saints comforted, and my ſoule reioyced,
in the day of the Lord Ieſus; but as
for the manner; the ſtile may ſeem harſh
and vnpleaſant, handling a Shepheards
ſong, after a Shepheardly and rude manner,
for (as your Worſhips know) my maner
is not at any time, to ſtudie for words,
but for matter, which ſo I deliuer in ſuch
words, as I may be vnderſtood of the ſimpleſt
hearer, I care for no more; mine only
deſire, being to inſtruct Gods people,
with the plaine euidencie of the ſpirit, and
of power. And therefore as in the deliuering;
ſo alſo in the penning and ſetting
downe thereof, I haue neither vſed curioſitie
of words; eloquence of ſpeech; gloouſneſſe

of ſtile, nor of obſcuritie, and
darkeneſſe of matter, to declare a deepe
profoundneſſe, but haue endeauoured in
all ſimplicitie of ſpirit, ſinceritie of heart,
plaineſſe of phraſe, and ſenſible maner, to
deliuer the only truth, to the Saints of god.
            It is the firſt thing of mine, that euer
paſſed the Preſſe, and therefore great reaſon,
that I ſhould dedicate it, to the firſt
friends, that euer I had in this Countrey,
who firſt wonne mine affection by courteſie,
and ſince many waies confirmed it,
by deſert; it was long ſince planted, and
being plentifully watered,Amor verus, non nouit finem. it ſtill groweth,
and ſhall, till in the next life it be perfected.
Vnder your roofe I found a happie
reſt, when I left your brothers houſe, a
Gentleman truely religious,Mr. vvoodward of Buckingham-ſhire. and worſhipfull,
by whoſe louing Sonnes meanes, I
was firſt drawne into theſe Southerne
parts: by your Chriſtian example, and religious
exerciſes in your familie, I was awakened
forth of that ſpirituall ſlumber,
into which I fell, ſo ſoone as I left the
Vniuerſitie,Mr. Perkins. and the ordinarie hearing of
a moſt zealous man of God, who ſpent
himſelfe as the lampe, to giue light to the
Church, whoſe ſoule is now at reſt with

God, and who firſt turned my feet towards
Gods Kingdome. Your Worſhips
were my firſt encouragement to the ſtudy
of Diuinitie, (and that with no ſmall hindrance
to your childrens proceeding in
learning, whom I taught:) by your meanes
did I firſt enter into this office, and was
called vnto this place, where I do now exerciſe,
and from you and yours, haue I receiued
manifold encouragements in my
miniſtrie, the Lord regiſter them in his
Booke, that they may be remembred, and
come in your good accounts, at the glorious
day of his ſonne, and be requited ſeauen-fold
into your boſomes; wherefore
(hauing none other thing) that I may not
be vnthankfull,In gratum ſi dixeris, omnia dixeric. which of all other ſinnes
(euen amongſt the heathen) hath euer
been reputed moſt vile, & odious; whatſoeuer
reſpects others haue, onely to avoide
the note of ingratitude, doe I prefume
to dedicate to your Worſhips, theſe
firſt fruits of my labours in this kind; that
as you heard the firſt Sermon that euer
I preached, your Sonne, was the firſt
child that euer I baptiſed, & your daughter,
the firſt that euer I maried, ſo you
would vouchſafe to patronize theſe few

Sermons, being the firſt that euer I publiſhed:
let then this poore Infant, which
knoweth not whither to flie, but vnto
you (as you haue giuen cōfort vnto his Father)
find ſome ſhadow vnder your roofe,
till the ſtormes of virulent tongues bee ouerpaſt.
Accept of this ſmall teſtimonie of
my great good will, according to your
wonted curteſie; and ſurely, if I ſhall heare
that it is fauourably entertained of you,
and curteouſly accepted of the brethren,
I ſhall not onely greatly reioyce, but alſo
ſhall hereby be ſtirred vp, and pricked forward
to the publiſhing hereafter of other
things, with more time, better aduice, exacter
diligence, mature deliberation, and
ſounder iudgement,Non in principiis perficta quaeruntur, ſed de paruis principiis, ad ea quae perfecta ſunt perueniture. Ambroſ. thorough the grace
of God, increaſing his guifts in me. The
Lord for his mercies ſake, graunt that
theſe my firſt labours, may bee accepted
of the Saints, and tend to the glorie of
God. And I hartely beſeech the Lord
God of all grace, the Fountaine of all
goodneſſe, and giuer of all ſpirituall bleſſings
both for your ſelues, your ſonnes
daughters, brethren, ſiſters, and kinsfolks,
and your whole religious Stocke, and Familie,
and ſpecially for that reuerent religious

Matron, your deere mother, whom
God hath many waies honoured, and after
many great ſtorms, ſweetly refreſhed,
to her euerlaſting conſolation in Chriſt,
to endue all your foules, with heauenly
knowledge, faith, zeale, and loue to God
his truth, and Saints, and beſtowed great
worldly bleſſings of wealth, wiſedome,
and reputatation: ſo it would pleaſe him
to preferue and keepe you all, in pure Religion,
perfect peace, feruent loue, vnfayned
faith, reuerent feare, and true holyneſſe,
all the daies of your liues, that the
courſe of this miſerable wretchedneſſe finiſhed,
you may receiue the happie fruit,
of the glorious Goſpell, with all the
Saints, and bee crowned with immortall
glorie, in his purchaſed Kingdome, wherevnto
he ſpeedily bring vs, for his mercies
ſake in Chriſt, Amen.
            
               From
Wye, in Kent 
                  the laſt
of September,
1603.
               
               Your Worſhips, in all Chriſtian dutie
to commaund:
THOMAS IACKSON.
            
         
         
            
            
            TO
THE GODLIE DISpoſed
Reader, and ſpecially
to his Countreymen, Kinſfolkes,
and friends, in
Lancaſhire.
            
               GRace, mercie, and peace,
with increaſe of all godlineſſe
and pietie, from God
the Father of all mercie,
thorough the inualluable
merites of Ieſus Christ,
our onely all-ſufficient Redeemer, by the
working of the most mightie, and liuely ſpirit,
the elects comforter, for euer be multiplyed,
Amen. Although it hath pleaſed
God, who hath the ſtarres (euen all the Angels,
or Ministers of the Churches) in his

right hand
               Reu 1. 16, to fixe me in theſe Southerne
parts, to giue light vnto his people
               Mat 5. 14, and
not ſuffer me (according to my hearts deſire)
to faſten the cords of my remoouing Tabernacle
among eſt you, yet no distance of place,
or continuance of time, can alienate or eſtrange
mine affections from you; S. Paule
wiſhed himſelfe accurſed, and ſeperate from
Christ, for the good of them that were his
kinsfolkes, according to the fleſh
               Rom. 9. 3.. And
ſurely, my heart were harder that flint, if I
ſhould not haue speciall affection, to my natiue
ſoyle, where I haue ſo many louing brethren,
and a ſister, deere kinsfolkes, and
faithfull friends: yea, my heartie deſire, and
prayer vnto God, is, that you may come to
the knowledge of the trueth, and be ſaued
               Ro. 10. 1. 2 Tim. 3. 7 2. Pet. 3. 9,
that as nature hath bound vs together, wee
my alſo be tyed in a ſtraiter, and neerer bond
of Religion, being borne againe, after a ſpirituall
birth
               Gal. 4. 19. Iam. 1. 18. 1. Pet. 1. 28 Iohn. 1. 13., ſpeaking all the language of
Canaan
               Eſay 19. 18. For your ſakes therefore, deere
Countreymen, kinsfolkes, and friends, (and
ſpecially ſo many as loue the Lord Ieſus
Chriſt, and his Gospell, dwelling in Bromley,
Colne, Merſden, or thereabouts) haue
I specially beene drawne to the penning of

theſe few Lectures, and to you do I commend
them, as all equitie and reaſon would, that I
ſhould returne the firſt fruits of my labours,
thither, from whence I came, and where I
had my first being and bringing vp; accept
therefore at my hands this poore mite, as a token
and pledge, of one, that loueth you vnfainedly
in the Lord, that whereas, (by the far
diſtance of place, and the great charge committed
vnto me, to bee attended vppon) I am
letted from cōming vnto you, in regard of bodily
preſence, that I might be comforted together
with you, thorough our mutuall faith,
both yours, and mine
               
                  
                     •
                  o. 1. 12.: Yet by this means
the ſame might be in ſome meaſure ſupplyed,
on my behalfe, & I hope you will acknowlede
it, as a flower of your owne Garden, that with
greater delight, you may ſmell vnto it, and
the fruit of your owne field, and euen in that
respect more willingly eat of it, & cheerefully
digeſt it, to the increaſe of that stature,
and ſtrength, whereunto you haue alreadie
attained in Chriſt; Oh what a ioy it was, the
last time that I was amongeſt you, to obſerue
euen a generall, and moſt bleſſed change, that
whereas heretofore, nothing, but blind and
ſuperſtitious deuotion raigned, men, generally

being like old veſſels, which could not bee
ſeaſoned, from retayning the ſent of their
firſt liquor, whereof many dregs remained,
that ſo they might be fit to receiue the pure
liquor of the Goſpell
               Mat. 9. 17.. Nay alas, where
were they that ſhould haue ſeaſoned them?
the word of God, being much more precious,
than in the daies of Elie
               1. Sa. 3. 1., ſcarce one Sermon
within many miles, once a yeere to bee
heard: Now it hath pleaſed God to ſend vnto
you, many most godly and learned Preachers.
Againe, in the people, what a loue
doth there beginne to ſpring towards the trueth?
How cheerefully doe they by great companies
flocke, to the hearing of the word?
with what earnestneſſe doe they thereunto
attend? with what reuerence doe they by the
way, and at home talke and conferre thereof?
how beautifull are the feet of Gods Meſſengers,
that bring glad tidings of peace vnto
them, when they come into the Countrey?
how importunately doe they require to haue
the word of God preached? how diligently
doe they employ, and exerciſe their Children,
and ſeruants in the priuate reading of the
Scriptures? Bibles, being to be found in moſt
mens houſes, whereas heretofore (for the moſt

part) no other Bookes regarded, but ſuch as
nuſled them vp in ſuperſtition, or prohaneſſe,
(wherein I deſire the Lord to forgiue the vanitie
of my youth) yea, in euerie companie;
ſome are found, that are readie in the
Scriptures, and can speake with a grace
of the word of God
               Eph. 4. 29.. Which when I
conſidered, me thought, in you was fulfilled,
that which Christ once ſaid, Lift vp
your eies, and looke vppon the Regions,
for they are white alreadie to the
Harueſt
               Ioh. 4. 35.: yea doubtleſſe, the Harueſt is
verie great, and the Labourers few
               Mat. 9. 37..
            Oh then deere Countrey-men, follow
Christ his counſell, pray the Lord of the
Harueſt to thrust forth labourers into his
Haruest:Mr. Iohn Bradford, Martyr. Nowell, Deane of Paules, London. Dr. VVhitakers, Reg. profeſſ. Cantab. Angliae, lux, Romae, maſtix. that as your ſoyle, hath yeelded
as many glorious lights, and worthy
inſtruments, in the Church, as any other
Countrey in the Realme beſides *, Yea, furniſhed
moſt places of the Land, with men
quallified with exellent gifts, for the worke of
the miniſtry. So it would pleaſe God, either to
raiſe vp amongſt you, or (becauſe a Prophet
is not eſteemed in his countrey
               Mat. 23. 57.) to ſend
ſome from elſewhere, that may be a light vnto
you, to direct your feet out of darkeneſſe,

               and ſhadow of death
               Mat. 4. 16, into the way of
righteouſneſſe and life, by Ieſus Chriſt,
and to this end that hee would mooue the
heart of our gratious King, and all godly
Rulers vnder him, with a tender commiſſeration,
of the lamentable eſtate of ſo good
a people, who haue ſo many yeeres wandred
like ſheep, for want of a Shepheard, and therby
made the more ſubiect to be drawne away,
by the ſubtill and damnable flatteries,
of roaging and vagabond Ieſuites and
prieſts. And heerein I moſt inſtantly entreat
you, in the bowels of Christ, that you
bee not wanting to your ſelues, but with
all care, and conſcience; zeale, and diligence;
ſeeke the meanes whereby you may
be edified to eternall life, whilſt this happie
time of grace and mercie laſteth; that
ſo all of you may haue hope; ſinne, may
bee aboliſhed; idolatrie rooted out, Antichriſt
ouerthrowne, Sathan trodden downe,
Hell confounded, the Gospell increaſe, and
righteouſneſſe flouriſh, to the glorie of God,
and ioy, of our godly King. Oh my deere
Countrey-men, kinsfolkes and friendes,
walke no longer in the ignorant, ſuperstitious,
and ſinfull waies of our fore-fathers,

but turne to the Lord, and declare repentance,
by the fruites thereof, come to the
Lord whilst his armes are ſtretched out to
embrace you, ſeeke him whilst he may be
found, call on him, whilst the time is conuenient,
and forſake all euill, both in Religion,
and conuerſation, ſo ſhall God bee
glorified, your ſoules ſaued, and all that
loue you in the Lord, exceedingly comforted.
For the ſtirring of you vp whereunto,
I am bold to commend this my first trauell
vnto you: vouchſafe therefore, with
a louing mind, to accept my faithfull meaning
towards you, open the Booke, and read
it with a deſire to profite by it, it containeth
not any thing, to delight the vaine eare,
or content the curious mind, but that which
may inſtruct the ignorant, cōfort and ſtrengthen
the weake and feeble conſcience: wherin,
if I can promiſe nothing elſe, yet this one
thing may I aſſure thee, that thou haſt this
whole Pſalme, more amply, & orderly handled,
than (to my knowledge) by any heretofore;
I craue therefore, that if this Booke
ſhall fall into the hands of ſuch, as (either
becauſe they heard theſe Lectures, or are
otherwiſe ſo full of knowledge) can gather

no ſweete, from this withered flower, that
yet they would fauourably let it paſſe, to ſuch
as it is ſent, remembring S. Auguſtins counſaile,
let thoſe that know it alreadie, pardon
me, leaſt I offend them, that know it
not; for it is better, to giue to him that
hath, than to turne away him that hath
notIgnoſcant ſcientes, ne offendantur neſcientes; ſatius eſt enim offerre habenti, quam diſferre non habentem. 2 de Bapt. Cont. Donat. 1.. And if it come into the handes of
ſuch, who take a ſpeciall felicitie, to carpe
at other mens doings, this is mine onely
comfort, that no man euer pleaſed all parties:
and therefore, ſeeking the profit of
many, I contemne the carping reproofe of
ſome, and applying my ſelfe onely to pleaſe
God, and the godly, I waigh not at a
ſtrawe, the cenſure of the wicked. Farewell,
courteous Reader, and if thou findest
any thing comfortable heerein, giue
God his due for it, and as I ſhall pray for
thee, that thy labours herein, and all other
thy godly exerciſes, may bee bleſſed with a
fruitfull increaſe, of all spirituall graces;
ſo I intreat thee, to beare with ſuch eſcapes
and faultes, as ſhall happen in the
printing, (if there bee any) and especially
to helpe me with thy faithfull prayer vnto
God, for the increaſe of his graces in me,

that the Church in Chriſt, may more, and
more bee profited by me.
            
               From Wie
in Kent, the laſt of September,
1603.
               
               Your moſt heartie Wel-willer, and
Seruant to you all for Chriſt.
Thomas Iackſon.
            
         
      
      
         
            
            
            
            
            THE
FIRST SERMON
vpon the 23. Pſalme.
            
               The Lord is my Shepheard, I ſhall
not want.
            
            
               IT ſeemeth, that ſongs,
poems, & verſes were
firſt inuented, for this
end, vz. That mans nature
delighting in muſique,
matters deliuered
in meeter, beeing
without tediouſneſſe the oftner repeated,
might thereby be conſecrated to perpetuall
memorie; and for this cauſe the holy
Ghoſt, condeſcending to our weakneſſe,
hath directed holy men of God, the penners
of the ſacred ſcriptures, to frame many
things, moſt excellent & memorable,

into verſe or meeter, ſo haue we the ſong
of Moſes, declaring the merciful, & miraculous
deliuerance of Gods people out of
Egypt, and the iuſt & powerfull deſtruction
of their enemies in the red ſeaExo. 15.; another,
containing a perticular rehearſall of
Gods benefits, and their ingratitudeDeut. 32.. Alſo
the ſong of Deborah and Baracke, for
the glorious conqueſt, and mightie deliuerance
of the people from the ſlauerie of
Iabin, by ſo vnlooked for an ouerthrow of
Siſerah and his hoaſtIudg. 5.. When little Dauid
ſo victoriouſly triumphed ouer proud Goliah
of the Philiſtims, the women met
Saule the King, and Dauid his ſeruant,
ioyfully, ſinging, and playing vpon their
Timbrels, viols, and other inſtruments, &
thankefully recording as followeth, Saule
hath ſlaine his thouſand, & Dauid his ten
thouſands1. Sa. 18. 7.. Hannah, when God had taken
away her reprochfull barrenneſſe, and
made her honorably fruitfull, ſhe ſung, &
ſaid:1. Sam. 2▪ 1. Mine heart reioyceth in the Lord,
mine horne is exalted in the Lord. When
God had looked vpon the humilitie of the
bleſſed Virgine, and made her the glorious
veſſell of Chriſt his conception, ſhee
gaue glorie vnto God in a ſong, and ſaid,

My ſoule doth magnifie the Lord, and my
ſpirit reioyceth in God my SauiourLuk. 1. 46. So
Zacharie, after the birth of Iohn Baptist his
Sonne, when his mouth was opened, and
tongue looſed, he ſpake, and praiſed God,
prophecying, and ſaying: Bleſſed bee the
lord God of Iſrael, becauſe he hath viſited
and redeemed his peopleLu. 1. 68. Old Father Simeon
embracing the babe Chriſt with his
armes, according to the promiſe of the holy
ghoſt, thankefully breaketh out into this
ſweet ſwan-like ſong. Lord now letteſt
thou thy ſeruant depart in peace, according
to thy wordLu. 2. 28.. And not onely haue
theſe and many others, the Saints of God,
in their proſperitie and flouriſhing eſtate,
hauing receiued many good things; offered
in their ſongs a ſacrifice of praiſe, Euen
the fruits of their lips, cōfeſſing his nameHeb. 13. 15.:
But alſo in their aduerſitie & dolefull conditions,
haue they poured out their ſoules,
in ſongs vnto God; for though S. Iames
ſeeme to oppoſe prayer and ſinging, as ſo
diametrally contrarie, that no man can
pray, ſinging; nor ſing, praying, where he
ſayeth: Is any amongſt you afflicted? let
him pray: is any merrie? let him ſingIa. 5. 13. Yet
ſurely it is moſt euident, that the Apoſtle

therein requireth, firſt that in afflictions,
when we are in diſtreſſe, and extreame anguiſh,
we flye vnto God by prayer, and of
him onely ſeeke releaſe, and comfort; and
when we are in proſperitie, and enioy the
bleſſings of God at our wils, that then we
giue thanks and praiſe vnto God: in our afflictions,
praying, and not deſpairing, blaſpheming,
and ſeeking vnlawfull meanes
of deliuerance with the wicked; and in
our proſperitie, ſinging ſonges of praiſe,
and not vain, light, and fooliſh ballads as
the worldlings doe, and herein conſiſteth
the oppoſition, and not in the former; for
as in proſperity it is lawfull, in feruent praier
to mourne, ſigh, ſob, and lament: ſo alſo
in aduerſitie lamentably, and ſorrowfully
to ſing, as the Apoſtle councelleth, ſaying:
My brethren count it exceeding ioy, when
ye fall into diuers temptationsIames 1. 2. So the
Apoſtles being beaten and ſcourged, went
out of the Councell reioycingAct. 5. 41., and being
ſore beaten, caſt into the inner priſon,
and their feete made faſt in the ſtocks, yet
at midnight they prayed, & ſung Pſalmes
vnto GodAct. 16. 25.. Dauid ſung many pſalmes,
and played thereunto with ſundrie inſtruments,
and yet oftentimes vnder a ſweet

ſound had a wofull and heauie heart; as
when he lamented the deaths of Saul and
Ionathan
               2. S
                     •
                  . 1.. And elſewhere complaineth of
the want of the feeling and aſſurance of
Gods fauour, and remiſſion of ſinnes, and
moſt earneſtly intreateth to haue thoſe
graces renewed againPſa. 4. 6. 51. 120.. And who findeth
not great vſe of ſinging, both in proſperitie,
and aduerſitie? In proſperitie by ſinging
of Pſalmes, our zeale is quickned; fervencie
in prayer, increaſed; and our earneſtneſſe
to perfourme all laudable ſeruice
vnto God, notably ſtirred vp, wherevnto
the example of Eliſha may bee referred,
who yeelding to the requeſt of Iehoſhaphat,
called for a minſtrell, who by his
ſongs to Gods glorie, ſtirred vp the Prophets
heart to prophecie2. Kin. 3. 15.. Alſo in aduerſitie
by ſinging of ſome holy and godly
Pſalme, our heauie and penſiue hearts are
refreſhed, for this cauſe the holy Prophet
Dauid (in the ſorrow and heauineſſe of
his heart) would rebuke his ſoule, ſaying:
Why art thou ſo heauie, oh my ſoule? and
why art thou ſo diſquieted within mePſ. 42. 5.?
And would ſtirre vp himſelfe, and his inſtrument
to play and ſing ſome ioyfull
ſong, awake my tongue, awake violl, and

harpe, I my ſelfe will awake right earlyPſ. 57. 8..
But I wil paſſe ouer theſe things, and come
to intreat only of the Pſalmes of Dauid,
whoſe penners, were many; Arguments,
diuers: and vſes, manifold.
            Firſt,Penners. for the penners, (as I ſayd) they
were many as Aſaphe
               Pſ. 50. 73. 74. 75. 76. 78. &c., for ſo ſome godly
learned, will rather that he was a writer,
than onely a ſinger, to whom they were
committed; and the rather becauſe elſewhere
it may bee gathered, that he made
ſome pſalmes2. Cron. 29. 30.: Some alſo were penned
by Moſes
               Pſa. 90.. But moſt of them by Dauid,
that princely Prophet, and ſweet ſinger
of Iſrael, and thereuppon called the
Pſalmes of Dauid: but whoſoeuer was the
penner, they are all to be receiued with the
like reuerent eſtimation, they being all led
by one and the ſelfe ſame ſpirit, ſo that the
holy Ghoſt may well be ſaid, to be Author
of the whole Booke, for theſe holy
men of God did ſpeake and write, as they
were mooued by the holy Ghoſt2. Pet. 1. 21.; and
ſpecially Dauid witneſſeth of himſelfe, that
the ſpirit of the Lord ſpake by him, and
that his word was in his tongue2. Sa. 23. 2.. And
therefore S. Peter alleaging the teſtimony
of Dauid, vſeth this maner of preface, Thus

hath the holy Ghoſt ſpoken (by the mouth
of Dauid) concerning Iudas, who was
guide vnto then that tooke IeſusAct. 1. 16.
            Secondly,Argument. for the argument of this Book
(as I ſayd) it is diuers, ſome containe confeſſion
of ſinnes, and humiliation before
the Lord, with earneſt and heartie prayer
vnto God, both for repentance, and remiſſion
of ſinnesPſ. 25. 51. Some are wholly ſpent in
commendation of Gods law, with many
intermixt praiers for ſtrength to obſerue
the ſamePſ. 119.. Some deſcribe the wonderfull
power, wiſedome, majeſty, and prouidence
of God, ſhinning in the creation and preſeruation
of all the world, for which all creatures
are exhorted to praiſe the name of
the LordPſa. 8. 18. 104. 147..) Some are penned for a preparation
to ſtir vp the people with feare and
reuerence, to preſent themſelues before
the Lord in their holy conuocations and
aſſemblies, as the Pſalme which beginneth
thus: Oh come let vs ſing vnto the LordPſa. 95..
Some of them lay open the miſeries of
Gods people in their captituitie, and how
hardly they were vſed of their enemiesPſa. 137..
Some of them containe particuler praiers,
for ſupply of ſome particuler wants, either
of bodie or ſoulePſ. 6. 86.. Some containe prayers

of the whole Church for the confuſion of
the enemies thereofPſa. 83.. In a word, many of
them are hiſtoricall, as briefly laying open
Gods dealing towards his people, & their
enemies, both in Egypt, in the wilderneſſe,
and in the land of CanaanPſal. 78. 105. 106. &c.: moſt of them
propheticall, and all of thē didacticall, full
of inſtructiō, both as concerning our faith
in the maine grounds, and Articles of Religion,
& concerning our obedience, whether
of pietie towards god, as hearing, reading,
praying and praiſing; or of loue towards
our neighbour, whether we regard
the inward affections, or outward actions.
            Thirdly,Vſes. & laſtly, the vſes of this Booke
are manifold, for all the holy Scriptures
are written for our learning, that wee
through patience, and comfort thereof,
might haue hopeRom. 15 4.: and as elſewhere he
ſaith; the whole Scripture, is giuen by inſpiration
of God, & is profitable to teach,
to conuince, to correct, & inſtruct in righteouſneſſe
2. Tim. 3. 16. Yet hath this Booke of the
Pſalmes, a certaine ſingular and excellent
difference from the reſt of the Scriptures,
for which the Apoſtle requireth, and there
hath alwaies been ioyned together, a dayly
exerciſe of the word & Pſalmes, ſaying:

Let the word of God dwell plentifully in
you, in all wiſedome, teaching, and admoniſhing
your owne ſelues in pſalmes and
hymnes, and ſpiritual ſongsColoſſ. 3. 16. And ſurely
no maruel that it ſhould be eſteemed at ſo
great price, for it is as a Chriſtians ſtorehouſe
and treaſurie of all good things, it
recordeth the memorable hiſtories of
things paſt, prophecieth and foretelleth
things to come, vnfoldeth hiddē myſteries
vnder pleaſant and familiar Allegories;
herein vertue is cōmended; vice condemned;
and moſt wholeſome rules and lawes
of a Chriſtian life preſcribed: if any man
be preſſed with the burthē of ſinnes, ſcorched
in conſcience with the flaſhes of hel,
thorough the kindling of Gods wrath; if
poſſeſſed with feare of warres, famine, or
death, if loadned with ſickneſſe, want and
penurie, heere is a ſoueraigne ſalue for euery
maladie; heere may the king learne
what he is, and how he ought to gouerne
his people religiouſly; and heere may ſubiects
learne to obey their Rulers peaceably;
the rich man may learne the vanitie of all
things, and the true vſe of his riches; and
heere may the poore man learne contentation
with his eſtate; the heauie hearted

ſhall hence learne where true comfort is to
be found; he that is tempted to euill, the
remedie; and he that is merrie, the true
ioy & the meaſure thereof; yea hence may
the godly man reape great encouragement,
being aſſured that he ſhall find true
peace at the laſt: and heere may the wicked
ones find diſcoragement, and ſpeedily
turne vnto God, knowing that howſoeuer
for a while he may flouriſh like the
greene bay-tree, yet hath god ſet him but
in a ſlipperie place, and he ſhall ſodenly
periſh, & come to a fearefull end. Doubtleſſe,
no man will denie but the Greeke &
Latine poems of Homer, Heſiode, Pindarus,
and others deſerue great praiſe, and
want not their ſinguler vſe: yet for any to
preferre or equall them with this Booke,
were intollerable dotage, and contumelie;
for therein nothing is to be found concerming
the good pleaſure of God towards
his elect in Chriſt, they acknowledge not
his diuinitie, nor eſteeme of his benefits,
without which we are no better than veſſels
of wrath, and firebrands of hell; they
intreat not of faith or iuſtification before
God, wherein a Chriſtians comfort chiefely
conſiſteth; indeed of the duties of the

ſecond table, and honeſt manners they
ſpeake much; but for the firſt table, it is
farre aboue their reach, and therfore therein
they are altogether mute and ſilent, or
groſly erre and bewray their ignorance;
much time they ſpend, & the greateſt part
of their verſes, in decyphering and deploring
the manifold miſeries and calamities
whereunto this life is ſubiect, but the remedie
hereof they know not: howſoeuer
therefore there are ſome things profitable
to bee found in them, and their writings
being garniſhed with eloquency of
words and ſentences, & running in a pleaſant
tune, may much delight and affect
the reader; yet vnto theſe pſalmes onely,
muſt we giue eare and attention, as vnto
the voice of God, as Dauid himſelfe hath
ſaid: Hodie ſi vocem domini audiueritis, To
day if you will heare the voice of God,
harden not your hearts
                  Pſ. 95. 7. Vt memphiticos vales audiret. Ad Architum Tarentinum.
            
            
               Pythagoras, that great Philoſopher, he
went into Egypt, to heare the poetrie at
Memphis. Plato, he left Athens, where he
taught with admiration, and for wiſedome,
knowledge, and eloquence, exceeded
all others, & went into Italie, to heare
that noble Philoſopher Architas at Tarentum;

Apollonius with verie great hazard,
labour and coſt, went to the furtheſt parts
of India, to heare that great Philoſopher
Hierarchas,
               Vt Hierarcham in Throno ſedentem aureo. ſitting in his golden chaire and
diſcourſing of the motions of the heauens,
poſition, ſcituation, and aſpect of the planets
and ſtarres; if theſe men ſpared not
to beſtow ſuch great labor & coſt, neither
feared to expoſe thēſelues to ſuch great
dangers, by ſea and land, onely to attaine
to a further meaſure of knowledge philoſophicall,
wherin though they placed their
Summum bonum, or chiefeſt felicitie: yet he
that knew much,Hoc vnum ſcio, quod nihilſcio. confeſſed, this one thing
I know, that of Chriſt I know nothing;
how ſhall they riſe vp at the day of iudgement
& condemn vs, if hauing ſuch excellent
meanes of knowledge of ſaluation,
and euen at our dores, we doe contemne
them; Wherefore to conclude, if Alexander
the great, ſo highly eſteemed of Homers
Poëms,So
                     •
                  raet. that amongſt the Babiloniſh
ſpoils, there being offered vnto him a moſt
precious casket, wherein the great King
Darius layd his chiefe treaſures; he onely
laid Homers books therin, as his cheefeſt
treaſure:Praecipu
                     •
                   
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  . How much more highly ought
we to eſteeme of this Booke, whereof the

holy Ghoſt himſelfe is the Author, ſo full
of doctrines for inſtruction & conſolatiō,
and to lay it vp not in any cheſt of Cypreſſe,
or other made with hands, and garniſhed
with gold and precious ſtones; but
in the very cloſet of our hearts, as the Apoſtle
counſaileth; Be not drunken with
wine, wherein is exceſſe: but be filled with
the ſpirit, ſpeakinge to your ſelues in
pſalmes, and hymnes, and ſpirituall ſongs,
ſinging and making melodie to the Lord
in your heartsEph. 5. 18. And thus much ſhall ſuffice
to haue ſpoken of the treaſure in generall,
let me now proceed to open & vnfold
this invaluable pearle, which I haue
choſen forth of the ſame, and more particularly
to handle this pſalme, which I purpoſe
by gods gracious aſſiſtance, and your
Chriſtian patience to ſpeake of.
            It ſeemeth by the title or inſcription,Title.
that this Pſalme was penned by King Dauid
himſelfe.Argument. Which Pſalme (becauſe it is
not mixed either with fearefull imprecations,
or ſorrowfull complaints vnto God,
but altogether ioyfull and milde, as proceeding
from a quiet and peaceable ſpirit,
relying with great confidence & aſſurance
on gods prouidence) ſeemeth to haue been

penned, when as after many and great
troubles, he had obtained the peaceable
fruition of his Crowne and Kingdome:
wherein hee doth thankefully acknowledge
Gods great goodneſſe towards him,
and vpon the great experience of former
mercies, gathereth this full aſſurance, that
God by his prouidence will ſtill preſerue
him, to the end, that by his authoritie, he
may maintaine & exerciſe himſelfe in the
pure ſeruice and worſhip of God, & ſo
handleth the ſame Argument, that in many
other pſalmes he dothPſ. 18. 118.
            
            For the Pſalme it ſelfe,Diuiſion. if we view it
well, we ſhall find it to bee verie methodicall,
and therefore that we may the more
orderly and profitably goe ouer it: we are
to note, that it chiefely diuideth it ſelfe into
theſe two parts. The firſt containeth a notable
diſcription of Gods great care and
prouidence, and of his manifold ſweet
mercies beſtowed on Dauid and all his elect,
in the fiue firſt verſes: In the ſecond
part, the Prophet ſheweth what vſe he
made thereof, and in his perſon teacheth
all Gods people, what vſe to make of former
receiued mercies, viz, Fully to be perſwaded,
that God will continue the courſe

of his fauour, & louing kindneſſe towards
them, vnto the end in the laſt verſe in theſe
words: Doubtleſſe, kindneſſe and mercie
ſhall follow me.
            For the firſt,Subdiuiſion. he maketh no large Catalogue
or rehearſall, neither vſeth any long
and perticular ennumeration or reckoning
vp of Gods benefits beſtowed vpon
him, as elſewherePſ. 18, & 66.: but by a few ſhort familiar
& pleaſant parables, he doth moſt
elegantly point out, and ſignificantly expreſſe
the ſame, the verie Metaphors them
ſelues (as folded vp) offering much more to
our conſideratiō, than by a long diſcourſe
or oration, could poſſibly haue been declared.
            The Allegories here vſed for this purpoſe,
are twaine: The firſt is taken from a
faithfull Shepheard, carefully attending
vppon his ſtraying ſheepe, and plentifully
prouiding al good things for their neceſſitie,
and ſecuritie; and this containeth the
foure firſt verſes of the Pſalme. The ſecond
is taken from an hoſt, or courteous
friend, moſt liberally entertaining his inuited
gueſts with all delicats, both for neceſſity
and delight, and that is laid downe
in the 5. verſe: (Thou doeſt prepare a table

before me in the ſight of mine Aduerſaries▪
For the firſt Allegorie or paſtoral Idyllion,
it conſiſteth of two parts: Firſt the
Allegorie it ſelfe, in the firſt, ſecond, and
third verſes: Secondly the vſe therof, in the
fourth verſe, (Though I ſhould walke
through the valley, &c.) for the Allegorie
it ſelfe, it is firſt briefely and ſummarily
laid down in the firſt verſe, and then continued
and illuſtrated by the parts thereof,
in the ſecond and third verſes. The firſt
verſe containing the ſumme of the Allegorie,
conſiſteth of two parts, viz: A propoſition
in theſe words, (The Lord is my Shepheard.)
Secondly, the inference thereon,
(therefore I ſhall not want.) And thus you
haue the logicall reſolution and Analyſis
of this methodicall Pſalme, into his parts
and members; by obſeruation whereof,
our memories may bee greatly helped in
the handling of it: it now followeth, that
hauing laid the foundation, wee begin to
build, & more narrowly to view the parts
of this holy ſcripture, for our further inſtruction
and comfort, and firſt to beginne
with the propoſition in theſe wordes expreſſed:
            
               The Lord is my Shepheard.
               Summe, of the propoſition. Although

               Dauid had now paſſed through the ſtormie
waues, & was ſafely arriued vpon the
ſhore, and maugre the beards of all his
mightie and ſubtil enemies, obtained the
kingdome, that now he might triumph in
the Lord, and ſay as elſewhere he doth,
The ſtone vvhich the builders refuſed, is
made the cheefe ſtone in the corner, this is
the Lords doing &c.Pſa. 118. 22.. Yet being not ignorant
with what manifold cares a crown
is beſet, and ſeeing many dangers imminent,
he had ſome cōbat or conflict within
himſelfe, but hauing had ſuch great experience
of Gods fauour, in former deliuerances,
and protections, his faith getteth
victorie ouer naturall diſtruſtfulneſſe,
and he burſteth out into theſe words of
Chriſtian reſolution and aſſurance, (The
Lord is my Shepheard, I ſhall not want.) q. d.
Oh my ſoule be not diſcouraged nor caſt
downe within me, dangers obiect themſelues
to thy view, but let not troubleſome
thoughts diſmay thee, caſt thy care vpon
the Lord, he that ſo promoted thee from
following the Ewes great with young, to
be gouernour of his people, will alſo preſerue
thee, the almightie, wiſe, and euerliuing
God is thy Shepheard, and therfore

contemne whatſoeuer may aſtoniſh thee,
and ſing thy former ſong; I truſt in God,
how ſay yee then to my ſoule; flye to your
mountaine, as a bird
               Pſ. 11. 1. And againe, I will
not be afraid, for ten thouſands of mine enemies,
that ſhould beſet mee round about
&cPſ. 3. 6..
            Q. But vvhat? was God Dauids ſheapherd
onely?
            A. No ſurely, though it be the propertie
of faith to make application, and in generall
promiſes to vſe the firſt perſon, as
wee are taught by diuers examplesHeb. 13. 7.: Yet
Chriſt Ieſus the great ſheapheard himſelfe
hath ſaid,1. Ti. 1. 15. 
               They that heare his voice and beleeue,
are his ſheepe
               Ioh. 10 26.: So that Dauid pronounceth
this in the perſon of the whole
church, & all the members thereof, wherfore
if wee heare Gods voice and beleeue,
we are fold-mates with Dauid, and I, and
you, haue as great intereſt in the Lord, as
he had, and may boldly, and as freely, ſay
as he did, The Lord is my Shepheard, The
Lord is our Shepheard, &c.
            1 No man,Sence of the words. but meanly exerciſed in the
ſcriptures, can be ignorant, that the metaphor
of a Shepheard, is not more plaine
and familiar, than frequent, and commō
               ly

vſed, ſometimes the great care and prouidence
of God, ouer his humble ſheepe,
& lowly lambes, is hereby ſhadowed out,
as in this place, and elſewhere. Say vnto
the Cities of Iudah behold your God, hee
ſhall feede his flocke like a Shepheard, hee
ſhall gather the lambes with his arme, and
carrie them in his boſome, and ſhall guide
them vvith young &c.Eſay 40. 11. Againe, thus ſayth
the Lord God: Behold, I vvill ſearch my
ſheepe, and ſeeke them out, and I vvill deliuer
them out of all places, vvhere they haue
beene ſcattered, in the cloudie, and darke
day, &c.Ezec. 34. 11, 12. &c..
            And Chriſt himſelfe hath plainely ſaid,
I am that good Shepheard
               Ioh. 10. 11, 14.. And S. Peter
ſpeaking of the faithfull, ſaith: ye were as
ſheepe going aſtray, but are now returned
to the Shepheard, & Biſhop of your ſoules,
&c.1. Pet. 2. 25.: and elſe-where calleth Chriſt the
cheefe Shepheard
               1. Pet. 54
            
            2 Sometimes alſo Kings, and Princes,
are compared to Sheapheards, whereby
their care and vigilancy, for the good of
their people and ſubiects are expreſſed, ſo
Aſaph ſpeaking of Dauid, ſaith: He choſe
Dauid his ſeruant, and tooke him from
the Sheep-fold, euen from behinde the

Evves great vvith young, brought hee him,
to feede his people in Iacob, and his inheritance
in Iſrael
               Pſ. 78. 70.. So the Prophet Eſay, prophecying
of that notable deliuerance of
Gods people out of captiuitie, to aſſure
them thereof, he nameth the perſon, by
whom it ſhould be, more than an hundred
yeeres before he was borne, in this manner,
he ſaith to Cyrus, Thou art my Shepheard
               Eſay 44. 28.. By which title the Lord giueth
all Kings and Princes of the earth to vnderſtand,
that it is their dutie, diſcharge it
aſwell as they wil, to prouide faithfully, for
the good of the ſoules, and bodies of their
people, to guide them by counſaile, and
to defend them by power.
            3 Thirdly, and moſt cōmonly, good miniſters
of the word, are compared to good
Shepheards, and therby the great diligence
and care that they ought to haue, to feed
the flocke committed to their charge, with
the green & wholeſome paſture of Gods
vvord, and to goe before them in all holy
example of life: are ſhadowed out; ſo the
Lord promiſeth, I vvill bring you pastors
according to mine heart, vvhich ſhall feede
you vvith knovvledge, and vnderſtanding
               Iere. 3. 15.
And again, I vvill bring them to their folds.

and they ſhall growe and increaſe, and I
will ſet vp Shepheards ouer them, which
ſhall feede them, neither ſhall any of them
be lacking
               Iere. 23. 4. Vnder this metaphor Chriſt
gaue Symon Peter his charge, Peter loueſt
thou me? feed my lambes &c.Ioh. 21. 15.. And S.
Peter accordingly, all miniſters, feed the
flocke of God, which dependeth vppon you,
&c.1. Pet. 5. 2.
            4 Fourthly & laſtly, the ignorance, idlenes,
couetouſneſſe, and diſſolute prophanes
of bad miniſters, or (as the Church calleth
them) companionsCan. 1. 6, are notably ſhadowed
out, by comparing them to idle,
greedie, and careleſſe Shepheards; and
theſe Sheapheards cannot vnderſtand, for
they all looke to their ovvne vvaies, euerie
one for his aduantage, and for his owne
purpoſe
               Eſay 56. 11.. Againe, the Shepheards are become
beaſts, and haue not ſought the Lord,
therefore haue they none vnderſtanding,
and all the flockes of their paſtures are
ſcattered
               Ie. 10. 21: but moſt notably & largely is
their idleneſſe and ſeueritie taxed, by the
Prophet Exechiel in theſe vvords: vvoe
be to the Shepheards of Iſraell, that feed
themſelues, yea eating the fat, killing them
that are fed, and cloathing themſelues with

the wooll, but yee feede not the ſheepe, the
weake haue yee not strengthned, the ſicke
haue yee not healed, neither haue yee bound
vp the broken, nor brought againe, that
which was driuen away, neither haue yee
ſought that which was loſt, but with crueltie
and rigour haue ye ruled them, and
they vvere ſcattered without a Shepheard,
and when they were disperſed, they vvere
deuoured of all the beaſtes of the field
               Ezech. 34 2, 3, 4, 5..
But becauſe in this place it is moſt plaine,
that by Shepheard the Prophet vnderſtandeth
the Lord, of that we will only ſpeake,
and paſſe by the reſt: which metaphor will
be much the more ſweet and profitable, if
we breake it open, by conſidering the duties
of a good Shepheard (wherby the mercies
of God towards his people are notably
reſembled) and alſo the nature and duties
of ſheepe,Illuſtration (whereby are ſhadowed out
thoſe good thinges, which either are or
ought to be in all Gods people againe.)
            Firſt,The qualities of a good Shepheard. a good Shepheard doth know his
ſheepe, and to that end will giue them
his marke, that if any of them goe aſtray,
he may ſeek them againe, and bring them
home to the Sheep-fold. So Chriſt Ieſus
the good Shepheard knovveth his ſheepe,
               
and calleth them by their names
               Ioh. 10. 3. 14.: and as
the Apoſtle ſayth, the foundation of God
remaineth ſure, and is ſealed with this ſeale,
the Lord knoweth who are his2. Tim. 2. 19.. Yea, this
great Shepheard, hath a Booke wherein all
the names of his elect ſheepe are written,
called the Booke of life
               Exod. 32. 32. Phil. 4. 3. Reu. 3. 5. 20. 12. 21. 27.: yea the Lord
marketh his in their foreheads with the
ſeale of the liuing God
               Reu. 7. 3.: which, as the Apoſtle
ſaith, is the holy spirit of promiſe
               Eph. 1. 13.,
which doth ſhew it ſelfe by the fruits therof,
in the outward behauiour, profeſſion,
and conuerſation, &c.
            2 Secondly, a good Shepheard will haue
care to feed his ſheepe, not in rotten ſoyle,
and waſting graſſe, but in good, wholſome
& green paſtures, for thereon is he called
Paſtor, a Paſcendo; So Chriſt is that good
Sheapheard, who feedeth euerie liuing
thing
               Pſ. 145. 16.. Hee fed his people in the wilderneſſe
40. yeeres, with mannah and feathered
fowles from heauen
               Exo. 16. 13., and with waters
out of the ſtonie rocke
               Exo. 17. 6. And Moſes miraculouſly
for 40. daies, during which time,
he neither did eate bread, nor drinke water
               Exo. 34. 28..
All men with naturall foode, cauſing the
raine to fall, and Sunne to ſhine both on
iuſt and iniust
               Mat. 5. 45, but ſpecially, hee feedeth

the ſoules of his choſen ſheep, in the green
paſtures that grow on the mountaines of
Iſraell
               Ezec. 34. 14., with the bread of life Chriſt Ieſus
himſelfe, in his word and Sacraments, his
glorious Goſpell, being our heauenly food,
his ſpirit and life, our coeleſtiall drinke, for
we may not maruell, that in diuers ſences
Chriſt Ieſus ſhould be the Shepheard that
feedeth
               Ioh. 10. 14, the dore whereby wee enter
               Ioh. 10. 9, and
the foode, wherewith our ſoules are fedde,
and fatted vp vnto eternall lifeIoh. 6. 35..
            3 A good Shepheard, knowing both the
ſtraying nature of his ſheep, and alſo their
timerouſneſſe, weakneſſe, and ſimplicitie,
either to flie from, reſiſt, or defend themſelues
from their manifold, cruell, and ſubtill
enemies, will haue great care to keepe
them together, and defend them, as Iacob
declaring his fidelitie to Laban, in keeping
his flocke, ſaid thus: This twentie yeares
I haue beene with thee, thine Ewes and
Goates haue not caſt their young, and the
Rams of thy flocke haue I not eaten, whatſoeuer
was torne of beastes, I brought it
not vnto thee, but made it good my ſelfe,
of mine hand didst thou require it, were it
stollen by day, or ſtollen by night, I was in
the day conſumed with heate, and with

froſt in the night, and my ſleepe departed
from mine eies, &c.Ge. 31. 38. 39, 40.. So Chriſt Ieſus being
a moſt faithfull Shepheard hath great
care ouer his ſheepe, both by the miniſtrie
of his word and ſpirit, to keepe them from
going aſtray, that they can no ſooner turne
aſide to the right hand, or the left, but they
ſhall heare a voice behind them, ſaying:
This is the way, walke ye in it
               Eſay 30. 21., and alſo to
defend them from the tooth of the Lion,
woolfe, and dog, that they doe not catch
or ſcatter them, being a wall of fire round
about them, as ſpeaketh the ProphetZac. 2. 5..
            4 Fourthly, and laſtly, (that I may not be
tedious, by inſiſting vpon euerie particular)
a louing and carefull Shepheard, if any
of his flock be gone aſtray into the wilderneſſe,
he will take paines to ſeeke it, and
exceedingly reioyce in the finding thereof,
as Chriſt noted in the parable of the loſt
ſheepMat. 18. 12., if any be diſeaſed, to ſet to his hand
& dreſſe thē, if their diſeaſe be contagious,
to remooue them from the fold & flock, til
they be cured, leaſt others bee infected: if
any be weake and feeble, to carrie them in
his armes. Euen ſo our Lord that louing
and carefull Shepheard, is come into the
wilderneſſe of this world, to ſeeke and to

ſaue that which was lost
               Luk. 19. 10.. If he find any
faultie, he will launce them with the ſword
of his ſpirit, and addreſſe himſelfe to their
amendment, annointing their ſoares with
the ſoueraigne ſalue of his mercie, but if
their liues be laſciuious, and the diſeaſe
grow infectious, then by diſcipline and excommunication,
hee will ſeparate them
from the flocke, remooue them from the
fold, and deliuer them vnto Sathan for the
deſtruction of the fleſh
               1. Cor. 5. 5. Laſtly, his yong
and weake ones, his tender lambes, he will
nouriſh and cheriſh in his boſome
               Eſay 40. 11, as
ſpeaketh the Prophet, not breaking the
bruſed reede, nor quenching the ſmoaking
flaxe
               Mat. 12. 20.; nor ſuffering them to bee tempted
aboue that they are able, but will euen giue
the iſſue with the temptation, as ſayth the
Apoſtle1. Cor. 10 13. And thus vnder the duties of a
good Shepheard, we haue noted the great
care and mercifull prouidence of God,
towards his Church and Saints: now on
the other ſide, let vs briefely looke into the
nature, properties and condition of the
ſheepe, that thence we may alſo learne to
know our ſelues, and our duties towards
Chriſt againe.
            1 For the nature of the ſheepe,The ſheepes nature. it is firſt

recorded by all thoſe that haue written
thereof, and by experience we find it true,
ſhe is fooliſh and ſimple, proane to goe aſtray,
euen when there is plentie of paſture
at home, yea, being once gone aſide, ſhe
hath not the wit to returne, but the further
ſhe goeth, the further from her fold: and
wheras other beaſts can ſhelter themſelues
in dens, caues, and calme places, againſt
ſtormie and tempeſtuous weather, yet will
ſhe expoſe her ſelfe to dangers remedileſſe,
vnleſſe ſhe be preuented by the care, and
prouident foreſight of her Shepheard:
And ſurely, ſo we are naturally fooliſh, and
vnwiſe, not perceiuing the thinges of the
ſpirit, but running with greedineſſe, in the
wandring pathes of death, as the Prophet
confeſſeth, all vve like ſheepe haue gone aſtray,
we haue turned euerie one to his owne
way
               Eſay. 53. 6.. So Chriſt witneſſeth of the prodigall
Sonne, that as long as he followed his
ryotous & ſinfull courſe, he was as beſides
himſelfe, not knowing what hee did, nor
whether hee went
               Luk. 15. 17.. And the Apoſtle alſo
hath ſaid of the Gentiles, that they walked
in their owne wayes
               Act. 14. 16.
            2 Though ſhe haue many enemies, yet
hath ſhe neither courage to reſiſt, ſwiftnes

to flie, or wiſedome to hide her ſelfe, but
rather will wander into deſolate places,
where ſhee doth the more dangerouſly expoſe
her ſelfe to her deuouring foes, the
ſubtill Foxe, greedie dog, rauenous wolfe,
and deuouring Lion; ſo that of all creatures
ſhe ſtādeth in greateſt need of a guide
& defender. Euē ſo, man of himſelf is vtterly
vnable to giue check-mate vnto ſin, and
temptations thereunto, which like a ſubtil
fox, lieth lurking & fawning at euery corner,
to pray vpon a Chriſtian ſoule: or to
withſtand Sathan, which like a rauenous
wolfe, or roaring Lion goeth about ſeeking
whom he may deuoure, as ſpeaketh the Apoſtle
1. Pet. 5. 8. So that moſt miſerable we were, if it
were not for the continuall, watchful, and
prouident care of our louing ſhepheard
Chriſt Ieſus.
            But now as her nature is ſuch,The ſheepes properties. ſo (as if
ſhe were priuie to her owne fooliſhneſſe
and weakneſſe) hath ſhe ſpeciall good properties,
whereby natures infirmities are
well reformed, and our dueties ſhadowed
 out: firſt ſhe knoweth, heareth, and obeyeth
her Shepheards voice or whiſtle; euen
ſo the faithfull doe know, heare, and obey
the voice of Chriſt, wherein they find ſuch

comfort and full contentation, that they
deſire to heare his voice, yea, his name is as
ſvveete as an ointment powred out
               Cant. 1. 2.. Yea,
the voice of a ſtranger they vvill not heare
               Ioh. 10. 5,
but hold him accurſed that preacheth another
doctrine, though an Angell from heauen,
or his charm neuer ſo ſweetGal. 1. 8.. If then
we will approue our ſelues the true ſheepe
of Chriſts fold, wee muſt firſt labour for
knowledge, and the ſpirit of diſcretion,
that vve bee not carried avvay vvith euerie
puffe of doctrine
               Eph. 4. 14, but that wee trie the spirits
vvhether they be of God or no
               1. Io. 4. 1., and
diſcerne the voice of Chriſt from the voice
of ſtrangers; ſecondly, that knowing his
voice, we cheerefully and ſpeedily run with
Dauid whether we are called, in the vvaies
of Gods commaund
               Pſa. 119. 32.: for otherwiſe if we
heare, and doe not, vve doe but deceiue our
ovvne ſoules
               Iam. 1. 22: and Chriſt Ieſus will renounce
vs, as he did the Iewes, hee that is
of God, heareth Gods vvords, yee therefore
heare them not, becauſe ye are not of God
               Ioh. 8. 47.
            2 Secondly, the ſheepe is profitable, yea
to her verie enemies, with her skinne and
wooll ſhee cloathed them; ſo ſaith Iob, the
loynes of the poore bleſſed him, vvhich
had beene vvarmed with the fleeces of his

ſheepe
               Iob. 31. 20.; with her fleſh and milke ſhe feedeth
vs; ſo ſaith God, reckoning vp the
bleſſings of his people, butter of Kyne, and
milke of Sheepe, with fat of the lambes,
and Rams fed in Baſhan
               Deu. 32. 14. ſo the ſheepe of
Gods paſture, doe good to all, but specially
to them of the houſhould of faith
               Gal. 6. 10.; with
their riches they helpe the needie, feed the
hungrie, cloath the naked, releeue the deſtitute;
and their gifts of grace, they communicate
vnto others, inſtructing the ignorant,
ſtrengthening the weake, comforting
the feeble minded, admoniſhing the vnruly,
yea thus beneficiall they are, not only
to their friends, but alſo to their enemies,
louing thoſe that hate them, bleſſing thoſe
that curſe them, praying for thoſe that perſecute
them, striuing to be perfect in loue,
as their heauenly father is
               Mat. 5. 48.
            3 She is patient, & contented quietly to
receiue many and great wronges, euen to
be laid vpon the ſtall, to the loſſe of fleece
and life, (ſo that by a more excellent ſimile,
the holy ghoſt could not poſſibly expreſſe,
the admirable patience of Chriſt than this,
he was led as a ſheepe to the ſlaughter, and
as a lambe dumbe before his ſhearer, ſo opened
hee not his mouth)Eſay 53. 7 euen ſo Gods

ſheepe are taught, being ſmitten on one
cheeke, to turne the other
               Mat. 5. 39 not to auenge
themſelues, by rendring euill for euill; but
rather to giue place vnto wrath, and ouercome
euill with goodneſſe
               Rom. 12. 17, 21. &c.: yea for the
Goſpels ſake cheerefully to ſuffer reproaches,
ſpoile of goods, and loſſe of life.
Wherefore (to ſtand no longer on this
point) by theſe properties, and duties, we
may trie and examime our ſelues, whether
we be any of Gods ſheepe, entred into the
ſheepe-fold, and receiued into the ſocietie
of Gods ſaints or no, and if we find them
in vs, in any true meaſure, we may boldly
proclaime with Dauid, The Lord is my
Shepheard, and then marke what condition
we muſt looke for.
            The ſheepe,The ſheepes condition. though ſhe be a creature ſo
ſimple, harmeleſſe, profitable, and patient,
yet hath ſhe many enemies, (as wee haue
heard) which doe continually ſeeke, to
bite, kill, deuoure, and pray vppon her, as
Dauid witneſſed, who keeping his Fathers
ſheepe, there came a Lion, and a beare, and
caught a ſheepe, but hee reſcued her, and
ſlew them both
               1. Sa. 17. 34.. Euen ſo the ſheepe of
the Lords fold, though they bee neuer ſo
innocent and harmeleſſe, yet muſt looke to

haue many enemies, euen Sathan and all
his Angels, with al the childrē of this wicked
world, of whom they muſt look to be
continually reproched, perſecuted, ſlandered,
and killed. And thus we haue vnfolded
the myſterie of this moſt ſweet & comfortable
Metaphor, wherein on the one ſide,
we haue viewed, the ſingular care, & prouidence
of God, towards his people; and
on the other ſide, what duties he requireth
of them againe. Let vs now conſider the
doctrine for inſtruction.
            That Dauid being ſo great and mightie
a king,Doctrine. and one that was placed as a Shepheard
to feede Gods people, as it is ſaid in
the Pſalmes,Pſ. 78. 71 yet not truſting in the multitude
of his riches, nor ſtrength & prowes
of his worthies, but eſpecially glorieth in
this, that the Lord is his Shepheard: it teacheth
vs, that the onely ſafetie, happineſſe,
and felicitie of man, (though otherwiſe
neuer ſo noble, wealthy or honorable) cō
               ſiſteth
in this, that they are the Lordes
ſheep, ſhrowded vnder the wings of Gods
diuine prouidēce, &c. For all fleſh is graſſe,
and the glorie thereof as the flovver of the
field
               Eſa 40. 6. Kings and Princes, though they be
Gods on the earth, yet they die like men,

and ſee corruption, and ſo all their thoughts
periſh.
               Pſal. 82. 7. Wherefore Dauid giueth moſt religious
counſell, Truſt not in Princes, nor
in the ſonne of man, for there is none helpe
in him, his breath departeth, and he returneth
to his earth
               Pſa. 146. 3: Yea, the Lord hath pronounced
the man accurſed, that truſteth in
man, making fleſh his arme, and withdrawing
his heart from the Lord
               Iere. 17. 5. As for riches
and pompe, they are vncertaine, and
therefore wee may not trust in them
               1. Tim. 6 17: for
when death commeth they will take their
leauePſal. 49; yea, as the wiſe man ſaith, they bebetake
themſelues to their wings as an Eagle,
and flie into heauen
               Pro. 23. 5; but bleſſed is the
man that hath the God of Iacob for his refuge,
and whoſe hope is in the Lorde his
God
               Pſa. 146. 5, for though Princes die, and riches
flie away, yet hee will be with vs for euer,
though wee paſſe through floudes of water,
and flames of fire
               Eſa. 43. 2, yea, though wee goe
through the valley of the ſhadow of death,
wee neede to feare none euill, for hee
will bewith vs, his rod and ſtaffe ſhall comfort
vs.
            
            Oh then let not our eies be dazled with
the vaine glittering ſhew of the world,Vſe. or
any thing therein, but ſeeke in aſſurance of

faith, to pronounce with Dauid (The Lord
is my ſhepheard) and therein let vs glorie, as
in mans onely felicitie.
            Q. But vnto whom is the Lord a Shepheard?
            A. Surely, vnto none but ſuch, who in
the true acknowledgement of their owne
weakeneſſe and ſtraying nature, do ſubmit
themſelues to his tuition, he is a ſhepheard,
but onely for ſuch ſheepe as are loſt
               Ma. 15. 24,
and more reioyſeth in the conuerſion of
one ſinner, then in ninetie and nine iuſt men,
that neede no amendment of life
               Luk. 15. 7, hee is a
Sauiour, but onely of ſinners: this is a true
ſaying, Christ Ieſus came into the world to
ſaue ſinners
               1. Tim. 1. 15. He is a Phiſition, but onely
to them that are ſicke, as he hath ſaid, The
whole neede not a Phyſition, but they that
are ſicke
               Mat. 9. 12. He is a Surgeon, but onely
to make them ſee that are blinde, for
ſo he hath ſayd in the Goſpell,Mat. 9. 37. I am come
vnto iudgement into this worlde, that they
which ſee not, might ſee; and that they
which ſee, might bee made blind
               Ioh. 1. 7. 8: Hee is
the light of the world, as Iohn Baptiſt hath
witneſſed, but onely to them that ſit in
darkeneſſe and ſhadow of death
               Mat. 4. 16: yea laſtly,
he is the bread and water of life, but

onely to the hungrie and thriſtie, as Marie
ſaith in her ſong: Hee filleth the hungrie
with good things, and the rich hee ſendeth
away emptie, Luke 1. 53. And therfore
to conclude this point, when once God
giueth vs the true ſight of our vanitie, and
vnfained repentance, humbly to confeſſe,
and heartily to pray with Dauid, I haue
gone astray like a lost ſheepe, oh ſeeke
thy ſeruant
               Pſal. 119. 176, then let vs bee aſſured hee
will ſeeke and find vs, wee ſhall become
fold-mates with Dauid, & ſing as he did,
(The Lord is my ſhepeheard.) So much for
the Propoſition, let vs now ſee what he inferreth
thereon in theſe words.
            
               I ſhall not want. The ſheepe of her ſelfe
is ſubiect to many wants, and of herſelfe
not able in any meaſure to ſupplie them:
euen ſo euery Chriſtian is compaſſed about
and preſſed downe, with innumerable
wants, both in regarde of the ſoule
and bodie, neither is he able to miniſter
to his neceſſities. Onely this is his comfort,
The Al-ſufficient God being his ſhepheard,
he ſhall not wantHabentī dominum nil deerit, quod Dei, ſint omniae Cyprian. de orat. dom..
            But it may ſeeme that Dauid vttered
theſe words,Senſe. rather vpon vain confidence,
and preſumption, then any faithfull aſſurance,

or experience of former mercies
how greatly was he an hungred, when he
was glad to begge the Shew-bread
               1. Sam. 21 6, and
what great thirſt did he ſuſtaine, when he
ſo earneſtly longed for a cup of water of
the VVell of Bethlehem
               2. Sam. 23 15? But what doe I
ſpeake of Dauid, when Chriſt Ieſus himſelfe
the deare ſonne of God, had not ſo
much as the Foxes, and foules of the aire,
for they haue holes and neſts, but hee had
not whereon to rest his heade.
               Mat. 8. 20, beeing
borne in a Stable (in ſtead of a Parlour) and
layd in a Manger (in ſtead of a Cradle)
there beeing no roome in the Inne
               Luke 2. 7, and
being dead, was buried in another mans
ſepulchreMat. 27. 60; how great was the neede of
his Diſciples, who on a Sabboth day, were
glad to ſatisfie their hunger, by plucking
and eating eares of corne, as they went
through the ſame
               Mat. 12. 1. Doth not ſaint Paule
alſo make mention of his hunger & thirſt,
cold and nakedneſſe2. Cor. 11. 27? And the Author to
the Hebrewes, ſpeaking of the condition
of Gods ſaints, ſaith, They were tryed by
mockings and ſcourgings, bondes and impriſonment,
they were ſtoned, hewen aſunder,
tempted, ſlaine with the Svvorde,
wandred vp and dovvne in Sheepes skinnes,

and Goates skinnes, being (deſtitute) afflicted,
and tormented
               Heb. 11. 36. How then doth Dauid
ſay, that none of Gods ſheepe ſhall
want?
            The Anſwere hereunto is two-fold;Sol. firſt
there is a want of things ſuperfluous, and
another of things needfull, without which
(ſo great is the weaknes of fleſh & bloud)
we can hardly ſerue God ſo chearfully as
we ought for the firſt, as we haue no warrant
to luſt after thē: Chriſt hauing taught
vs to pray for dayly bread
               Mat. 6. 11: and the Apoſtle
bid vs be content vvith foode and rayment
               1. Ti. 6. 8 ſo alſo is it great mercy in God,
(knowing how proane wee are to abuſe
proſperitie, to pride and ſecurity) to croſſe
thoſe our ſinful deſires; as Saint Iames teacheth:
Ye aske and receyue not, becauſe yee
aske amiſſe, that ye might lay the ſame out
in your pleaſures
               Iam. 4. 3.. And therefore as concerning
this ſort of wantes, neither had
Dauid or any other the Lords ſheepe, any
warrant to ſay the Lord being their ſhepheard,
they ſhould not want them; but as
concerning the other, viz. things needfull,
the promiſe is made by him that is heyre
of all things
               Heb. 1. 2.. First ſeeke the Kingdome
of GOD, and the righteouſneſſe thereof,

and all theſe things ſhall bee caſt vpon you
               Mat. 6. 33.
The Lyons lacke, and are hungerbit (ſaieth
Dauid) but they that feare the Lord ſhall
vvant nothing that is good
               Pſa. 34. 10. They ſhall not
want health, wealth, peace, &c. if God ſee
them to be good for them, if they do want
them, they may boldly ſay, they are not
good for them, &c. Seeing then godlineſſe
hath a promiſe euen of the things of this
life, all needfull wants ſhall ſeaſonably be
ſupplied, ſo that Gods people (caſting
their care vpon the Lord, and doing their
honeſt endeuours) may boldly ſay, The
Lord is my ſhepheard, I ſhall not want. And
ſurely, it is both maruellous and comfortable,
to cōſider and obſerue, Gods great
prouidence towardes his poore ſaints in
this reſpect, wherein Dauids experience
is verfied, Nunquam vidi iustum derelictum,
I haue beene young and now am olde,
yet neuer ſavve I the righteous forſaken,
or his ſeede begging breade
               Pſa. 37. 25. The ſecond
anſwere is this, there are two other
ſorts of wantes. The firſt is in regarde of
outward condition, and the ſecond, in regard
of inwarde affection. There is many
a rich man poor, ſwimming in wealth,
and yet pining away with cōtinuall wants

like Tantalus, whom the Poets faigne to
die for thirſt, ſtanding in waters to the
chinn: ſuch a one the wiſe man ſpeaketh
of, VVho is alone and hath neither ſonne
nor brother, yet there is none ende of all his
trauell, neyther can his eye be ſatisfied vvith
riches
               Eccles. 4 8. And there is many a poore man,
exceeding rich, becauſe though he ſuſtain
ſome want in regarde of his outward condition,
yet God hath enlarged his affections,
& giuen him true contentation therwith,
more chearfully to praiſe God for a
dinner of greene hearbes, then the wicked
do for the feaſt of a ſtalled Oxe, hauing
learned with the Apoſtle, to bee full, and
to be hungrie, to abounde, and to haue vvant,
in vvhatſoeuer eſtate they are, there vvith
to be content
               Phil. 4. 21. So then the ſenſe is, The
Lord will not ſuffer his people to want any
good thing, but wil either giue them abundance,
or chearfull contentation, with
a litle, that euery one may boldly ſay, The
Lord is my ſhepheard, I ſhall not want.
            
            Hence firſt vve learn,Doctrine. 1. vvhat an excellent
ſtay a ſtedfaſt faith in the prouidence of
God is, Abraham being demaunded of his
ſon Iſaac, father behold the fire, & the wood,
but vvhere is the Lambe for the burnt offring?
               
returned this faithfull anſwere, My
ſonne, God will prouide
               Gen. 22. 7.. Dauid beeing
compaſſed with many wants, yet through
the power hereof, getteth victorie ouer al
naturall feare and diſtruſtfulneſſe, & ſaith,
The Lord is my ſhepheard, (I ſhal not want,)
whereas then ſuch as want this gift, are
fraught with innumerable cares: and becauſe
they deſire to bee rich, doe fall into
many temptations and ſnares
               1. Tim. 6 9, and in euery
neede, doe turne ſtones into bread,
ſeeke to prouide for themſelues, by euill,
indirect, and vnlawfull means: he that beleeueth
(ſaith the Prophet Eſay) vvill not
make haste
               Eſa. 28. 16, but chearefully relie vpon
the prouidence of God, knowing, that
though all hope of worldly meanes faile,
yet the Lord being ſhepheard, who is the
All-ſufficient God, the birds of the aire
ſhall bring vs good, as the Rauens brought
bread and fleſh euerie Morning and Euening
to Eliah the Lords Prophet
               1. Kin. 17 6: the
drie iaw bone of an Aſſe, ſhall become a
fountaine of water vnto vs, as it was to
thirſtie Sampſon
               Iud. 15. 19: The heauens ſhal raine
downe Mannah and feathered foules, as
they did to the people of Iſrael in the wilderneſſe
Exod. 16, yea the fiſhes of the ſea ſhall

lend vs money, as they did to Peter
               Mat. 17 27, if
the Lord ſee it good for vs.
            Yea, and the more to ſtrength our faith,Power.
let vs conſider, firſt, that where as many
parents are willing to doe their children
good, yet cannot; our God is omnipotent,
and able to do whatſoeuer he willPſa. 115. 3. Secondly,
many are able to do others good,VVill.
but will not: But our God is nigh to all ſuch
as call vpon him faithfully
               Pſ. 145. 18: Whoſe bowels
doe earne at the miſeries of his ſaints, and
his repentings rowle togither
               Oſe. 11. 8, and hath
promiſed, that he vvill fulfill the deſires of
them that feare him. Laſtly, whereas many
haue both power and will,VViſdome. but want
wiſedome, whereby their doing good to
others, is many times vnſeaſonable: VVith
our God is vviſdome, ſaith Iob
               Iob. 12. 13, yea his wiſdome
(as all other his eſſentiall attributes
are) is infinite, ſaith Dauid
               Pſ. 147. 5, hee knoweth
beſt when, where, and how to helpe.
            Oh thē let vs cōmit our wayes vnto the
Lord,Vſe. and though he ſatisfie not our haſtie
affectiōs, according to our raſh preſcribed
times, yet let vs follow the counſell of the
Prophet Habacuck VVith patience wait his
leyſure
               Haba. 2. 3, in the meane time playing Iacobs
part, let vs wreſtle with God, by the power

of faith, and feruencie of prayerGen. 32. 26, beeing
aſſured, that hee is able and willing, and
when in wiſedome hee ſeeth it beſt for vs,
hee will not faile to ſet to his hande and
helpe vs.
            2 The ſecond leſſon which from hence
we learne,Doctrine. 2 is, that the condition of Gods
Saints in this life is moſt glorious, howſoeuer
the naturall man perceiue it not, for
of them (as one verie well obſerueth) theſe
contraries (in diuerſe ſenſes) may truly be
affirmed.
            1 They are the richeſt & the pooreſt: the
richeſt, becauſe as our Prophet ſaith, they
want nothing: and as the Apoſtle ſayth, they
poſſeſſe all things
               2. Cor. 6 10, for beeing Christes
through him, all is theirs
               1. Cor. 3. 21. 22. And they are
the pooreſt, vſing this world as though they
vſed it not
               1. Cor. 7 31, being readie to ſuffer the
ſpoyle of their goods, and loſſe of liues for
Chriſt his ſake.
            2 They are the wiſeſt, and the fooliſheſt:
The wiſeſt, becauſe they build vppon
the rocke
               Mat. 7. 24, and lay vp treaſure in heauen,
vvhere neither the moth, nor canker corrupt,
nor theeues can digge through and ſteale
               Mat. 6. 20.
And becauſe in ſome meaſure, they conceyue
thoſe miſteries, which are hid from

the wiſe and prudent of the world
               Mat. 11. 25.
            
               And they are accounted the fooliſheſt,
becauſe with Moſes, they rather chooſe
to ſuffer afflictions with the people of
God, then to enioy the pleaſures of ſinne for
a ſeaſon, eſteeming the rebuke of Chriſt greater
treaſures, then the riches of the worldHeb. 11. 25.
            3 They are the higheſt and the loweſt,
the higheſt, for their conuerſation is in heauen
               Phil. 3. 20, and they are the loweſt, as being troden
vnder foote of all men like clay in the
ſtreetes, accounted as the of-ſcouring of the
world, a gazing ſtocke to Angels and men
               1. Cor. 4. 9, 13,
yea, as a But, where againſt euery man ſhoteth
out his arrowes, euen bitter words, of
reproch, ſlaunders and diſgrace, &c.
            4 They are the fayreſt and the fowleſt.
The fayreſt, becauſe they are members of
the Church, the ſpouſe of Christ, for which
he gaue himſelf, that he might ſanctifie it &
clenſe it, by the waſhing of water through the
worde, that hee might make it a glorious
Church vnto himſelfe, not hauing ſpotte or
wrinckle, or any ſuch thingEph. 5. 26 27, wherof Chriſt
hath pronounced, that ſhee is the fayrest amongſt
womenCant. 1. 7, yea, in beautie comparable
to the Sunne & MooneCant. 6. 9: and they are
the fouleſt, both in their owne eies, and the

eies of the world, being as blacke as the tents
of Kedar, the Sunne hauing looked vppon
themCant. 1. 4.
            5 They are the merrieſt and the ſaddeſt;
The merrieſt, becauſe they haue the aſſurance
of the remiſſion of ſins, and of Gods
fauour in Chriſt, which maketh them alwayes
to reioyce in the Lord
               Phil. 4. 4: and for that
they haue the peace of a good conſcience,
which is as a continuall feaſt
               Prou. 25. 15, and do know
that all things worke togither for the beſt vnto
them
               Rom. 8. 28. And they are the ſaddeſt, as hauing
continuall occaſion to weepe, both
for the ſinnes of others, as did Dauid
               Pſal. 119 136, &
for their owne ſinnes, as did Ioſiah, whoſe
heart did melt, and hee wept before the
Lord
               2. Chr. 34 27. And ſurely the conſideration of
their often offending of the Maieſtie
of thier moſt mercifull and louing Father,
maketh them many times to
faint in their mourning, yea their beds to
ſwimme, and to water their Couches with
teares
               Pſal. 6. 6. And whereas others ſpend their
daies in brutiſh delights, they ſow in tears
               Pſ. 126. 5.
But this is their comfort, that God reſerueth
their teares in a bottle
               Pſal. 56. 8, and will one
day wipe them away from their eies, with
euerlasting comfort
               Eſay. 25. 8, whereas the other

               ſhal haue their portiō in the lake burning with
fire & brimstone, where ſhall be weeping, wailing,
& gnaſhing of teeth
               Mat. 8. 12. In regard wherof
our Sauiour hath pronoūced, Bleſſed are
they that weepe, for they ſhall laugh, but wo be
to you that nowe laugh, for you ſhall vvaile
and vveepe
               Luk. 6. 21.
            6 Laſtly, they are the ſtrongeſt, & the weakeſt.
The ſtrongeſt, for that they are able to
preuaile with God, as did Iacob, who wreſtled
with God, & obtained the bleſſing
               Gen. 32 28, as Lot
did, euen hinder him from powring out his
indignation vpon the heads of the wicked
               Gen. 19 22,
and as Moſes did, ſtand in the gap to turne
away his fierce vvrath
               Pſal. 106. 23, yea, they are able
to doe all thinges by the power of Ieſus
Chriſt, ſtrengthning them, as ſpeaketh the
ApoſtlePhil. 4. 13. And they are the weakeſt, as
not able of themſelues to thinke a good
thought
               2. Co. 3. 5. For which, and many other reſpects,
the members of the Church are not
vnfitly compared to the braunches of the
Vine, which of themſelues are the weakeſt
and tendereſt of al plants, not able of them
ſelues to grow vpright, vnleſſe they be vnderpropped,
and faſtned vp.
            The vſe whereof is,Vſe. that we be not diſcouraged
with the contempt of Gods

children, in this wicked world, but rather
looke vnto their ſpiritual beautie, and hidden
comlineſſe, wherein, they are as faire as
the Curtaines of Salomon
               Cant. 1. 4: And though they
haue lien amongeſt pottes, yet ſhall bee as the
wings of a Doue, which are couered with ſiluer,
and their feathers like yellow gold
               Pſ. 68. 13..
            Laſtly,Doctrine. 3 from hence we may learne, that
Gods deareſt ſeruants, in this life, are ſubiect
to many alterations & changes: looke
vpon Iob, who ſomtimes fearefully curſed
himſelf, & the day of his birth, & cōplained
of gods rigorous dealing towards him, as
though he had ſet him as a But to ſhoot at,
& would not ſuffer him to take his breath,
nor ſwallow his ſpittle, ſomtimes again ſo
cōfortable, that though the Lord ſhould kill
him, yet vvould he trust in him
               Iob 13. 25. But what
need we other example thē this of Dauid,
who was ſomtimes ſo greatly caſt downe,
that the earth rang againe with his wofull
complaints and mourning, Oh my God, my
God, vvhy hast thou forſaken me
               Pſal. 22. 1? vvhat,
are thy mercies cleane gone, and wilt thou
ſhut vp thy louing kindneſſe in diſpleaſure for
euermore? Haſt thou forgotten to be merciful?
and vvilt thou no more be intreated? &c.
Sometimes againe ſo comfortable, in the

aſſurance of Gods fauour, and ſo ſtrong in
faith, That the Lord being his ſhepheard, he
ſhall not vvant, and he vvill not feare to goe
through the valley of the ſhadovv of death,
and he vvould not feare though compaſſed about
vvith thouſands of his enemies
               Pſal. 3. 6. Yea,
though mountanes did remoue, and hils vvere
hurled into the midst of the ſea, for the Lord
is my ſtrong rocke, caſtell, & defence, he hath
made my feete like Hindes, I ſhall breake a
bovv of ſteele, and by the povver of God I ſhal
leape ouer the vvall, &c. Yea, I appeale to
your owne conſciences, whether you haue
not experience of the like in your ſelues,
ſomtimes ſuch ioy and delight in the worſhip
of God, and ſuch comfort in diuine
Meditations, as will make vs awake at
midnight (with Dauid,) to ſing Pſalmes
vnto God. Sometimes againe, ſuch dulnes
and drowſineſſe, vnaptneſſe and vntowardneſſe
to euery good dutie, that there
is nothing but mourning like the Doue,
and chattering like the Crane, or Swalow.
Well, the Lord, hee knoweth what is beſt
for vs, not euer a full Sea, nor euer a low
ebbe, not euer Summer, nor euer Winter:
The Sonne is ſometimes couered with a
clowde, yet ſtill in the Firmament; the fire

couered with Aſhes, yet ſtill on the hearth,
the tree ſometimes without bud, bloſſom,
leafe, and fruit, yet aliue in the rooteSpiritus tentatoris folia deiiciit viuit tamē radix., and
ſurely this is our comfort, that God is no
changeling, vvhom he loueth hee loueth to
the end
               Ioh. 13. 1, he may for a moment in his anger
leaue his elect, but vvith euerlasting compaſſion
he hath embraced thē
               
               Eſay. 54. 8, neither ſhall
any thing bee able to ſeparate them from
his loue.
            The vſe whereof is,Vſe. that we muſt not be
too much caſt downe, although it pleaſe
the Lord, with northren blaſts to wither,
and ſhake off our bloſſoms, and for a time
to depriue vs of our comfortable meditations,
ſeeing this is the portion of his deareſt
Saints: onely this, let vs not pleaſe our
ſelues, in the dulneſſe and hardneſſe of our
hearts, but with all diligence vſe the good
meanes which he hath appointed, for the
quickening of his graces in vs, and doubtleſſe
he vvil comfort and ſtabliſh our harts
               Pſ. 27. 14 and 30. 5.,
and by experience we ſhall find though
heauineſſe endure for a night, yet ioy
ſhall come in the
morning.
            
         
         
            
            THE
SECOND SERMON
vpon the 23. Pſalme.
            
               He maketh me to reſt in greene Paſtures,
and leadeth me to the ſtill waters.
&c.
               verſ. 2.
            
            
               IN theſe words of the
ſecond and third verſes,
the holy Prophet
proceedeth in way of
a thankfull narration,
of Gods great mercies
towards him, for
to illuſtrate the former generall propoſition,
by a diſtribution of the ſpeciall duties
of a good and faithful Shepheard; whereby
he declareth, the happie eſtate and condition,
(and how free they are from want)
of thoſe, ouer whom the Lord hath taken

care and charge, to prouide for them as
a faithfull Shepheard, doth for his ſheepe.
And herein two things are to be conſidered:The ſubdiuiſion of the 2. & 3. verſes.
firſt a rehearſall of the duties; ſecondly
the reaſon of perfourmance: the
particular duties here mentioned, (wherevnto
the reſt may be reduced, and vnder
which great myſteries are comprehended)
 are theſe fiue in number. Firſt, it is the dutie
of a good Shepheard, to prouide wholſome
 and good paſture for his ſheepe: Secondly,
 fit waters to drinke: Thirdly, a
coole ſhadow in the heat of the day, where
(being freed from the ſcorching heate of
the Sunne) they may reſt, and chewe the
 cudde: fourthly to haue a tender care ouer
 the feeble and weak, to refreſh them: Laſtly,
to lead, and guide them, whereby they
may be preſerued from going aſtray, and
defended from their deuouring enemies,
whereunder the ſingular care and prouidence
of God towards his people are ſhadowed
out, wherunto in the ſecond place,
the Prophet addeth the reaſon, that mooueth
God to perfourme theſe duties, and
euerie way to bee ſo good to his poore
Saints, by the miniſtrie of his Goſpell to
conuert them, by his ſpirit to lead them

into all godly actions, and euerie way to
bleſſe them, viz. Not for their beautie for
that is but graſſe
               Eſay 40. 6, nor for their righteouſneſſe,
for that is to his eies, but as a filthy
menſtruous cloath
               Eſay 64. 6., but it is for the ſame
cauſe, wherewith he hath euer been prouoked,
euen for his owne name and glorie
ſake: theſe are the particulers, for our comfort,
and inſtruction further to be conſidered
of.
            The firſt and cheefeſt care of a good
Shepheard,The firſt dutie of a good Shepheard, is to prouide good and wholeſome paſture for his ſheepe. is to prouide freſh and wholſome
paſture for his ſheepe, for though
they haue all other things neuer ſo aboundantly,
yet if they want this, they periſh;
and ſo it is with Gods ſheep, which made
our Sauiour Chriſt, that great Shepheard
and Biſhop of our ſoules, as the Apoſtle calleth
him1. Pet. 2. 25, ſo earneſtly to require Peter,
and in him all the Apoſtles, and their lawful
Succeſſors: Feed, feed, feed, my ſheep
               Io. 21. 17, &
and Peter with no leſſe earneſtnes, requireth
the ſame of euerie Paſtor, Feede the
flocke of God which dependeth vpon you
               1. Pe. 5. 2.
1. Pet. 5. 2. Yea, how great care the Lord
hath, that his ſheepe doe want no food, appeareth
moſt notably from the prophecie
of Ezechiel, becauſe the Shepheards of Iſraell,

feed themſelues, and feede not my flocke,
I will my ſelfe feed my ſheepe in good and fat
pasture, vpon the mountaines of Iſraell
               Ezec. 34. 14.. And
Chriſt that good Shepheard hath ſayd; I
am that dore, by mee if any man enter in, hee
ſhall be ſaued, and ſhall goe in and out, and
find paſture
               Io. 10. 9. But that I may not confuſedly
handle this point, let vs briefly conſider
theſe few things: firſt, what is this
paſture or food; 2. What manner of paſture
it is. 3. where it groweth, & is to be found.
4. laſtly, how Gods Sheepe ought to feed
thereon.
            1 For the firſt,VVhat is the paſture of Gods ſheepe. This good Shepheard,
feedeth the bodies of his ſheep, with earthly
and corporall food, for it is hee that giueth
all good thinges aboundantly to enioy
               1. Tim. 6 17..
Yea there is not a morſell of bread, that
we eat, but it is the gift of God, begged
at his handes, Giue vs this day, our dayly
bread, &cMat. 6. 11.. And is ſanctified to our comfort,
by the word and prayer
               1. Ti. 4. 5. Secondly, he
feedeth the ſoules of his ſheepe, with ſpirituall
and heauenly food, euen the hidden
mannah, and bread of life, which is come
downe from heauen, Ieſus Chriſt himſelfe, of
which bread whoſoeuer eateth by a true faith,
ſhall liue for euer
               Ioh. 6. 33.: and this is called hidden

Mannah
               Reu. 2. 17.. That mannah which the
fathers did eat in the wilderneſſe, was ſeen,
taſted, and eaten of all; but this bread of
life the Lord Ieſus, whereof that was a Sacrament
or figure, is a hidden mannah,
none can come nigh it, none can ſee it, none
can taſt of it, but ſuch as haue a true and
liuely faith; they all indeede which beleeue,
ſhall receiue ſomewhat of it, euen
as it were ſome morſels therof in this preſent
life, (which ſhalbe ſufficient to make
them liue, yea to make them fat and well
liking) and in the life come, they ſhall bee
moſt plentiouſly filled, and feede thereof
with continuall delight; for it is not as our
daintie meats wherwith we fill the belly,
which (though they be neuer ſo ſweet and
delicate) when we are full, wee loath, but
the ſweet taſt hereof continueth ſtill, without
any ſacietie for euermore: bleſſed are
they which hunger for this heauenly mannah,
as they cannot but long for it, which
once doe truely taſt it, nay the more wee
feed, the more we ſhall hunger, for all the
ſweete dainties of the world, are but as
draffe vnto it.
            2 Secondly,VVhat maner of paſture, Gods ſheepe feede vpon. if you would knowe what
manner of paſture this is, it is not barren,

rotten, or ſoyled graſſe: but the Prophet
ſaith, it is greene or flouriſhing paſture,
and that principally in theſe two reſpects:
Firſt, becauſe though all Gods ſheepe, who
euer liued heretofore, though thouſand
thouſands haue fed therein; yet it waſteth
not, but is ſtill as greene, and ſufficient to
feed euerie beleeuer, as euer it was, for Ieſus
Chriſt yesterday, & to day, the ſame is for
euer
               Heb. 13. 8, the Lambe ſlaine from the beginning
of the world
               Reu. 13. 8, and that Lambe of God which
for euer taketh away the ſinnes of the world
               Ioh. 1. 29.
Secondly, becauſe the longer we feed, the
fatter we ſhall be, we neede no change, as
Dauid ſaith: Such as be planted in the houſe
of the Lord, ſhall flouriſh in the Courts of our
God, they ſhall bring forth more fruit in their
age, and ſhall be fat and well liking
               Pſ. 92. 13, and as
it is greene, and flouriſhing, ſo alſo ſweet
and nouriſhable, compared to wine and
milke
               Eſa. 55. 1.. Yea, by the ſame Prophet Eſay,
in another place, compared to wines fined
and purified, and to fat thinges full of marrow
               Eſa. 25. 9..
            3 Thirdly, where doth this greene and
flouriſhing paſture grow?VVhere this good paſture groweth.
            
            A. Surely, not on euery mountaine, nor
in waſt wilderneſſes, and vntilled forreſts,

but as God himſelfe ſaith, thrice in one
Chapter, alreadie cyted, it only groweth vppon
the high mountains of Iſrael
               Ezec. 34. 13, 14.. And what
are theſe high mountaines of Iſrael, but
the high and holy Oracles of God committed
vnto Iſrael
               Rom. 3. 2. The woord of God is that
ſweet and ſincere milke wherewith he feedeth
his lambes
               1. Pet. 2. 2., and the ſacred Scriptures,
are thoſe pleaſant paſture fields, wherein
grow thoſe liuing hearbs, wherof whoſoeuer
eateth by faith, ſhall be fed vp to eternall
life: in compariſon whereof, all other
writings of men, are but as barrein
and drie mountaines, which thing Gods
ſheepe doe well know, and therefore will
not follow, but rather flie from thoſe ſtrā
               gers,
that would lead them into other paſture,
and feed them with other food
               Ioh. 10. 5. Here
then is a good Caueat for all ſuch as are
deputed Paſtors, by the great Shepheard,
that (if they deſire to be foūd faithful vnto
the flocke, and to render an account with
ioy) they make conſcience to feede Gods
ſheep with the right paſture, according to
the councell of S. Peter: If any man ſpeak,
let him speake as the wordes of God
               1. Pet. 4. 11, and
not follow the example of thoſe treacherous
Paſtors in the Church of Rome, who

ſuffer the ſoules of Gods people to famiſh
and pine away, hauing nothing to lay before
them, but Schoole-mens toyes, mens
traditions, and vnwritten verities, as they
call them, tying their conſciences to a
ſtrickt obſeruation of daies, whereof ſome
are blaſphemous, many fabulous, and all
of them idolatrous; and alſo enioyning
them a preciſe difference of meats, as taſt
not, touch not, handle not
               Coloſſ. 2. 21., and that for verie
pietie and religion ſake, wherein they
come no whit ſhort of the old heretickes,
the Tatianes, and Manichies, in maintenance
of this doctrine of Diuels, as the holy
Apoſtle calleth it1. Ti. 4. 1..
            4 Now that wee haue ſeene what it is,How Gods ſheepe muſt come to feed in his paſture.
the manner of it, and where this paſture
groweth, let vs in the laſt place, conſider
how Gods ſheep muſt come to feed thereon,
and that doth Marie tell vs in her
ſong, he filleth the hungry with good things,
and ſendeth away the rich emptie
               Luk. 1. 53.. Proclamation
was made by the Prophet Eſay,
for all them that thirsted, to come to the waters
of life
               Eſay 55. 1. yea, and by Chriſt himſelfe,
who in the laſt and great day of the feaſt,
ſtood and cryed, He that thirsteth, let him
come and drinke
               Ioh. 7. 37., and pronounceth them

               bleſſed that hunger and thirſt
               Mat. 5. 6: whereby we
are giuen to vnderſtand, that they are no
marchants for Gods market, to buy wine
and milke, that doe not thirſt; nor ſheepe
to feed in his greene paſtures, that haue
full ſtomacks, for ſuch is the qualitie of
this graſſe, ſo ſweet, pleaſant, and wholeſome,
that the more we taſt, and feed on
it, the more ſhall wee hunger after it: the
more we read, heare, meditate, and exerciſe
our ſelues in the holy Scriptures, the
greater will bee our deſire, and delight
therein.
            Here then commeth to be bewailed,The fearefull contempt of the word in euerie place very lamentable. the
lamētable eſtate of many thouſands, contemners
of the word of God, who make
no conſcience to repaire to thoſe places of
Gods worſhip, where the bread of life is
broken, but ſpend the beſt houres of the
beſt daies, in carding and dicing, piping
and dauncing, chambering and wantonneſſe,
ryot and drunkenneſſe, ſpeaking euill
of them, that will not run with them,
in their damnable waies; Oh, what will
not men doe to ſatisfie their hunger? and
what careth hee for delicates that is full
gorged? Euen this one thing doth witnes
to the faces of many thouſands in this

land, that they haue neuer yet truly taſted
of this heauenly food. When Mannah firſt
fell, the people of Iſrael were ſo exceeding
greedie and deſirous of it, that notwithſtanding
God was mercifull to preuent
ſinne, by taking away the occaſion, not
ſuffering any to fal vpon the Saboath day,
yet notwithſtanding ſome of them, contrarie
to expreſſe commaundement, went
out euen on the Saboath to gather, as if
they could neuer bee ſatisfied, nor haue
inough of it
               Ex. 16. 25.. But they had not long eaten
of it their bellies full, but they beganne
to loath it, ſaying: Our ſoules are dried vp,
we can ſee nothing but this Mannah
               Num. 11 6. Euen
ſo, when it pleaſed God, that by the
meanes of our gracious Queene, the Goſpell
began firſt to be preached in this land,
oh how forward and zealous men were,
ſparing for no labor or coſt, ſo they might
enioy and be made partakers of the miniſtry
thereof, being full of burning loue to
the glorie of Chriſt, and euen ſtriuing who
ſhould be forwardeſt to perform any good
worke, that might aduance the ſame; but
now that the Goſpell hath beene ſo long
continued amongſt vs: alas, whither can
we caſt our eies, vpon any place, where

the Goſpel hath beene preached, but euen
a few yeares, & not ſee, with the church of
Epheſus, a fearefull falling from their firſt
loue
               Reu. 2. 4.? Oh Lord what great cauſe haue
we, all of vs, and eſpecially wee Miniſters
of the worde to bee inſtant with God, to
quicken his graces in vs, and to keepe vs
vpright, that with a true zeale to Gods
glorie, and a feruent loue to Chriſt, and his
Church, we may performe all holy dayes,
that ſo the graces of God, may ſpring afreſh
in our people, and their appetites be
prouoked to hunger after this heauenly
foode, leaſt otherwiſe God in iuſtice, ſhut
vp his paſture gates, and remoue his Candle-ſticke
from vs, as he threatned the
Church of Epheſus
               Reu. 2. 5.. It woulde make a
mans heart to bleede, that hath in it any
ſparke of remorſe, and is not harder then
Flint, or Adamant, to paſſe by the priſons
and grates in London and elſe-where, to
ſee their gaſtly countenances, and heare
their rewful complaints, for want of food:
but ſurely if euery ſoule had but a grate to
looke through, & crie for her ſelfe, a thouſand
times more wofull and lamentable,
would their crie be in all places and companies,
and yet is this the miſerable difference,

the hunger of the bodie is felt and
perceyued, whereby all good meanes
are vſed for comfort, but the want of the
ſoule is not diſcerned: but as God ſayd to
the Church of Laodicia: Thou ſayeſt I
am rich, and encreaſed with goods, and haue
neede of nothing, and knowest not that thou
art vvretched, miſerable, poore, blind, and
naked
               Reu: 3. 17. So may it be ſaid of the hungerſtarued
ſoule, Thou thinkeſt thou art in good
plight, fat, and vvell liking, and knowest not
that thou art poore, leane, miſerable, and readie
to ſtarue, and hereby it commeth to
paſſe, that Gods paſture, is contemned, and
troden vnder footeEze. 34. 18, of none more, then
of them that are ready to periſh, and know
it not. The Lord giue all ſuch a true knowledge,
and feeling of their eſtates, that they
may in a holy manner, more and more
hunger after this heauenly foode, wherewith
their ſoules, may be fed vp, to euerlaſting
life, &c. And ſo much for the firſt
dutie of a good ſhepheard, which is, to
prouide wholſome foode for his ſheepe,
which thing our heauely ſhepheard, doth
moſt aboundantly for vs his poore ſheepe,
that we may ſay with Dauid, The Lorde
being our ſhepheard, vve ſhall not vvant any

paſture.
            
            
               And leadeth me by the ſtil waters.
               2. Dutie▪
                The 2.
dutie of a good ſhepheard is to prouide,
wholeſome and conuenient water for his
ſheep, and ſpecially in thoſe hote and dry
Countryes and Regions, and therefore we
reade of their great care this way. Iacob in
his iourney to Padan-Aram, looked, and
behold there was a Well in the field, and loe,
three flockes of ſheepe lay thereby, for at that
Well were the flockes vvatered, and there was
a great ſtone vpon the Wels mouth, and thither
vvere all the flockes gathered
               Gen. 29. 2. 3: ſo likewiſe
wee reade of the Prieſt of Midians
daughters, who came and drevv vvater, and
filled the troughes, for to vvater their fathers
ſheep, and the ſhepheards came & droue them
away: but Moſes roſe vp and defended them,
and vvatered their ſteepe
               Exo. 2. 16. But euerie water
is not fit for ſheepe, it muſt either be in
troughes, or as the Prophet ſayth, Leniter
fluentes (ſtil waters)Leniter fluentes, rapidi torrentes ad potū ouium incommodi, atque etiam vt plurim. noxii ſunt Moll. in pſ. For as writers affirm,
violent ſtreames are inconuenient, and for the
most part hurtfull
               Leniter fluentes, rapidi torrentes ad potū ouium incommodi, atque etiam vt plurim. noxii ſunt Moll. in pſ. Now how carefull
this great ſhepheard is to water, as well as
to feede his ſheepe! Dauid in the perſon
of them all thus witneſſeth (He leadeth me
to the ſtill vvaters) where, by ſtill waters,

the Prophet ſignifieth, the ſweet and comfortable
graces of Gods ſpirit, conueyd by
the conduit pypes of his worde and Sacraments,
for the refreſhing of the drie and
thirſtie ſoules of his people, which Metaphor
is very common in the Scriptures, ſo
the Lord telleth his Church, that he waſhed
her with vvater
               Eze. 16. 9, and promiſeth that hee
vvillpowre cleane water vpon her, and clenſe
her from al her filthineſſe
               Eze. 36. 25. Yea, Chriſt hath
ſaid, Except a man bee borne of this vvater,
and the ſpirit, he cannot enter into the Kigdome
of heauen
               Iohn. 3. 5. And vnto the woman of
Samariah, VVhoſoeuer drinketh of this vvater
ſhall thirst againe, but vvhoſoeuer ſhall
drinke of the vvater that I ſhall giue him,
ſhall neuer thirſt any more, but the water that
I ſhall giue him, ſhall bee in him a VVell of
vvater, ſpringing vp into euerlaſting life
               Ioh. 4. 13 14.
And yet moſt plainely elſewhere in the
ſame Goſpel. If any man thirſt, let him come
vnto me and drinke, he that beleeueth in me,
as ſaith the Scripture, out of is bellie ſhall
flow riuers of vvater of life, (this ſpake he of
the ſpirit, which they that beleeued in him,
ſhould receiue.
               Ioh. 7. 37 38) And ſurely this Metaphor
is not ſo frequent and common, as fit and
ſignificant: for as there is nothing more

acceptable to a wearie, thirſtie traueller,
then a cup of cold water (ſo that wiſe Salomon
could not more excellently declare
the ioyfulneſſe of good newes, from a farre
Countrey, then by this ſimile, that as cold
vvaters are to a vvearie ſoule, ſo are good
nevves from a farre Countrey
               Pro. 25. 23.) So is there
nothing ſo welcome and comfortable to a
thirſting ſoule, as the graces of Gods ſpirit,
without which it pyneth, fainteth and
languiſheth away, as Dauid in many places
of his Pſalmes complainethPſa. 42. 2 and 143. 6. Dauid
as one of Gods ſheepe, had often beene
led to theſe ſtill waters, as he himſelfe hath
witneſſed, ſaying: In the multitudes of the
ſorrovves of my heart, thy comforts haue reioyced
my ſoule
               Pſ. 94. 16 And the Apoſtle alſo,
who witneſſed, as the ſufferings of Chriſt
abound in vs, ſo our cōſolations abound much
more
               2. Cor. 1 5. Yea, which of Gods ſheepe but
muſt confeſſe with Eſay, VVe haue ioyfully
dravvne vvaters out of the Wels of ſaluation
               Eſay. 12. 3. And with Ieremie, Thy compaſſions
faile not, but are renued euery morning
               Lam. 3. 22.
            If wee would know the excellencie of
theſe graces, the Church by two worthie
Metaphors, declareth the ſame: firſt ſayth
ſhe: Thy name is like the ſauour of a good

oyntment powred out
               Cant. 1. 2. What doth more
delight the ſenſe of ſmelling, then the ſauour
of ſome precious oyntment, and ſpecially,
the ſame powred out. We read in the
Goſpel, of a woman, which had a box of
verie coſtly oyntment of Spiknard, & ſhee
brake the boxe, and povvred the oyntment
vpon the head of Ieſus as he ſate at the table,
and the houſe was filled vvith the ſwet ſauour
thereof
               Mar. 14. 3. Iohn. 12. 3. But theſe graces which do runne
from Chriſt as the head, into all the partes
of his myſticall bodie, are farre, ſweeter,
then any ſpikenard, or that moſt precious
oyntment, vvhich vvas povvred vppon the
head of Aaron, and ran dovvne to the ſkirts
of his cloathing
               Pſa. 133. 2 Secondly, thy loue is better
then wineCant. 1. 1. Wine is a moſt cōfortable
bleſſing, giuen to make glad the heart
               Pſal. 104 15.
And therefore the wiſe man would haue
wine giuen to him that hath grief of hart,
that he may forget his pouertie, and remember
his his miſerie no morePro. 31. 6 yea, what
more pleaſant to the taſte then wine, in ſo
much that many make it their greateſt felicitie,
to fill and ſtuffe themſelues therewith:
but yet in compariſon hereof, the
ſweeteſt wines are as bitter as gall and
wormewood. For what can wine, or any

worldly delights, giue comfort to him
that is vexed with Gods ſtormes, affrighted
with terrors of an euil cōſcience, or on
whoſe ſoul the horrors of hel haue ſeazed.
No, no, it is onely the aſſurance of Gods
loue, and comfortable graces of his ſpirit,
that maketh ſuch an ones heart reioyce
with ioy vnſpeakable and glorious; witnes
the Apoſtles, who hauing taſted hereof,
they forgot their preſent miſery and trouble,
& out of the Dungeon, ſung Pſalmes
of praiſe vnto God at midnightActs. 16. 25 The
Saints alſo, who in the dayes of Traian
did ſing Pſalms vnto God before dayHymnos ante lucanos., as
Plinius ſecundus did write vnto the Emperour
in their behalfeEuſeb. Pamphilus. lib. 3. ca. 30. And the holy
Martyrs of God, in our forefathers dayes,
who haue reioyced, and kiſſed the ſtake,
yea and clapped their hands in the midſt
of the flaming fire, as the hyſtories of
our Church beaare witneſſeActs and Mon. pag. 1447. 10. 2.
            Oh that our ſoules were througly
athirſt for theſe waters, that we coulde
truly ſay with Dauid, As the heart braieth
for the riuers of waters, ſo panteth my ſoule
after thee O God, my ſoule thirſteth for God,
yea euen for the liuing God
               Pſ. 24. 1. 
                     •
                  
               . And againe,
My ſoul thirſteth after God, euē as the drie

ground
               Pſa. 143. 6, That wee might make it our
moſt earneſt deſire and requeſt with the
woman of Samariah, Lord giue vs of this
water
               Ioh. 4. 15, For then ſurely he would ſatiſfie
our deſire, he would bring vs into his
wine-celler, and ſay to vs, as he did to his
Church, and the members thereof, Eate
oh friends, drinke and make you merrie
               Cant. 5. 1.
Yea, we ſhould (as we heard the Prophet
Eſay ſay) with ioy, Draw waters out of the
welles of ſaluation, & haue in vs a Welſpringing
vp into euerlasting life.
            
            But alas,It is lamentable to cō
                  ſider how theſe ſtill waters are not regarded. it is lamentable to conſider,
that though moſt men thirſt after
riches, honour, & preferment, and therein
are neuer ſatiſfied, but like the graue that
neuer ſaith ho, yet care they not for thoſe
ſweete waters of Shiloah, flowing from
the ſanctuarie of God, and running ſoftly.
Once to touch them with their lips,
which indeede is a fearefull argument,
that moſt haue neuer yet truely taſted of
them, for (as we heard before) the nature
of Gods paſture is ſuch, that the more
his ſheepe do feed therein, the more they
hunger after it: ſo the nature of his waters
is ſuch, that the more his ſheepe doe
drinke thereof, the more they may, yea,

the more inſaciably doe they thirſt after
them, whereby it commeth to paſſe, that
none are more importunate ſutors vnto
God, to haue his graces increaſed in thē,
nor more diligent and zealous in the vſe
of the ſanctified meanes, then ſuch as by
his mercie haue obtained the greateſt
meaſure thereof, an example herein wee
haue the Church herſelfe, who beeing
brought into Chriſtes wine-celler, and
hauing taſted how ſweet it was vnto her
mouth, ſhe cried out to bee ſtaied with
flagons of wine, being verie ſicke of loue
               Can. 2. 4, 5.
The meaning is this, that Chriſt giuing
to his Saints the earneſt and firſt fruits of
the ſpirit, and as it were through little creuiſes
diſtilling into their ſoules, a drop or
twaine of his mercies and loue, they are
ſo rauiſhed with the ſweeteneſſe thereof,
that they become not onely loue-ſicke,
but euen readie to faint, and to ſwound
with the deſire of hauing more, yea her fil
thereof, hauing flagons of that pure and
precious liquor.
            Oh then,Vſe. I beſeech you, yea I humbly
beſeech the Lord, both for mee and you,
that it may euery day more and more appeare,
that wee are true members of this

Church, and ſheepe of Gods paſture, by
ardently thirſting after theſe heauēly waters,
that where as moſt men ſay, who wil
ſhew vs any good, wee may with Dauid
eſteeme this aboue all things, and ſay,
Lord lift thou vp the light of thy countenance
vpon vs, for this is it, which (when all the
world forſaketh) ſhall giue vs true peace,
and comfort at the laſt. So much for the
ſecond dutye: The thirde followeth,
which is;
            To prouide reſt at noone,3. Dutie. To prouide reſt at noon that in ſome
ſhadow, where the ſheepe are freed from
the ſcorching heate of the Sunne, they
may lie downe and chew the cud, and
this is no leſſe needfull and comfortable,
then either of the former, and ſpecially in
thoſe hot Regions and Countryes, where
the ſhepheards thēſelues, could not tend
their flocks, without their tēts or booths:
whereunto Ezechiah alluding, ſayeth:
Mine habitation is remooued like a Shepheards
Tent
               Eſa. 38. 12. But let vs conſider what
is that comfortable reſt, which Ieſus
Chriſt the great ſhepheard prouideth for
his ſheepe? And that is two-fold; for as he
feedeth the bodie and ſoule, ſo alſo hee
prouideth reſt for both.
            
               
Firſt,Chriſt prouideth a bodily reſt for his ſheep and what it is. he prouideth reſt for the bodie,
in time of hotte perſecution, whereunto
the Church alluding, ſayth: Shew mee, oh
thou whom my ſoule loueth, where thou feedeſt,
and where thou cauſeſt thy flocke to lie
downe at noone
               Cant. 1. 6 At the noonetide the
Sunne is hotteſt, neither can any thing hide
it ſelfe frō the heate therof as Dauid ſaithPſal. 19. 6.
And how comfortable a ſhadow is at that
time, experience (euen in theſe cold countries)
declareth, and the example of Ionah
beareth witneſſe, who ſitting on the
eaſt ſide of the Citie Naniuie, to ſee what
ſhould be done in the citie, and the Sunne
beating vpon his head that he fainted, the
Lord God prepared a Gourd, and made it to
come vp our Ionah, that it might be a ſhadow
ouer his head, and deliuer him from his
griefe: ſo Ionah was exceeding glad of the
Gourd
               Ionah. 4. 5, 6, 7.: for what is more intollerable
then heate? It is one of the curſes threatned

                  Deu. 28. 22 Ardor & aeſtus.. And when the fourth Angel powred
out his Violl vppon the Sunne, and it
was giuen him to torment men with heate of
fire, then men boyled in great heate, and blaſphemed
the name of God, as is mencioned in
the booke of the ReuelationReu. 16. 8, what a ſingular
cōfort then is it vnto Gods people,

that when the Sunne of perſecution is hotteſt
               Mat. 13. 21, yet their ſhepheard will one way
or other prouide a ſhadow of refreſhing
 for them, either by preſeruing them ſecretly
from the rage of tyrannie, as he did
in the dayes of Ahab and Ieſabel, when
not onely Elizah, and an hundred Prophets
of the Lorde were ſaued, being hid
by fiftie in a Caue, and fed with bread and
water, by good Obadiah
               1. Kin. 18 13, but alſo ſeuen
thouſand in Iſrael which neuer bowed their
knees vnto Baal
               1. Kin. 19 18. Or ſecondly by ſending
them gracious kings and princes,
 ſuch as may be vnto Gods Saints, as an
hyding place from the winde, and as a refuge
for the tempeſt, as riuers of water in a
drie place, and as the ſhadow of a great rocke
in a wearie land, as was prophecied of
Ezekiah
               Eſay 32. 2. Or thirdly, the Lord giueth
 them fauour in the eyes of forraine Princes,
as Dauid with his two wiues, and the
ſixe hundred men that were with him,
ſeeking refuge againſt the cruell perſecution
of Saul, by flying vnto Achiſh king of
Gath, he ſecurely enterteined thē, & gaue
them Ziglag to dwell in
               1. Sam. 27 3: And thus by
Gods mercie, Geneua, Germanie, & other
places, were a ſhadow to our perſecuted

fathers, as Englang this day, is vnto many
of the like condition againe.
            But laſtly, if the Lord for his owne glorie 
ſake, and the good of his Church, doe
ſuffer this Sunne to ſhine vpon them, and
ſcorch them, yet doth hee ſend vnto them
the Comforter
               Ioh. 16. 7, which maketh them to
reioyce in afflictions
               Rom. 5. 3. And though they
haue trouble the world, yet haue they ſweete
peace in Christ
               Ioh. 16. 33, that euen the burning
flames of fire, are as a moſt comfortable
ſhadow vnto them, as the ioyfull deathes
of many the holy Martyrs of God doe
witneſſe.
            The conſideration whereof,Vſe. yeeldeth
Gods people a very profitable vſe, viz.
that whereas carnall and worldly wiſe
men, whenſoeuer they perceiue any trouble
or daunger to bee imminent, for the
profeſſion of the Goſpel, they account it
their greateſt ſafetie to flie from Chriſt,
and conforme themſelues to all times,
places, and companies, and to carry themſelues
ſo indifferently, that no man can
ſay of what religion they are. But if wee
will ſhew our ſelues true members of the
Church, we muſt in all dangers flie vnto
Chriſt, knowing that he both can and will

prouide a reſt for his ſheepe, hee hath a
layer at noone, and when the Sunne ſhineth
hoteſt, he will make vs lie downe
in peace, in the verie midſt of our enemies:
oh then, let vs neuer bee aſhamed
of Chriſt, nor afraid to profeſſe his Goſpel,
for if once we be ſhrowded vnder
the ſhadow of his wings, though the earth
remoue, we need to feare none euill, and if
once we enter by him, as the doore; wee
ſhall bee ſafe, and go in and out, and finde
pasture
               Ioh. 10. 9.
            And nowe to make application of
thoſe things vnto our ſelues,The bleſſed reſt that Gods ſheepe haue founde in this land vnder the happie gouernment of queene Elizabeth. wee were
vnworthie to haue our heades ſheltred
vnder the ſame, if we doe not continually,
thankfully record, the ſweete reſt and
comfortable ſhadow which Gods people
haue ſo long enioyed, in this lande,
vnder the happie gouernment of our
gracious Princeſſe Elizabeth.
               O bona ſi ſua norint Angli. During
whoſe raigne, it may as truly be ſaid of
her people, as euer of the people in Salomons
dayes, that wee haue liued without
feare, and euerie one ſate vnder the ſhadow
of his vine and fig tree
               1. King. 4. 25. Which ſhadow,
God as ſeaſonably prouided, as euer
he did Ionahs Gourd, euen when the

ſoules of his ſheepe were readie to faint,
being ſcorched with the feruent Eaſt
wind, and noone-tide ſun of cruell perſecution,
in the dayes of Queene Mary;
oh that we had rightly vſed this reſt! It is
ſaid in the commendation of the church
of Iudeah, Galile and Samariah, that hauing
reſt they were edified, and walked in
the feare of the Lord, and were multiplied by
the comfort of the holy ghoſt
               Act. 9. 31. Oh, if wee
had made ſuch vſe of our long reſt, euen
hungerly to haue fedde in Gods greene
paſtures, thirſtily to haue drunke of thoſe
ſtill waters, and cheerefully to haue
chewed the cudde vnder this ſhadow,
the Lord had had a moſt glorious church
in this land by this day! but alas, we haue
all of vs ſo abuſed our peace, libertie, and
proſperitie, to carnall ſecuritie, and haue
paſſed away this happie time, as men in
a dreame, that now it is high time to repent,
awake from ſin, and ſeeke the Lord,
leaſt otherwiſe we prouoke him to prepare
a worme to ſmite our Gourd that it
wither, and it be ſaid vnto vs as it was to
the rich man 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               , You
haue had your Gourd, now it is dead, & cā
not be reuiued. So much for the bodily

reſt, which Chriſt prepareth for his ſheep.
            The ſecond reſt,The ſpirituall reſt which chriſt prouideth for the ſouls of his people and that which is a
thouſand times more precious, is the ſpirituall
reſt of the ſoule, whereby it is ſhadowed
and refreſhed, againſt the intollerable
and conſuming heate of Gods
wrath, and this reſt or ſhadow Chriſt Ieſus
himſelfe is, he is our peace
               Eph. 2. 14, through
whom God is wel pleaſed, as he himſelf hath
proclaimedMat. 3. 17. It is he that hath troden the
wine-preſſe of his father alone
               Eſa. 63. 3, Yea, hee is
a ſtrength to the poore and needie, in their
trouble, a refuge against the tempeſt, and
ſhadow againſt the heate, as the Prophet
Eſay ſpeakethEſa. 25. 4. Yea, the Church herſelf
acknowledgeth him for her onely ſhadow,
ſaying: Like the Appletree amongst
the Trees of the Forrest; ſo is my wel-beloued
amongest the ſonnes of men, vnder
his ſhadow had I delight, and ſate downe
               Cant. 2. 3.
The ſhadow of a tree is comfortable,Chriſt Ieſus the onely comfortable reſt of the ſoule. and
doth greatly refreſh them that are parched
with the boyling heate of the Sun,
but there is no ſhadow ſo comfortable
to the bodie, as Chriſt Ieſus is vnto the
ſoule, that is ſcorched with the firie
temptations of SathanEph. 6. 16, and burning
heate of a guiltie conſcience for ſinne;

yea, there is no other tree able to ſhadow
vs, and therefore ſayth Chriſt, Come
vnto me all yee that trauell and are heauie
loadned, and I will refreſh you, take my yoke
vpon you, and you ſhall finde reſt vnto your
ſoules
               Mat. 11. 29. Yea, the Saints of God, hauing
beene vexed with his ſtormes, and once
comming vnder the ſhadow of this tree,
they finde ſuch wealth, reſt, and peace
therein, that they do ſit downe and neuer
ſeeke any further, nay for the world, they
would not bee drawne away from the
ſame againe.
            It is farre otherwiſe with Idolaters,Idolaters can find no true peace in their ſuperſtitious traditions. and
ſuch as do worſhip falſe gods: for though
they puniſh and afflict themſelues many
wayes; ſeeking by all meanes to make
ſatisfactions for their ſinnes, and to coole
the flaming heate of their guiltie conſciences,
yet when they haue wearied themſelues,
& done all that euer they can, they
they are ſo farre from being ſatisfied, finding
eaſe, or taking away the ſting of ſin,
that rather as Dauid ſayth they doe multiplie
ſorrowes vpon their heads
               Pſal. 16. 4. There is no
true reſt in the worlde but onely vnder
the ſhadowe of this Apple-tree Ieſus
Christ.
            
            
               
To conclude this point, ſeeing wee
haue heard that this good ſhepherd, prepareth
abounantly, both paſture, water,
& ſhadow, let vs, I beſeech you, as Gods
ſheepe, hunger after this foode, thirſt after
theſe waters, and take our delight in
this reſt: then ſhall we no more hunger,
after the draffe of humane traditions, nor
thirſt after the puddle of popiſh poyſoned
cups, no more wearie our ſelues, ſeeking
for reſt in our owne merits and ſatisfactions:
but hauing fedde in theſe paſtures,
drunke of theſe waters, and reſted
vnder this ſhadow: wee ſhall haue the
heate of ſinne ſlaked, and our ſoules fatted
with the taſte of theſe heauenly delicates,
till in the end wee be brought into
the preſence of God, where the fulneſſe of
ioy ſhall euer be preſent with vs,Beata vita in fonte. wherewith
we cannot be filled: or rather, filled,
but cannot be ſatisfied: for there is bleſſedneſſe
at the head of the ſpring, not in
the Ceſterns, or Conduits, For with God
is the Well of life, and he ſhall giue his Saints
drinke out of the riuer of his pleaſures, as
Dauid ſaythPſal. 36. 8, Which riuer is as cleare as
Chriſtall, proceeding out of the throne of
God
               Reu. 22. 1. Yea, and there ſhall we find the

               tree of life, whoſe leaues are not onely for ſhadow,
but for medicine to heale the Nations
with
               Reu. 22. 2, yea and beareth fruit, not onely to
ſatisfie the hunger, but twelue manner of
fruits, euery Moneth brought forth to ſatisfie
the pleaſure of his Saints
               Reu. 22. 2. Oh, for
it, let vs ſharpen our appetites, and beſeech
him that hath planted it, to bring
vs thither where we may taſte how
wholeſome and pleaſant
the fruit of it is! It
followeth.
         
         
            
            THE
THIRD SERMON
vpon the 23. Pſalme.
            
               He reſtoreth my ſoule, and leadeth me in the
pathes of righteouſneſſe for
his names ſake.
            
            
               THe fourth dutie of a good
Shepheard,The 4. duty of a good and louing ſhepheard. is to beare
with the weake: and if
any of his flock be ſicke
or feeble, to cheriſh, noriſh,
and ſtrengthen thē,
yea, euen to carrie them in his boſome,
for ſo the Lord himſelfe alluding to theſe
qualities of a good ſhepheard, ſayth. Hee
ſhall feede his flocke like a ſhepherd, he ſhall
gather the Lambs with his arme and carrie
them in his boſome, and guide them that are
with yong
               Eſa. 40. 11: euen ſo kinde is the ſpirituall

ſheheard of our ſoules, that his ſheepe
being weake, he wil ſtrengthen; feeble, he
will cheeriſh; yea dead in ſinnes, hee will
quicken, reſtore and conuert them, by regenerating
and induing them, with a true
and liuely faith whereby they liue
               Heb. 10. 38: and
being vndoubtedly perſwaded of Gods
fauour and loue, doe reioyce with ioy vnſpeakeable
and glorious
               1. Pet. 1. 8. And this is the
grace whreof we are now to ſpeak, which
indeed is ſo great, that neither heart of
man, nor tong of Angels, are able fully to
conceiue or expreſſe: for what would it
profit Dauid, now that he is dead and ſeeth
corruption
               Act. 1. 29, that hee hath beene taken
frō following the Ewes great with yong,
to become a king in great honor & welth,
that he hath bin mighty in battel, & ſung
vnto in dāces, Saul hath ſlaine his thouſand
and Dauid his ten thouſand
               1. Sam. 11 7. If the Lord
had not conuerted his ſoule, yea what wil
it profit a man to win the whole worlde,
and looſe his owne ſoule, this, this, therfore
is more to be reioyced in, then the
finding of, all the kingdoms of the world,
happie Dauid, and happie that man or
woman, that can truely ſay vvith Dauid,
The Lord hath conuerted my ſoule.
               
Now that we may the more orderly
and profitably handle this ſtraine, there
are two things therein to be conſidered.
Firſt, the Conuerter (the Lord:) ſecondly,
the thing conuerted (the ſoule:) for the
firſt,
            He reſtoreth reſtituit animam,
               Doctrine. the words
are plaine, our leſſon for inſtructiō is this,
viz. That it is not our action, or in our
power, in part, or in all, to become the
ſheepe of Chriſt, but it is wholy the work
of God in vs, according to that of Chriſt,
in the Goſpell of ſaint Iohn,
               Poſtpone. 
               No man commeth
vnto me except my father draw him
               Ioh. 6. 44..
And againe in the ſame Goſpel, Other
ſheepe I haue alſo, which are not of this fold,
them alſo must I bring, and they ſhall heare
my voyce, and there ſhall be one ſheep-folde,
and one ſheepheard
               Io. 10. 26. For although in this
Text there is neither any addition of neceſſitie,
as that he (must) conuert the ſoul,
nor yet any exception, or excluſion, as
though (none other) could do it, but he:
yet vnder this ſignificant, and affectionate
worde (he) they both are included; by neceſſarie
implication, q. d. ô Lord, it is onely
thy worke,Confirmation. that my ſoule is conuerted, no
other can do it, but thou alone. Which leſſon

is confirmed by many other places of
Scripture. The Prophet Ieremie thus prayeth.
Conuert vs, O Lord, and we ſhall be conuerted
               Ier. 31. 18. Saint Paule ſayth: It is neither in
him that planteth, nor in him that watereth,
but God that giueth the increaſe
               2. Cor. 3. 7. And againe:
We are not ſufficient of our ſelues, to
thinke any thing
               2. Co. 3. 5. And Saint Iames ſaith:
Euerie good and perfect gift commeth downe
from aboue
               Iam. 1. 17. In a word, the whole ſtreame
of the Scriptures doe runne this way, to
proue this doctrine, that our conuerſion
vnto God, is no worke of any inferiour
power, but the peculiar worke, of the holy
and omnipotent ſpirit of God, ordinarily
wrought by the miniſtry of the word,
according to that of Dauid, The law of the
Lord is perfect, conuerting the ſoule
               Pſ. 19. 7. And
ſaint Paule ſaith, I am not aſhamed of the
Goſpell of Christ, for it is the mightie power
of God to ſaluation, to euery one that beleeueth
               Ro. 1. 16, And elſe where, Faith commeth by
hearing of the worde
               Rom. 10 17▪
               .
            The vſe of which doctrine ſerueth notably
to reforme our iudgement, as concerning
a very groſſe and daungerous hereſie,
maintained by the Church of Rome,
about the free will of man, in his pure naturals,

I will not in way of a cōmon place
enter into the handling of this large,VVherein the Papiſtes and wee doe differ about free-will. and
great controuerſie, with obiections, anſweres,
and replies, but onely by the way,
as I am occaſioned by my text, briefly lay
open the ſtate of the queſtion, and then
ſhew wherein they doe ſwarue both from
vs, and the deliuered and approued truth.
for the firſt, we may note, that the condition
 of man is foure-fold. 1 Of creation,
 2 Of corruption, 3 Of regeneration,
 Of glorification: ſecondly, we may obſerue,
 that the obiects of will are diuerſe,
and ſpecially of three ſorts. 1 Naturall
actions, which are common to men with
beaſts, as to eate, drinke, ſleepe, heare, ſee,
ſmell, &c. 2 Humane actions, as practiſe
of Mechanicall and liberall artes, or exerciſe
of morall vertues. 3 Actions ſpirituall
& diuine, &c. Now the queſtion of
free-will betwixt them and vs, is to bee
vnderſtoode, of mans free-will, concerning
ſpirituall actions, in the ſtate of corruption,
for in the other, though we altogither
agree not, yet is not the difference
ſo great,3. and materiall. Laſtly, wee are to
note, that ſpirituall actions, are two-fold,
either ſuch as concerne the kingdome of

darkeneſſe, or ſuch as corcerne the kingdom
of God: for ſuch actions as concerne
the kingdom of darknes, and are properly
ſins, we ioyne with them, and teach, that
in theſe man hath freedome of will ſinning
neceſſarily, but not conſtraynedlyNeceſſarie ſed non coacte. &c. In primae gratiae receptione; homines non ſeſe habent mere 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                   ſed ſunt gratiae dei 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                   Bezae quaeſt:,
But the maine difference betwixt them
and vs, is about free-wil in mans naturals,
as it is exerciſed, concerning actions ſpirituall
and good, as repentaunce, faith, the
conuerſion of a ſinner, new obedience, &
ſuch like: yet not as concerning the freedome
it ſelfe; for we ioyne with them and
ſay, that in the firſt conuerſion of a ſinner,
mans free-will doth concurre, with Gods
grace, as a fellow-worker in ſome ſort, for
God doth not worke vpon man as a ſenſleſſe
block or ſtone. Non ſicut lapidibus aut
aliis inſenſatis,
               He that made thee with out thee, will not ſaue without thee. Aug. 
               & operatur ſalutem, &c. August.
contra Pelag. 1. 5. Seeing he is indued
with reaſon, wil & vnderſtanding, (which
for ſubſtaunce do ſtill remaine, onely the
qualities changed.) And vnto true conuerſion,
the will is required, as well as the
worde, or ſpirit; for no man was euer conuerted
againſt his wil, neither is will conſtrained,
any will. But in this they and we
do exceedingly differ, as concerning the

cauſe of this libertie of will, in theſe ſpirituall
matters concerning Gods Kingdome;
for they ſay, mans free will is not
wholly extinguiſhed, but attenuated and
abated, as the man that fell amongſt
theeues, and was left halfe dead: and therfore
being aided and aſſiſted of grace, it is
able to will any thing appertaining vnto
ſaluation, and of it ſelfe to worke together
with grace, and ſo they giue not all
the glorie of their conuerſion vnto God,
but attribute part vnto grace, and part vnto
free will, working by a naturall power
               Liberum arbitrum nos facit volentes: gratia, bene volentes. Bernard lib de lib Arbit.. Contrarie
wiſe, we ſay according to the word
of God, that though the naturall power of
willing, and thinking be in vs, and is properly
ours, by the generall guift of God,
yet the holyneſſe, goodneſſe, and freeneſſe
hereof, are meerely, and entirely, wrought
in vs by the spirit of God
               Concilium Trident. Seſs. 6. cap. 1 & 5. Canon. 4.: and therefore
though the will doe concurre with Gods
grace, yet not as working, by any naturall
power or vertue, but as framed of
God,Bellarmine de grat. lib. 5. cap. 30. he giuing vs a wil to deſire the grace,
Volentes ex nolentibus August. contra 2.
Epiſt. Pelag. lib. 1. cap. 20. at the time that
he beſtoweth the grace vpon vs; and therfore
wee giue glorie vnto God, for the

whole worke, and confeſſe with Dauid to
his praiſe, hee conuerted my ſoule; as for
their Arg. drawne from the man, that was
left halfe dead,Rhemiſt. it is a feeble collection,Annot. in Luc. 10. ſect 6. & Rom. 9. ſect. 4. and
nothing agreeable to the ſcope and intent
of Chriſt, in the propounding of that parable;
yea and contrarie to other ſcriptures,
where we are plainely ſayd, not onely to be
halfe dead, but wholly dead
               Ro. 5. 12. Eph. 2. 1. 5. Col. 2. 13. not 
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                   
                  vn̄, but 
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  . And laſtly,
contrarie to the iudgement of Auguſtine,
who ſaith: Man before hee can become
righteous, hath neede of a Phiſitian, becauſe
hee is ſicke; yea of a quickner, becauſe
he is dead, Vt homo redeat adiuſtitiā,
opus habet medico, quia ſanus non eſt, imo opus
habet viuificatore, quia mortuus eſt
               Auguſt. de natur. grat. ca. 23.. So
much for the conuerter, the thing conuerted,
is the ſoule, (he conuerteth my ſoule)
God worketh not to halfes, laying a foundation,
without any further building: but
he finiſheth euerie good worke, that he taketh
in hand
               Phil. 1. 6. 
               he conuerteth the whole man, the
bodie aſwell as the ſoule, the eies, which were
full of adulterie, ſhall become chaſt, the hands
that were full of bribes, ſhall be ſeaſoned with
liberall guifts to the poore
               Eſay 32. 
                     •
                  . 
               the feete which
were ſwifts to ſhedde innocent bloud, ſhall bee
ſwift to releeue and helpe, the innocent oppreſſed,

the tongue that was defiled with blaſphemie,
and filthy speaking, ſhall speake reuerently,
and ſoberly, as may minister grace
to the hearers
               Eph. 4. 29, the head that was fraught
with couetous and carnall deuices, ſhall be
ſanctified with wholeſome and diuine meditations
               Pſ. 77. 6.. And in a word all the members
of the bodie, which haue been abuſed, to
become weapons of vnright couſneſſe vnto
ſinne, ſhall become weapons of righteouſneſſe
vnto God
               Ro. 6. 13.. But becauſe the root muſt
be good, before it can ſend forth ſap into
the braunches to the bringing forth of good
fruit
               Mat. 7. 17 12. 32.; And the fountaine muſt firſt bee
purged, before the ſtreames that iſſue
from the ſame, can bee made cleane and
ſweet: therefore muſt the heart, being the
root and fountaine, bee firſt purged, and
conuerted, without which, all holyneſſe
is but hipocriſie: and deuotion, diſſimulation:
Religion, ſuperſtition; and all appearing
of conuerſion, a counterfaiting before the
Lord: wherefore the Prophet Dauid, to
declare the trueth of his conuerſion, doth
wiſely, and purpoſely adde this circumſtance,
He conuerteth my ſoule: and therby
teacheth vs this leſſon,
            That vntill ſuch time as God conuertDoctrine.
               
our ſoules (howſoeuer wee may with an
outward appearance, bleare and deceiue
the eies of men,) yet can we neuer haue any
comfortable aſſurance, concerning our
eſtate with God, but rather looke when
God ſhall pluck away our maskes, and vizards,
and make vs bewray our hipocriſie
& diſſimulation, to thoſe who haue beene
moſt deceiued by vs. Iudas, hee obtained
fellowſhip in the ministration of the Apoſtleſhip
               Act. 1. 17 25.: But becauſe his ſoule was not
conuerted vnto God, he fell away like
water from one ſinne to another, till in
the end, he became guide to them that
tooke Ieſus, and ſo went aſtray to goe to
his owne place. Herode, hee feared and
reuerenced Iohn Baptist, and heard him
gladly, and did many things; but becauſe
his ſoule was not conuerted, hee embraced
a beloued ſinne: which when the man
of God reprooued, he took away his head
               Mar. 6. 17 18, 19, 20.
Demas was a companion of the Apoſtles,
but becauſe his ſoule was neuer truely
conuerted, in time (being ouercome of
couetouſneſſe) he fell away, and embraced
this preſent world
               2. Tim. 4 10. Were there euer any,
in the world, that for outward appearance
had greater ſhew of ſanctitie and

holineſſe, than the Scribes and Phariſies
                  •
               
               They looked ſower, and disfigured their face?
when they faſted, prayed in ſynagogues, and
corners of the ſtreets, gaue almes with the
ſound of a trumpet
               Mat. 6. 2. 5. 16., made their philacteries
broad, and fringes of their garments long,
compaſſed ſea and land to make a proſelyte,
tythed mint, anny ſe, and cummine, waſhed
the outſide of the cuppe and platter
               Mat 23. 15. 23. 25, 26: and yet
becauſe their ſoules were nto conuerted
vnto God, but full of couetouſneſſe, bryberie,
rapine, and extortion, our Sauiour
plucketh away the painted vizards from
their faces, and ratleth them vp, with many
a fearefull woe, laying their condition
moſt plainely before them by a worthy
compariſon, ſaying: You are like vnto
painted Sepulchers, goodly, and gorgeous
toombes, and monuments without, beautifull
to looke vpon; but within, full of rottenneſſe,
corruption, and dead mens bones
               Mat. 23. 27., and hath
told vs, except our righteouſneſſe exceed the
righteouſneſſe of the Scribes and Phariſies,
we ſhal neuer enter into the kingdome of heauen
               Mat. 5. 20..
            Oh Lord God,Vſe. how ought the conſideration
here of to rowſe vs vp euerie one,
to a thorough triall and examination of

our ſelues, that we be not deceiued with
a vaine perſwaſion, and opinion of our
eſtate and condition, as if all were well,
when it is ſtarke naught, and to think with
the Church of Laodicea, That we are rich
and increaſed in goods, and haue need of nothing,
when in truth we are very wretched,
blind, poore, miſerable, and naked
               Reu. 3. 17.. Oh then
let vs (as in the ſight of God) examine our
ſelues, how we ſtand affected, whether we
doe hate thoſe thinges which we haue
loued, whether we loath our former liues,
and be aſhamed of our old ſinnes, caſting
off the workes of darkeneſſe, liuing by
faith depending vpon the prouidence of
God, hauing knowledge to render a reaſon
of our faith, hauing a zeale to Gods
glorie, and a ſincere loue to the trueth, &
profeſſors thereof. If we find theſe things
in trueth in vs, though but in ſmall, and
weake meaſure: yet doubtleſſe, wee may
boldly pronounce with Dauid, The Lord
hath conuerted my ſoule, and happie is hee,
that euer he was borne, to ſee that houre;
but if we find not theſe thinges in vs, but
all that we haue to cleaue vnto, is a naked,
bare, and verball profeſſion: ſurely then,
let vs not flatter our ſelues, we are but in the

condition of many reprobates
               Eſay 1. 13: and if thus
we continue,Mich. 6. 6. 7 Mat. 15. 7. 8. we ſhall one day bee found,
filthily naked, for want of a wedding garment,
and be thruſt out of dores, by head
and ſhoulders, and haue our portion with
hypocrites.
            And ſurely,Application if we doe make application
of theſe thinges to our ſelues, it is a miſerable
thing, and would make the heart of
any man bleede, (that is not harder than
flint and Adamant) to conſider, the ruefull
eſtate and condition of many people,
who if they be demanded, how they hope,
or look to be ſaued, and in what ſtate they
ſtand before God: this is their common
anſwere, I hope well, that God will ſaue
that which he hath made, I goe orderly to
the Church and receiue the Sacrament, I
thanke God, I meane no body any harme,
but doe as I would be done vnto.
            But oh foole, know that God is a ſpirit,
and wil be worſhipped in ſpirit and truth,
and therefore it is not inough, not to
ſteale, not to cōmit whoredome, to beare
falſe witneſſe, to kill, to come orderly to
the Church, to pare off ſome ſinnes, to be
friendly to the profeſſors of the Goſpell,
and to lead a ciuill life; when as in the
meane time thy heart within, is filthy, full

of infidelitie, ignorance, pride, couetouſneſſe,
malice. What is all this thy Religion
now? ſurely as much regarded of God,
as the cutting off of a dogs necke, and offering
of ſwines bloud, as the Prophet ſaithEſa. 66. 3. 
               Thou
art like a goodly ſepulchre, full of filthineſſe;
Oh then, ſtriue to haue the inſide of the cup
and platter clenſed
               Mat. 23. 26 let the hidden man
of the heart bee decked, with a meeke and
quiet ſpirit
               1. Pe. 34 and ſpecially with loue, a good
conſcience, & faith vnfayned
               1. Ti. 1. 5; for the kings
daughter (as her apparell is of wrought
gold) ſo is ſhe glorious within
               Pſ. 45. 13: which ſpirituall
beauty, is a thing much ſet by, without
which, whatſoeuer we ſeeme to haue
(whether we be ſuperſtitious Papiſts, or
ceremonious Proteſtants) in the ſight of
God, it is nothing worth. What is then
more to be feared thā this, that the nūber
of true conuerts is very ſmall, whoſe harts
are vpright with God, and can truely ſay
with Dauid, The Lord hath conuerted my
ſoule; and I feare in the day of viſitation,
when the Lord will ſearch vs to the quick,
moſt mens conuerſion will be found but
copper, not able to abide the Lords touchſtone,
and when hee ſhall waie vs, in the
ballance of his ſanctuarie, Balthaſars Embleme,
               
may be written in our foreheads,
Mene,
               Numerauit, appendit, diuiſit. 
               mene, Tekell, vpharſin; thou haſt
been weighed in the ballance, and art found
too light
               Dan. 5. 25 Oh then whilſt the time of
grace and mercie laſteth, let vs follow the
councell of S. Peter, euen giue all diligence
to make our calling and election ſure
               2. Pet. 1. 10 that as
the ſheepe of Gods paſture, wee may in
truth, thankefully aknowledge with Dauid
our fold-mate, and ſay, Hee hath conuerted
my ſoule. It followeth:
            
               And leadeth me in the pathes of righteouſneſſe.
               5. dutie of a good Shepheard.
The holy Prophet, ſtill proſecuteth
this allegorie; And becauſe the ſheep
is of a ſtraying nature, and ſubiect to many
enemies, that ſeeke to pray vpon her;
it is therefore the dutie of a verie good
Shepheard, not onely to prouide paſture,
water, ſhadow, and to cheriſh the weake,
but alſo to guide and lead them in the
plaine way, from the fold to the paſture,
and from paſture, to paſture, according to
that of our Sauiour Chriſt, in the Goſpell
of S. Iohn, A good Shepheard calleth his
ſheepe by name, and leadeth them out, and
when hee hath ſent forth his owne ſheepe, hee
goeth before them, and the ſheep follow him
               Ioh. 10. 3. 4..
That it might therefore appeare, that God

is not wanting in the perfourmance of
any good dutie to his people, he thereunto
alludeth, ſaying: and he leadeth me in the
pathes of righteouſneſſe, q. d. The Lord
not only conuerteth the ſoules of his people,
and quickneth them by his ſpirit from
the graue of ſinne; but alſo being quickned
and conuerted, (knowing how weake
and proane they are to runne in the path
of deſtruction) he leaueth them not vnto
themſelues, but taketh charge of them,
and leadeth them in the path of righteouſneſſe,
finiſhing the good worke, which he
hath begunne in them, to his owne glory
and their eternall ſaluation.
            The generall doctrine from this ſtraine,The generall doctrine from this ſentence.
is this, viz: That as in God is the cōuerſion
of our ſoules, ſo from him is the continuance
of our vpright walking before him;
if euer he leaue vs to our ſelues, we fearefully
ſtart aſide, as we haue an example in
that faithfull and zealous King Ezekiah,
who being left of God, to trie him; in ſtead of
thankefulneſſe, (both for his gracious deliuerance
out of the hands of his enemies,
& for his miraculous reſtitution to health)
he bewrayed great pride of heart, in ſhewing
to the meſſengers of Merodache Baladan

King of Babell, all his treaſures of ſiluer,
gold, and armour
               2. Cro. 32 31. VVherevppon the aſſurance of the perſeuerance of Gods Saints is grounded.
            
            Q. If this be our weaknes, what is then
the ground of our aſſurance, that being
once conuerted, and brought into the
ſtate of grace, we ſhall continue therein?
            A. Euen here it is laid down, The Lord
will lead vs in the pathes of righteouſneſſe
this grace hath Chriſt prayed for, who was
heard in all thinges
               Ioh. 11. 42 
               Holy Father, keepe
them in thy name, euen thoſe that thou haſt
giuen me, and ſanctifie them with thy truth,
thy word is thy trueth
               Ioh. 17. 11. 17. Yea God himſelfe
hath promiſed, (who is faithfull and cannot
lie) I will not faile thee, neither forſake
thee
               Heb. 13. 6 So that howſoeuer for a moment
he may leaue, and forſake vs, for our triall,
that hauing experience of our weakeneſſe,
we may the more earneſtly cleaue
vnto him; yet doubtleſſe, he will not forſake
vs ouer long, but ſo order our goings
and lead vs forth, in the right way, that
for the beginning, continuance, and end of
our ſaluation, his name may haue all the
praiſe.
            The vſe whereof is,Vſe. that no man glory
in his owne ſtrength, which is but as a
read, that will breake to ſhiuers, but hee

that glorieth, glorie in the Lord
               Ierem. 9. 24 And ſay
with Dauid, The Lord is my strength and
my ſaluation
               Pſ. 18. 2. 
               & he is on my right hand, that
I ſhal not greatly fall
               Pſ. 16. 8. yea, let vs continually
pray with Dauid, Lord lead mee in thy
righteouſneſſe, becauſe of mine enemies, make
thy way plaine before my face
               Pſa. 5. 8.. And againe,
Caſt me not off in the time of mine age, forſake
me not when, my strength faileth me
               Pſ. 71. 9..
So much for the doctrine and vſe of this
whole ſtraine in general: now let vs more
neerely come to ſcanne the words in particular,
as they lye in order, for they are
verie ſignificant, and yeeld verie profitable
obſeruatiōs for our inſtructiō, & comfort,Diuiſion of this ſentence.
wherein firſt we are to conſider what
the lord doth: he leadeth; ſecondly, where
in the pathes: 3. what manner of pathes,1. part.
(of righteouſneſſe) of theſe in order.
            He leadeth;1. note. he ſaith not, he (ſheweth)
as if it were inough for Gods people to
know the way, and then they haue power
ſufficient of themſelues to walke therein,
but the Lord doth lead & conduct them
ſhewing them the way and giuing them
power to walke therein; This doth the
Church acknowledge in the Canticles,
where ſhe deſireth Chriſt to draw her
               Can. 1. 3. Alas

good virgin, her onely ioy and deſire is to
runne after Chriſt, in whom ſhe knoweth
her felicitie conſiſteth, and yet her legges
will not ſerue, her knees are ſo feeble, that
ſhe fainteth in the race, ſhe is ſo fettered
and hampred with the remnants of ſinne, and
preſſed downe with the reliques of corruption
               Heb. 12. 1 Gal. 5. 17., that ſhee cannot doe that which ſhee
would
               Ro. 7. 15, She loueth Chriſt, and yet is not
able to make any faſter ſpeede after him,
then hee ſhall drawe her, if hee ceaſe to
draw, ſhe by and by ceaſeth to runne.
            The vſe wherof ſerueth to condemne
the doctrine of the Church of Rome,Vſe. for
hereſie, and the Church her ſelfe for a bold
and impudent ſtrumpet, which maintayneth
with ſharp Arguments, euen fire and
ſworde, that mans enfeebled will (as they
call it) being once preuented and holpen
and as it were looſed, and ſet on foote by
grace, it can & doth performe all thingsCon. Trident. ſeſ. 6. ca. 5. can. 4 Rhem. Act. 13. ſect. 2. Bellarm. poteſt homo abſolute per liberum arbitrium, bene facere ſi velit &c. li. 5. cap. 29 reſponſ. ad teſtimon. 2..
But the true Church hauing receyued
grace; yea, after ſhe had run, and doth run:
yet ſhe craueth his graces, whereby ſhee
may bee enabled to runne faſter, and to
runne to the end; and Dauid here, though
he acknowledge hee hath receiued grace,
and God hath conuerted his ſoule; yet

ſtandeth he in need,Certum eſt nos velle cum volumus, ſed ille facit vt, velim us bonū; ratum eſt nos facere, cū facimus, ſed ille facit, vt faciamus, de bono perſeverat. ca. 16. ſtill by his grace, to
bee led forward in the pathes of righteouſneſſe,
it being certaine, that it is man
that willeth, whatſoeuer is willed, but god
is the cauſe that hee willeth that which is
good, man worketh whatſoeuer is
wrought, but God is the cauſe that we do
that which is good.
            Secondly, wee may note, that Dauid,
ſayth not, he (compelleth) but (leadeth) for
though the Shepheard doe ſtand in neede
of a rod to correct his wandring ſheepe,2. Note.
and make the ſlouthfull plodders, to paſe
it better, (as wee ſhall heare from the
next verſe) yet doeth God ſo inwardly
frame the affections of his Saints, that they
doe chearefully run in the wayes, of Gods
commandements, and after a holy maner,
doe ſtriue vnto perfection; ſo ſaith Dauid,
I will run the wayes of thy commandements,
when thou hast enlarged mine heart
               Pſal. 119. 32 And
Saint Paule ſaith, One thing I doe, I forget
that which is paſt, and endeuour my ſelfe,
to that which is before
               Phil. 3. 13 Yea, how great
the delight of Gods Saints is herein, Dauid
declareth, I haue had as great delight
in thy commaundements, as in all manner of
riches
               Pſ. 112. 14 
               They are dearer then thouſands

of gold and ſiluer, ſweeter alſo then honie and
the honie combe
               Pſ. 19. 10: So that here needeth
no compulſion, the way is ſo ſweete and
pleaſant, that the inner man is willing
               Math. 26 41: and
taketh great delight therein
               Ro. 7. 22. But becauſe
the fleſh is weake, therefore the Church
prayeth her ſpouſe: Draw me, and we will
run after thee
               Cant. 1. 3: thereby noting, that Gods
Saints being made pertakers of the outward
miniſterie of the word, and inwarde
powerfull working of the ſpirit, are moſt
chearefull and readie, with all ſpirituall
and holy affections, care and conſcience,
to follow God and his calling, and in outward
conuerſation, to ſhew themſelues
readie to treade the pathes of righteouſneſſe,
and ſtriue vnto ſanctification.
            Thirdly,3. Note. this Metaphor of (leading)
doth teach vs, that in al gods ſheepe, there
muſt be an holy growth and increaſe, a
growing forward vnto perfection, and the
meaſure of the age of the fulneſſe of Chriſt
               
                  Eph. 4. 13. In via virtutis, qui non proficit, deficit.
where there is a ſtanding ſtill, there is no
leading, nay in this way, there is no ſtanding
ſtill at all: he that goeth not forward,
goeth backward, though he thinke not ſo:
wherefore if we will approue our ſelues,
to be ſheepe of the Lords paſture, we muſt

               grow & go forward frō ſtrength to ſtrength
               Pſal 84. 7
               from faith to faith
               Ro. 1. 17., and from one meaſure
and degree of knowledge, zeale, and vertue,
to another, that wee may bring foorth more
fruit in our age
               Pſ. 92. 14: and being once deliuered
from the filthie Sodom of this world,
we take heed wee partake not with Lots
wife, in her ſinne, to looke backe againeGen. 19 26 Luk. 17, 32.
Oh, I beſeech you, let the knowledge of
this poynt, make vs all, both paſture and
people, enter into a deepe conſideration
of our wayes,Vſe. that if wee finde our
ſelues by Gods mercie, to be led forward
we may giue him thanks, and hold faſt, that
no man take away our crowne
               Reu. 3. 11: but if wee
find a decay of Gods graces in vs, we may
in time repent, and ſeeke to recouer our
former eſtate by double diligence, least he
remoue our Candlesticke
               Reu. 2. 5, and take from
vs that which we ſeemed to haue
               Luk. 8. 18. If our
conſciences doe witneſſe againſt many of
vs Miniſters,The fearfull going back, and falling away, both in miniſters and people. that whereas heretofore of a
zeale to Gods glorie, we haue diligently
preached the worde, and reioyced in the
cōming of the Sabboth, when wee might
emptie, and vnloade our ſelues of that we
haue gathered in the weeke day: of conſcience
wee haue abſtained from this or

that ſinne, and beene grieued in our
ſoules for them in others, and our onely
deſire hath beene to pleaſe God, and both
by doctrine and example to ſhine in the
world. But now we can be content to take
our eaſe, delight in ſleeping, and altogither
looke to our ovvne vvayes, purpoſe,
and aduauntage
               Ezech. 34 Eſay. 56., hauing no care to feede
Gods flocke, strengthen the weake, heale
the ſicke, bring againe that vvhich vvas
gone aſtray, and ſeeke vp that vvhich vvas
lost; but ſo we be fed with the fat, and clothed
with the wooll, we care for no more,
that which periſheth,Multi, doctiores, pauci meliores let it periſh, all our
care is to pleaſe men, and to haue the fauor
of the mightie, and both by word and example
wee doe iuſtifie, that which before
we haue diſallowed.
            Oh good Lord, if this bee our eſtate,
how can we be perſwaded, that wee are
led in the pathes of righteouſneſſe? When
it is apparant that we fall away more and
more. And if the conſciences of the people
doe no leſſe witneſſe againſt you, that
whereas you haue beene ſo long hearers
of the word, and ſo many yeares ago you
had ſuch a meaſure of knowledge, that
you would according to the word render

a reaſon of your faith, and maintaine the
truth againſt errors, and hereſies; ſuch a
meaſure of zeale, that rather then you
would ioyne with Idolaters, and offend
God, and your conſciences, you would forſake
father, mother, yea, and your owne
liues; Such a meaſure of loue to the truth,
that you could affoord to bee at this or
that coſt to maintaine the preaching of it,Aliquid, deſcripturis ſanctis, quotidie diſcere.
to take this or that paines to go to heare
it, to riſe or go to bed, ſo much the rather
or later, that you might haue one houre
of the day to heare or reade it; ſuch a meaſure
of a good conſcience that you could
not away with this or that ſinne. But now
alas, there is a fearefull backſliding, you
doe account them but hotte ſpirited fellowes,
that take that courſe, or if you doe
outwardly performe theſe things, yet it is
not with that wonted feeling & remorſe:
oh, if this bee the eſtate of any of you
(as it is to be feared, it is of too many) conſider
from whom you are fallen, & repent,
and doe the firſt workes
               Reu. 2. 6. Is this to bee led
forward vnto perfection? Will the Lord
take it in good part at your hands, to feed
in his greene paſtures, and yet to be euery
day leaner and leaner? to drinke ſo plentifully

of the ſincere milke of his word, and yet
neuer to grow thereby
               1. Pe. 2. 2, but to remaine as
wriſlings, withering and pining away: no
ſurely, euen therefore hath the hande of
the Lord gone out againſt vs, and he hath
puniſhed vs with peſtilence, famine, vnſeaſonableneſſe
of weather: becauſe neither
miniſters nor people, haue marched ſo
valiantly in the wayes of the Lord as wee
ought but haue fainted, halted, and turned
out of the wayHeb. 12. 13, ſo that it is high time for
vs all, to conſider our wayes, and to pray
vnto God that our weake hands and feeble
knees may be ſtrengthned
               Eſay. 35. 3, that we may be
led forward, and more chearefully runne
in the pathes of righteouſneſſe, then heretofore
we haue done.Pietas, quae finem nouit nō eſt pielas But wherein doth
this good ſhepheard lead his ſheepe?
            (In the pathes) He ſaith not (path) but
(pathes) as ſpeaking of many:2. Part. for though
the way to gods kingdom, be but that one
ſtrait and narrow way, whereof Chriſt maketh
mentionMat. 7. 13, yet are there in that way
many pathes, and Gods ſheepe muſt walk
in them all. The doctrine for our inſtruction
from hence, is this, viz. That the obedience
of a true Chriſtian, muſt extend it
ſelfe to the whole courſe of his life, and to

all the commandements of GodSecundum, iſtius vitae modum.. For the
firſt, it is not enough to ſerue God for a
yeare, or twaine, but we muſt ſerue him
in true righteouſneſſe and holineſſe all the
dayes of our liues
               Luk. 1. 75: the promiſe is made, he
that continueth to the ende ſhall be ſaued
               Mat. 10. 22:
And, be thou faithfull to the ende, and I will
giue thee the crowne of life
               Reu. 2. 10. Though then
we did runne in theſe paths of righteouſneſſe,
a great while, and then afterwardes
ſtay, turne aſide, or go backe gaine; what
ſhall it auaile vs? So, ſecondly, we may not
take liberty in any one ſinne, but ſtriue to
auoid all, nor omit any one good dutie,
but ſtriue to performe all, as did Zacharie
and Elizabeth, who were iuſt before God, and
walked in all the ordinances and commandements
of God, without reproofe
               Luk. 1. 6..Sine querela, non ſine peccato. Auguſt. There are
many who may eaſily be drawne to auoid
and caſt away many ſinnes, ſauing ſome
one or few that ſerue moſt for their pleaſure
and aduantage: ſo Herod heard Iohn
Baptiſt willingly, and did many things
               Mar. 6. 20, He
could be content to walke in ſome of the
pathes of righteouſneſſe, but not in all, he
had one pleaſing ſin, which by no meanes
he could abide to be reproued forMat. 14. 5, But
let vs be aſſured, that all Gods ſheepe truly

regenerated by the ſpirit of God, thogh
there be great weakeneſſes and imperfections
in them, whereby they are drawne
into much euill, which they ſhould not,
and leaue vndon many good duties, which
they ſhould do, (and, wherein they deſire
God to bee mercifull vnto them through
Chriſt) yet do they ſtand thus affected, that
they do hate and deteſt all ſinne, and doe
loue and delight in euerie vertue, yea thoſe
profitable and pleaſant ſinnes, which are
as deare vnto them as their right handes,
and right eies, yet are willing to cut them
off, and caſt them from them, rather then
by enioying therof, bee hindred from entring
into the Kingdome of Heauen
               Mat. 5. 29,
moſt earneſtly deſiring of God, to be led
into all righteouſneſſe, knowing that one
Colloquintida ſpilleth a whole meſſe of pottage
               2. Kin. 4. 40 Mors in olla iſta.
               , and as a bird though enſnared but
by one claw, in the net of the fowler, looſeth
her life, and the beſieged Citie by
one breach, not maintained, is taken by
the enemie, and the ſhip by one leake is
drowned in the waters; euen ſo, the ſoule
of man being as a ſhip, by one hole maketh
a ſhipwracke of faith and a good
conſcience; as a citie beſieged by Sathan

and his Angels, may be ſpoyled through
one breach, and as a bird ſought to be deſtroyed
of Sathan, aſwell loſeth her life,
being enſnared by one claw, as all: if wee
auoide his ſnare, in drunkenneſſe, we may
be caught by whordom; if by neither, yet
by couetouſnes: yea the ſoule may aſwell
be deſtroyed by one beloued ſinne, aſwell
as by many: and therefore ſuch as looke
to haue eternal life, muſt carefully follow
their ſhepherd, leading thē in al the paths.
            But what manner of pathes are
they?3. Part. 
               of righteouſneſſe) God leadeth
not his ſheepe in the pathes of ſinne,
and wickedneſſe, for they are for the filthie
and vncleane Goates to wander in,
but in the pathes of holineſſe and righteouſneſſe.
For the better vnderſtanding
whereof, wee may note that there is a
double righteouſnes, the one imputed, the
other inherent, by the righteouſnes of the
one, we are iuſtified before god: by the other
we are iuſtified before mē. The righteouſnes
imputed,VVhat is the righteouſneſſe of imputation and the vſe thereof. is the righteouſnes of
Ieſus Chriſt, both in regard of the innocencie
of nature, obedience to the lawe,
and ſuffering of puniſhments for ſinne,
are by faith imputed vnto vs, and made

ours, for our iuſtification before God,
both in regard of Originall and Actuall
ſinnes, of omiſſion or commiſſion, whereof
the Apoſtle Saint Paule ſpeaketh. For
as by the diſobedience of one, many were
made ſinners, ſo by that obedience of that one
ſhall many alſo be made righteous
               Ro. 5. 19.. Which
righteouſneſſe is ſo excellent, that the Apoſtle
in regard thereof, accounted all but
droſſe, that he might be found in Chriſt, not
hauing his owne righteouſneſſe, which is of
the law, but the righteouſneſſe which is of
God through faith
               Phil. 3. 9.. And this may bee
called the righteouſneſſe of imputation:
for as Christ was made ſinne for vs, not by
infuſion of ſinne into his perſon, but by imputation
of our ſinnes vnto him
               2. Cor. 5. 21:Delicta noſtra ſua delicta fecit; vt iuſtitiam ſuam noſtrā iuſtitiam faceret. ſo are wee
made righteuos before God, not by infuſion
of righteouſneſſe into our perſons,
(for that ſerueth for many other vſes) but
by imputation of Chriſt his righteouſneſſe
vnto vs: VVhatſoeuer he did for vs,
if we beleeue, being made ours,
               Auguſt. in Pſal. 21. 
               as if we had
performed the ſame in our owne perſons
               1. Cor. 1. 30.
            Secondly, there is a righteouſneſſe of
ſanctification,VVhat is the righteouſnes of ſanctificatiō and the vſe thereof. which followeth as a fruit
vpon the former, when as by the ſanctifying
ſpirit of God, the minde is inlightned,

the heart mollified; the will rectified; and
the whole courſe of the life reformed; no
more to loue, and liue in ſinne, but to hate
and abhorre it, and to delight in godlines
and vertue, whereof Saint Paul ſpeaketh,
ſaying, this is the will of God, euen our ſanctification
               1. Theſ. 4. 3. And vnto Titus he ſayth, The
grace of God which bringeth ſaluation vnto
all men hath appeared, and teacheth vs that
we ſhould denie vngodlineſſe, and worldly
lusts, and that we ſhould liue ſoberly, & righteouſly,
and godly in this preſent world
               Tit. 2. 11..Sobrie, quo ad nos: iuſte quo ad proximum: pie, quo ad deū. And
Saint Iohn ſayth, He that doth righteouſnes
is righteous, but he that committeth ſinne, is
of the Diuell
               1. Iohn. 3 7. 8.. The vſes whereof are manifold,
but ſpecially it ſerueth for to iuſtifie
vs before mē, and to make faith which
is hidden in the hart, & ſeen of God, to become
viſible, & apparāt vnto men. Wherof
S. Iames ſpeaketh ſaying, Abraham & Rahab
were iuſtified by their works
               Iam. 2. 21. 25. Now the
Lord leadeth his ſheepe into the pathes
of both thoſe Righteouſneſſes, giuing vs
a true and liuely faith, whereby wee are ingraffed
into Chriſt, and made partakers of all
his benefits
               Rom. 6. 5 6, 7, & alſo ſanctifying vs through
out with his holy ſpirit
               1. Theſ 5. 23, to become new creatures
               2. Cor. 5. 17, and to offer vp our ſelues, a liuing, holy,

and acceptable ſacrifice vnto him
               Ro. 12. 1. But of
the latter, the Prophet in this place, moſt
properly ſpeaketh, and therefore our leſſon
is.
            That all thoſe ſheepe whoſe ſaluation
the great ſhepheard hath bought & purchaſed
with his blood▪ 
               they ſhall in time be
called
               Ro. 8. 30,Doctrine. 
               from walking in the ſinfull pathes
of vncleane Goates, to walke in the pathes
of righteouſneſſe, and holineſſe they ſhal ceaſe
to walke as the Gentiles in vanitie of mind
               Eph. 4. 17,
and blind hypocriſie; and ſhall become followers
of God as deare children
               Ephe. 5. 1, ſtriuing to bee
holy as he is holy, in all manner of conuerſation
               1. Pet. 1. 15 In theſe pathes, the Lord hath led
all the flockes of his ſheepe, as the Author
to the Hebrews hath traced many of them
out by their ſteppesHeb. 11. 4 5. 6. 7, which paths, are
ſtraite, narrow, rugged, and vnpleaſant to
daintie and tender fleſh and bloodMat. 7. 13., as
requiring ſo ſoone as euer wee ſet foote
therein,How bleſſed and gainfull a thing it is to follow Chriſt in the pathes of righteouſneſſe. 
               a deniall of our ſelues, and continuall
taking vp of the croſſe
               Mat. 16. 24, but moſt pleaſant
and ioyfull to the inner man, as Ieremie
declareth, ſaying. Stand and enquire for the
old way, which is the good way, and walke
therein, and you ſhall finde reſt vnto your
ſoules
               Iere. 6. 16 The truth whereof we and all the

Saints of God, that euer walked therein
haue experienced; that as agreed, Dauid
as foreman may ſay for vs, I haue had as
great delight in the way of thy teſtimonies, as
in all maner of riches
               Pſ. 119. 14. And yet is not this
al: for beſides the inward and ſpiritual ioy
of the ſoule, the Lord will alſo beſtow all
good things vpon them, yea ſo gainfull is
godlineſſe, that it hath a promiſe both of
this life, and that which is to come,1. Tim. 6. 6, they
ſhall want nothing that is good
               Pſ. 34. 10, they ſhall
eate their bread in plenteouſneſſe, be fed with
the fat of the graine of wheate, and pure liquor
of the Grape, he will bow downe the
backes of their enemies, they ſhall lend, and
not borrow, be the head, and not the taile
               Deut. 28. 12. 13..
            Now I beſeech you let vs make application
of theſe things vnto our ſelues,Application̄
                  ▪ The true cauſe of all the miſeries that haue fallen vpon vs, or are further threatned.
there is nothing more common then to
heare men euerie where complaine, of the
great dearth wee haue ſuſtained, or the
peſtilence, botch of Egypt, hot burning
feauers, conſumptions, and grieuous diſeaſes
of the bodie, wet and vnſeaſonable
weather, and ſo forth, and ſome lay the
cauſe here, and ſome there, ſome complaine
of this, and others of that, but few
ſee, or regard the true cauſe indeed, to ſet

to hand to remoue it: the verie cauſe of
all euils is, for that we haue not hearkned
to the voice and whiſtle of our ſhepherd,
calling vs to follow him in the pathes
of righteouſneſſe; but rather wee haue
troden the pathes of death, and our
footeſte
                     •
                  ppes haue caught holde of hell,
as if we were at a league and couenant with
both
               Eſa. 28. 15, wee haue added drunkenneſſe vnto
thirſt
               Deut. 29. 19, we haue not zealouſly, and fruitfully
entertained his word. For if we had,
marke what God ſaith, Oh that Iſraell
had walked in my wayes, I would ſoone haue
humbled their enemies, and haue fed them
with the flower of weate, and honie out of the
rocke
               Pſa 81. 13 14.
            
               What is the reaſon then, I pray
you, of all theſe euils, and farre greater
if we repent not, who is ſo blind that
ſeeth not? VVe haue refuſed to bee taught
and inſtructed in Gods wordIere. 9. 6., deſpiſed his
wholeſome counſels and admonitions, abuſed
his patience and long ſufferance to preſumption,
which ſhould haue led vs to repentanceRom. 2. 4,
the more he hath corrected vs for our amendment,
the more haue we fallen away from
himEſay. 1. 5., hardning our faces as Braſſe againſt
his feareIere. 5. 3., and dealing moſt frowardly

with him in his couenaunt, that neuer
might hee more iuſtly complaine of the
Iewes, than of vs, All the day long haue I
ſtretched out my hand, to a stubborne, and
diſobedient peopleEſay 65. 2..
            Oh then I beſeech you,Vſe. let vs awake,
and ſtrengthen the thinges that doe remaine
& are ready to die, for our works,
are no whit perfect before the Lord
               Reu. 3. 2.. Let vs
euery one lay his hand vppon his ſoule,
repent and turne, for now the Lord calleth
vs. Oh England, if thou wilt returne,
returne vnto me
               Ier. 4. 1.. Yea, the Prophet of
God telleth vs, That it is time to ſeeke the
Lord, till he come and raine righteouſneſſe
vpon vs
               Oſay 10. 12. Let vs ſtirre vp our ſelues, and
the graces of God that are in vs, reuiue
our zeale, & make our loue to the Goſpell
ſpring afreſh, that it may bud, and
bring forth fruite, let vs make ſtraight
ſteps to our feet, and no longer wait that
euerie one goe before vs, for that were
too great vnmannerlineſſe, but both paſtors
and people, let vs in our ſeuerall
places, in a holy emulation ſtriue, who
ſhall bee formoſt, and runne faſteſt after
our Shepheard Chriſt, Ieſus in the pathes
of righteouſneſſe; and then the Lord will

delight to doe vs good, hee will bleſſe our
Queene, and giue her constancie to defend
the trueth vnto the end, not ſuffering our
land to be ſown with diuers ſeeds
               Deu. 22. 9, nor Dagon
to be where the Arke of God is
               1. Sa. 5. 2., or abhomination
of deſolation to be ſet in the holy
place
               Mat. 24. 15.; but in her daies the Goſpell ſhall
flouriſh, and aboundance of peace ſo long
as the Moone endureth
               Pſ. 72. 7., & as for all thoſe
that beare euil wil vnto Sion, & ſpecially
our home-born enemies, the vncircumciſed
Philiſtins, & curſed Canaanites, who
beginne to lift vp their heads, as though
their long wiſhed day drew nigh, the Lord
will either turne their hearts, or how downe
their backes, cauſe their loynes to tremble
               Pſ. 69. 23,
and lay the curſe of Canaan vpon them, and
make them ſeruants of ſeruants ſtil
               Gen. 9. 25, or laſtly,
fill their eies with wormes, and mouthes
with grauell, but wee and our poſterities ſhall
ſee Ieruſalem in prosperitie, all our liues
long
               Pſ. 128. 5.
            Thus we haue heard by many particulars,
how aboundantly good, the Lord
is to his poore people, now would you
know what it is, that hath, doth, and for
euer only ſhall mooue him, to do his people
good? then marke what the Prophet

ſayeth in the next words.
            (For his names ſake;)Sence of the words. 
               concerning the
ſence of theſe words, we are to note, that
the (name) of God hath diuers ſignifications
in the ſcriptures; as firſt,
               1. 
               by name
are meant thoſe titles, whereby God is
named and knowne, as Iehouah, Elohim,
Shaddai, 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               , Deus, God. &c. As God ſaid
to Iacob, Wherefore now doeſt thou aske my
nameGen. 32. 29.. And anſwereth Moſes, asking
the ſame queſtion, I am that I am hath
ſent me vnto you, and thus ſhalt thou ſay to
the children of Iſrael, the Lord God of your
Fathers, the God of Abraham, the God of
Iſaac, and the God of Iacob, hath ſent mee
vnto you; this is my name for euer, and this
is my memoriall vnto all agesExo. 3. 14 15. &c.. And Moſes
in his ſong giueth him this title, The
Lord is a man of war, his name is IehouahExo. 15. 3;
And concerning Chriſt, it is ſayd: This
is his name, whereby hee ſhall be called; the
Lord, our righteouſneſſeIerem. 23 6. 33. 16. 1. Cor. 1. 30. And this is one
of thoſe ſences, according to which the
commaund is giuen, Thou ſhalt not take
the name of the Lord thy God in vaineExo. 20. 7.
            2 Secondly, ſomtimes by the (name) of
God, is meant the perſon of God, ſignified,
by the name or title, as the name of

the mightie God of Iacob defend thee
               
                  Pſ. 20. 1. Nomen pro re, per nomen, ſignificata..
Where is not meant any title of God, Iehouah,
Tetragrammaton, or ſuch like, either
in Hebrew, or Greeke, this tongue
or that, (as they are of many ſuperſtitiouſly
abuſed) but God himſelfe, by his omnipotent
power defend thee. So the people
are commanded to offer their ſacrifices,
in the place, which the Lord ſhall chooſe to
cauſe his name to dwell
               Deu. 16. 2: and the Pſalmiſt
prayeth; Let them that loue thy (name) reioyce
in thee
               Pſ. 5. 11.. Againe, I will take the cup
of ſaluation, and call vpon the name of the
Lord
               Pſ. 116. 13., and the promiſe is made, whoſoeuer
ſhall call vpon the name of the Lord, ſhall be
ſaued
               Ioel 2. 32. In all which and many other places,
by (name) is meant, the perſon of
God, it being vſuall in the ſcriptures, by
name, to vnderſtand, the thing ſignified
thereby, as where it is ſaid, there is no other
name vnder heauen, whereby we must be ſaued
               Act. 4. 12., and to the Church of Sardis the
Lord ſayeth, Thou haſt a few names, which
haue not defiled their garments
               Reu. 3. 4..
            3 Thirdly,Quicquid de Deo, vere dici poteſt, Deus eſt. by name are meant ſomtimes
the eſſentiall attributes of God, becauſe
thereby God is knowne, yea, God is the
ſame, for whatſoeuer may truely be ſayd

of God, that God is, as he is true, he is the
trueth, God is wiſe, hee is wiſedome it
ſelfe. So the Lord thus proclaimed his
great & glorious name vnto Moſes,
               Nomen Dei dicitur, omne id, quod de illo praedicatur. 
               The
Lord, the Lord, strong, mercifull, and gracious,
ſlow to anger, and aboundant in goodneſſe
and trueth, reſeruing mercie for thouſands,
forgiuing iniquitie, tranſgreſſion, and
ſinne, and not making the wicked innocent,
viſiting the iniquitie of the fathers vpon the
children, vnto the third and fourth generation
               Exo. 34. 6. So it is ſayd, that in the name of Chriſt
the Apostle caſt out Diuels
               Mar. 16. 17.. Not by the
repetition of the name (Ieſus) for the ſons
of Sceua, doing ſo, the euill ſpirit anſwered:
Ieſus I acknowledg, & Paule I know, but
who are ye? and the man in whom the euill spirit
was, ran vpon them, and ouer came them,
and preuailed againſt them, that they fledde
out of the houſe, naked and wounded, as S.
Luke witneſſeth, in the Acts of the Apostles
               Act. 19. 15. 16.. But by name is meant the power,
ſtrength, and vertue of Chriſt, as Peter expoundeth
in the Acts, where (declaring
the meanes, how the Cripple was healed)
he ſaith, It was not their power and godlines
that had made the man goe
               Act. 3. 12 16.. So S. Paule
ſayth: at the name of Ieſus euerie knee ſhall

bowe
               Phi. 2. 10, that is, not when the word is pronounced
we ſhall make a curteſie, but we
and all creatures, ſhall bee ſubiect to his
power, authoritie, and dominion.
            4 Somtimes alſo by (name) his works,Nomine (Ieſus) dominatio & poteſtas; (genu flectionis) vocabulo, exprimitur ſubiectio.
creatures, and iudgements, are meant, as
where Dauid ſaith; O Lord our God, how
excellent is thy name in all the world, which
haſt ſet thy glorie aboue the heauens
               Pſ. 8. 1.. q. d.
How greatly doth thy glorie, power, and
maieſtie ſhine in thy creatures.
            5 By (name) is meant many times the
doctrine of Gods word, inuocation, praiſe,
and profeſſion thereof; So it is ſayd of
Chriſt in the Pſalmes: I will declare thy
name vnto my brethren
               Pſ. 22. 22. And the people
of God ſay, We will walke in the name of the
Lord our God for euer and euer
               Mich. 4. 5: ſo Paule
is called a choſen veſſell, to carie Gods name,
before Gentiles, Kings, and children of Iſraell
               Act. 9. 25: and ſayth of himſelfe, That hee is
not onely readie to be bound at Ieruſalem, but
alſo to die for the name of the Lord Ieſus
               Act. 21. 13.
Now I take it, by (name) in this place the
Prophet vnderſtandeth the truth, mercie,
and goodneſſe of God, according to the
third annotation laid down, and then the
ſence is thus much in effect: q. d. This good

Shepheard feedeth me, giueth me drinke,
prouideth reſt, and is exceeding bountiful
towards me, aboue all that I am able to
aske or think, not for any goodnes in me,
but onely for his owne meere mercie, and
goodneſſe ſake, that for euer he may bee
praiſed, for the ſame: this being the ſence,
let vs now ſee the doctrine, which is this,
viz:
            That,Doctrine. what good thing ſoeuer God hath
done or doth for his children, as in their
election, vocation, preſeruation: he neither
was, nor is therevnto mooued, by any
thing in them, or proceeding from
them, as not for their righteouſneſſe:
which is but vncleaneſſe
               Eſay 64. 6: or for their beautie:
which is but vanitie
               Prou. 31 30. Eſay. 40. 6.: or for their
ſtrength: which is but rottenneſſe
               Iob. 17. 14., or for
their gold and ſiluer: which are no marchandiſe
with him
               Mic. 6. 7. 8 Pſal. 50. 10. 11. 12.: but onely what hee
doth, hee doth for his owne name, and
mercie ſake, to the end, that for all, his
name may for euer bee praiſed, as the
Saints of God doe confeſſe, ſaying: Not
vnto vs, ô Lord, not vnto vs, but vnto thy
name giue the glorie, for thy louing mercie,
and truths ſake
               Pſ. 115. 1.. This is agreeable to many
other places of Scripture: the Apoſtle

               Paule ſayth,Confirmation. ſayth, we were choſen in Chriſt before
the foundations of the world, according to
the good pleaſure of his wil
               Eph. 1. 4. 5. The Lord himſelfe
proteſteth vnto Iſrael: For my names
ſake, will I differre my wrath, and for my
praiſe, will I restraine it from thee, that I
cut thee not off; for mine owne ſake, for mine
owne ſake, will I doe it
               Eſay 48. 9. 11.: and againe, I will
haue reſpect vnto you, for mine names ſake,
and not after your wicked waies
               Ezec. 20. 44: and elſewhere
telleth them, what it was that mooued
him, to deliuer and redeeme his people
out of captiuitie, I doe not this for your
ſakes, oh houſe of Iſraell, but for mine holy
names ſake, which was polluted amongst the
heathen whether ye went
               Ezec. 36. 22. Yea, euerie
where the Scriptures confirme this doctrine,
viz: That in man there is no dignitie,
or meanes whereby to deſerue any
thing at Gods hands, but the whole work
of our ſaluation, and all his bleſſings beſtowed
vpon vs, are wholly to bee referred
vnto God, and that onely, for the glorie
of his holy name.
            And yet notwithſtanding the euidence
of this truth,Confutation. they of the Church of Rome,
are not aſhamed to maintain the doctrine
of foreſeene workes, and that according

to the ſame, God did ſo order the decree
of predeſtinationRhem. annot. on Rom. 9. ſect. 2.: yea and doe diſtinguiſh
of the kindes of merits, that ſome
are of congruitie, as the workes of men
before iuſtification, whereby they doe
prepare themſelues thereuntoRhem. annot. on Act. 10. ſect. 5. Meritum de congruo & condigno, ex debito iuſtitiae.: and merits,
of condignitie, or good works done
in the ſecond iuſtification, which (ſay they)
are truely meritorious, and deſerue at
Gods hands by the due debt of iuſtice, to
be rewardedRhem. annot. on Ro. 2. ſect. 3.. Oh Lord, how farre doth
the Prophet varie in iudgment from theſe
proude Hypocrites, which thus glorie in
themſelues, and their workes, who acknowledgeth
euerie good thing that he
hath, to come from God, and that onely
for his owne names ſake.
            The vſe hereof is,Vſe. that aboue all things
in the world, we bee carefull in thought,
word,Vt ore, corpore, vita
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   tota, ſanctificetur, illud nomen. and deeds, and euerie way that we
can, to ſeeke the aduancement of the glorie
of that name, whereby the Lord hath
been mooued to doe ſuch great things for
vs, and to that end that we pray vnto God
to haue a zeale of his glorie kindled in our
hearts, whereby we may be prouoked, to
a holy, and godly life, that our heauenly father
may be glorified
               Mat. 5. 16, and whereby alſo

we may be kept from al prophaneſſe, leaſt
otherwiſe, his name be diſhonoured, and
blasphemed
               Eſay 52. 5. Rom. 2. 24. The Prophet Dauid had a
great meaſure of this zeale, when he ſayd,
The zeale of thy houſe, hath euen eaten mee
vp
               Pſ. 69. 9.: and that his heart ſhould vtter foorth
good matter
               Pſ. 45. 1.. Yea, the woord which
there the holy Ghoſt vſeth is verie emphaticall.
q. d.
               Eructat cor I will caſt vp a good matter,
alluding to the manner of men, who
hauing ſomething which lyeth heauie
vpon their ſtomackes, can haue no reſt
till they haue caſt it vp. Oh that the
conſideration of thoſe mercies, which
wee and all Gods Sheepe, doe dayly
receiue and enioy, with Dauid our foldmate;
did ouercharge our hearts continually,
with ſuch an holy ſurfet,Crapula ſancta. Luther. (as a
godly man called it) the care and deſire
to gloifie GODS name, lying ſo
heauie vppon vs, that wee could neuer
bee at eaſe nor reſt, vntill wee were
diſburdened, by ſounding foorth Gods
praiſe; and magnifying him, for whoſe
name ſake onely, hee hath beene mooued
to doe ſuch great thinges for vs!
&c. And ſo much for the firſt Allegorie
ſummarily layde downe in the firſt

verſe, and particularly amplyfied, and
illuſtrated, in the ſecond and third verſes.
Now let vs proceede, to conſider
what vſe Dauid maketh
hereof.
         
         
            
            THE
FOVRTH SERMON
vpon the 23. Pſalme.
            
               Though I ſhould walke through the valley of
the ſhadow of death, I will feare no euill:
for thou art with me, thy rod and
ſtaffe doe comfort me.
            
            
               IN this verſe, the holy
Prophet of God, declareth,
what great
comfort and ſtay, the
cōſideration of Gods
paſtor-like care and
prouidence towardes
him, did affoord him in the ſerious meditation
of death, Yea though I ſhould walke
through the valley of the ſhadow of death.
The ſumme whereof is thus much in effect,The ſumme of this verſe.
               q. d. Seeing then, oh my God, like a
moſt louing and faithfull ſhepheard, thou

haſt taken care and charge ouer me, graciouſly
to ſupply my wants, and mightily
to defend me in all aduerſities; I will not
hence-forth vex, or diſquiet my ſoule in
vaine, with feare of any euill, but ſecurely
repoſe my ſelfe vnder the wings of thy
prouidence, not fearing any danger, hauing
thy preſence, no not to go through
the valley of the ſhadow of death it ſelfe.
Surely a moſt excellent ſentence, declaring
the great valour and fortitude, not
onely of Dauid, but of euerie true Chriſtian,
and ſheepe of Gods paſture, in all
daungers whatſoeuer, whoſe hearts are
poſſeſſed with comfortable aſſurance of
Gods prouidence towards them, as his
was; from whence that we may reape the
greater comfort and benefite, I purpoſe
firſt to obſerue ſomething for the verſe
generally,A generall obſeruation from the whole verſe and then handle the wordes
themſelues more particularly.
            The thing which we are in generall
to obſerue, is this, viz. Dauids religious
meditation of death in his greateſt proſperitie
of life; it ſeemeth by the tenour of
the Pſalme (as we haue heard) that it was
not penned when hee was perſecuted by
Saule, and glad to flie from one holde to

another1. Sam. 23 14., no, nor when (after he was annoynted
in Hebron king, both ouer Iudah
2. Sa. 2. 4., and all Iſraell2. Sa. 5. 3.) he was glad to flie
being perſecuted by his owne ſonne Abſolom,
moſt treacherouſly practiſing to
aſpire to the kingdome2. Sam. 15 14. For no maruell
though then his ſoule was poſſeſſed with
the continuall remembrance and meditation
of death, when as hee might moſt
truly ſay, as hee did vnto Ionathan, as the
Lord liueth, and as thy ſoule liueth, there is
but a ſtep betwixt me and death
               2. Sa. 20. 3. But this
Pſalme was penned as a thankful remembrance
of Gods prouidence towards him,
when hauing ſafely paſſed through ſo
many great perils, he had obtained (maugre
the beardes of all his enemies) the
peaceable fruition of his crowne & kingdom,
when as a man would haue thought
he ſhould haue baniſhed al remembrance
of death, and neuer haue troubled his
thoughts with ſuch nightly meditations,
but rather haue ſolaced himſelfe as that
rich man in the Goſpell, who hauing pulled
downe his old barnes, and filled greater
with his fruit and goods, hee neuer
dreamed of death, but ſaid to his ſoule, Be
merry, liue at eaſe, eate, drinke, and take thy

pleaſure, for thou haſt goods laid vp for many
yeares
               Lu. 12. 19. I ſay, a man would haue thought,
that Dauid in ſome ſuch manner alſo
would haue ſpoken vnto his ſoule, & haue
ſaid, Now my ſoule be merrie, take thine
eaſe, eate and drinke, for now thou haſt
obtained thine hearts deſire, and ſhalt be
able to auenge thy ſelfe on all thine enemies
that haue vexed thee. &c. But he being
better trained vp, and exerciſed in the
Lords ſchoole, and hauing learned the vanitie
and vncertaintie of this life, that hee
was but a ſoiourner, and a pilgrime on earth
as all his fathers were
               Pſ. 39. 12, and knowing what
great cares and feares a crowne bringeth,
& ignorāt whether euē that night his ſoul
ſhould be fetched away or noLu. 12. 26: being aduaunced
to the top of proſperitie, he forgetteth
not himſelfe, preſuming of life,
but looketh downe to the earth whither
he muſt, and bethinketh how hee may
comfortably paſſe through the valley of
the ſhadow of death, and tread the path
of all fleſh, and goe the way of all the
earthIoſ. 23. 14 1. Kin. 2. 2..
            Whoſe religious example teacheth vs
this leſſon for our inſtruction,Doctrine generall from the obſeruation. viz. That
we ought at all times, and in all conditions,

in our youth, in our ſtrength, and in
our proſperitie, to remember our end; this
is the counſell of the wiſe man, Remember
thy Creator in the daies of thy youth, whilest
the euill dayes come not, nor the yeares
approach wherein thou ſhalt ſay, I haue no
pleaſure in them; before the Almond tree
flouriſh grinders grow few, ſtrong men bow
themſelues, keepers of the houſe doe tremble,
and they grow dimme that looke out by the
windowes
               Eccleſ. 12 1. 2. 3. Yea, this was Gods wiſh, Oh
that my people were wiſe to conſider their latter
end
               Deut. 32. 29. The holy Patriarkes declared
their wiſdome, and the due conſideration
that they had of their latter end, by purchaſing
places to burie inGen. 23. 4.. Abraham
had it at his fingers end, I am but duſt and
aſhes
               Ge. 18. 27. And Iacob as readily confeſſed to
Pharaoh, demaunding how old hee was,
That his life was but a pilgrimage, and his
dayes few and euill
               Gen. 47. 9, * few for number,Anni, pauci aerumnae; multae. and
euill for qualitie; Iob alſo, hee waited all
his dayes for the appoynted time, when
his changing ſhould come
               Iob. 14. 14. The Prophet
Dauid, after long watching and faſting,
beſought God to bee inſtructed concerning
the number of his dayes, and the time
that he had yet to liue
               Pſa. 39. 4: yea, all the faithfull

are taught by Moſes to pray, Lord
teach vs to number our dayes, that we may applie
our hearts vnto wiſdome
               Pſ. 90. 12.
            
               Ioſeph of Arimathea, a rich man, had a
Sepulchre in his garden to lie in, long before
he diedIoh. 19. 41, ſo that his recreation and
ſolace in the cōtemplation of Gods creatures,
was ioyned with a ſerious meditation
of his end, wherein both he, and the
reſt of thoſe holy Saints, haue ſhewed thē
               ſelues
to be truly wiſe men indeed: for
what would it haue profited them, or any
other, by Arithmeticall account, to diuide
the leaſt fractions, & neuer to take an account
of thoſe few dayes that we haue to
liuePſa. 90, 12▪
               , or with the Geometriciā, to take the
height, longitude, or latitude, of moſt ſpacious
obiects, and neuer to meaſure that
which the Prophet ſaith, is but a ſpanne
long, or a hands breadth
               Pſal. 39. 5. What were it
with the Aſtronomer to obſerue the motions
of the heauens, poſitions and aſpects
of the Planets and Starres, and neuer with
Dauid to looke downe to the valley of
death, through which Kings, and all muſt
paſſePſ. 82. 7.: or with the Lawier to be skilfull
in lawes, ſtatutes and decrees, for the managing
and gouernment of kingdomes,

common-wealthes,Statutū eſt omnibus, ſemel mori. and countries, and giuing
to euerie man his right, and to forget
that common and irreuocable lawe
whereby it is appoynted for all men once
to die
               Heb. 9. 27: or with the Phiſition, to know
the cauſe, nature and qualitie of euerie
ſickeneſſe and Symptome, wherby he may
skilfully applie himſelfe to the cure, and
neuer to regard the languiſhing ſoule, being
mortally wounded with the ſting of
ſinne
               1. Cor. 15. 56. In a worde, what will it one day
profit a man, that with the Rhetorician,
by ſweete and eloquent ſtile hee could
draw teares from the hardeſt heart: or
with the ſubtile Logitian, by conſequence
of fallacious arguments, enforce a
cōceſſion of greateſt abſurdities, yea with
the temporizing Politician, gaine the
whole world, and looſe his owne ſoule
               Mat. 16. 26.. Surely
vnleſſe chiefe regard be had to the ſaluation
of the ſoule, all pollicie is but fooliſhneſſe,
all knowledge groſſe ignorance.
            Seeing then neceſſitie is laid vpon vs,Eſto domus cius & 
                     •
                  rit domus tua, habitet in te, & tu habitabis in eo: ſi tu acceperis eum in corde, ille recipiet te vulcu. Aug. in Pſal. 30.
that we muſt die, oh let vs follow the example
of this Prophet, and in the whole
courſe of our liues prepare our ſelues,
not to die naturally, as men, but religiouſly

as Chriſtians, firſt dying vnto the world,
by mortifying the old man, that ſo Chriſt may
come and liue in vs
               Io. 14. 23. And then when wee
die in the world, we ſhall go and liue with
him
               Mors poſ crucem minor eſt.
               Io. 17. 25; yea then, whenſoeuer it ſhall be
ſaid vnto vs, as it was to Ezechiah, thou
ſhalt die, and not liue
               Eſay. 38. 1▪
               : and as it was to
Ahaziah, Thou ſhalt not come downe from
off the bed wheron thou art gone vp, but ſhalt
die the death
               2 Ki. 1. 16. Wee ſhall entertaine the
meſſage of death with ioy, and more truly
ſay, then Agag did vnto Samuel, Truly
the bitterneſſe of death is paſſed alreadie
               1. Sam. 15 32.
            And ſurely this leſſon well learned and
practiſed,How profitable it is for a man alwayes to remember his end. would be very effectual to keep
mē within the bounds of a Chriſtian & cō
               ſcionable
life: would the couetous wretches
of the world ſo greedily ſcrape togither
the droſſe of the earth and neuer be
ſatisfiedHab. 2. 11? Would the proud Hamans, ſo
lift vp their heads on high, and throughly
reuenge euery leaſt diſgraceHeſt. 3. 5, 9.? Would any
filthy Amnon commit that in the ſight
of God, which he is aſhamed to cōmit in
the ſight of his baſeſt creatures2. Sam. 13 9? or any
cruel Ahab, oppreſſe & wrong poore Naboth
               1. Kin. 21. 13? if they did remember that there is
a God, and day of reuengeReu. 6. 17., when to cry

vnto rockes and mountaines, fall vpon vs,
fall vpon vs, and couer vs, will be too lateLu. 23. 30.?
No ſurely, will you know then the groūd
of much greedie ſinning, and a ſpeciall ſin
in theſe euill dayes to be lamented? euen
this it is, that ſubtile Sathan hath intoxicate
a great number with that poyſon,
wherewith he infected our firſt parents,
Tuſh you ſhall not die at all
               Gen. 3. 4. How many
yong men are there,Nequaquā moriemini. that cannot brooke
this leſſon, with Faelix they ſay, They haue
no ley ſure to heare of theſe matters
               Acts. 24. 25, it is
too chilling a doctrine, for their warme
and youthfull blood, and too Melancholicke
thoughts, for their delightfull diſpoſitions,
they haue put off their coate, waſhed
their feeteCant. 5. 3, and ſuited themſelues
for other buſineſſe,The want of due conſideration of our end, the cauſe of much ſinne. preſuming vpon repentance
at leyſure. Yea, how many olde
men who cannot hope for any continuance
of life, one foote being as it were ſet
in this valley alreadie, when as old age ful
of ſickneſſes, aches, and pains, as the clouds
which do returne after the rain
               Eccl. 12. 2, are ſo many
watch-wordes to make them prepare
for another place, yea and bended backs,
make them to ſtoope & conſtraine them
to view the earth whither they muſt; yet

are either (through their earthly cōſtitution)
inſatiably addicted to gain, or (throgh
their luſtful inclinatiō of nature) addicted
to the lighteſt behauiour of youth, wherby
it appeareth, that both yong & old, haue
made a couenant with death, and with hel are
at agreement
               Eſa. 28. 15, entertaining at leaſt in their
hearts, the old Epicures poeſie, Death hath
nothing to do with vs
               
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  .. I pray you then let it
not be grieuous or tedious vnto you, that
I doe a little further endeuour to awaken
you out of this daungerous lethargie of
the ſoule, and preſſe vnto you the neceſſarie
and moſt comfortable practiſe of this
doctrine, to which purpoſe I might vſe
many, & thoſe moſt pithie Arguments &
reaſons, but I will only cōtent my ſelf with
theſe foure, and alſo handle them briefly.
            The firſt Argument,1. which may effectually
ſtirre vs vp with Dauid to a religious
meditation of our end, is the certainty
of death: for though it bee vncertaine,
1. for time, when: 2. for place where:
3. for manner, how: yet in regard of it
ſelfe, it is moſt certaine, no man can auoid
it, death is the way of all the world, ſaid Ioſuah
               Ioſh. 23 14, the way of al the earth, ſaid Dauid
               1. Kin. 2. 2,
and the end of all men, ſaid Salomon
               Eccle. 7. 4..
            
               
The righteous muſt tread this path aſwell
as any other, for their fleſh is but as
graſſe
               Eſay 40. 6. Aſwell died godly Abell, as murtherous Cayne
               Gen. 4. 8, Abraham
               Ge. 25. 8., the Father of
the faithfull
               Ro. 4. 11., as any of the children of vnbeleefe,
Iſacke the ſonne of the free woman,
as Iſhmaell the ſonne of the bond-woman
               Gal. 4. 22,
Iacob, whom God loued: as Eſau whom hee
hated
               Ro. 9. 13.: Dauid the man after Gods owne
heart
               1. Sam. 13 14., as Saule from whom he tooke his ſpirit
               2. Sam. 7. 15: aſwell Salomon the wiſe
               1. Kin. 3. 12., as Naball
the foole
               1. Sam, 25 25: aſwell the rich man, as Lazarus
the begger
               Lu. 16. 22: aſwell Simon Peter the Apostle
               Ioh. 21. 18. 2. Pet. 1. 13, as Simon Magus the ſorcerer
               Act. 8. 9.. In a
word, death knocketh aſwel at the dore of
the Princes Pallace, as of the poore mans
CottagePallida mors, aequo pede, pulſat pauperum tabernas regum
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   turres. Horac.. She is the Ladie & Empreſſe of
the whole world, who neuer arreſteth, but
ſhe bringeth, Corpus cum cauſa, without
any appeale, bayle, or maine-prize, ſhee
ſpareth no perſons for their age, qualitie,
or condition, but bee they rich, or poore:
noble, or baſe borne, Gods impreſſe is vppon
all fleſh, hee hath numbred out our
dayes, and die wee muſt; as wee came by
the wombe, ſo we muſt goe by the graue;
it is not the maieſtie of the Prince, nor holyneſſe
of the prieſt, ſtrength in the bone,

or beautie in the face, or gold in the Coffer,
or any ſuch worldly reſpect, that death
regardeth, there is neither Moat of waters
ſo broade and deepe: nor wall, ſo
thicke and high: nor dores of yron and
braſſe, ſo hard and ſtrong: nor houſes ſo
warme fieled with Cedar or vermillion;
nor Iuorie beds ſo ſoft and ſweet, or any
other thing that can plead priuiledge againſt
the graue; but both Princes, and
Peſants, muſt acknowledge their pedegree,
as Iob doth: Corruption, thou art my
Father; rottenneſſe, thou art my mother;
wormes, yee are my brethren, and ſiſters;
graue, thou art my bed
               Iob. 17. 14. Oh then, ſeeing
nothing is more certaine than death, nor
vncertain than the time; let vs not truſt in
any worldly thing, which is but vanitie,
but let vs follow the example of this kingly
Prophet, and remember death, euen in
our greateſt hope and proſperitie of life.
2 The ſecond Argument to this purpoſe,
may be, the ſence of our owne infirmities,
there being no man or woman ſo ſtronge
or healthie, but at one time or other, haue
felt in their boſomes, the fore-runner of
death, whereby they may perceiue, that
their life, is but as a Ionas gourd, and Iacobs

pilgrimage, we being but tenants at will,
dwelling in houſes of clay
               Iob. 4. 19, the wals wherof,Quid caro, quam terra, in figuras ſuas cō
                  uerſa, Tertull. de carne Chriſti in breui caſura eſt domus tua, Bernerd. Eccleſ. 2.
with euerie little ſhower of ſickneſſe,
are almoſt waſhed downe, and though
wee dawbe, or patch them vp neuer ſo
much, yet will they quickely fall into the
hands of the Land-lord, and as we haue
mourned for others, ſo ſhall mourners
goe about in the ſtreets for vsEccl. 12. 5, and ſhall
we then liue as though wee ſhould neuer
die? Oh remember, we bring our yeares
to an end, as it were a tale that is told
               Pſ. 90. 9., our
wheele runneth round a pace, and whether
we ſleepe or wake, or whatſoeuer we doe,
we are ſtill vnder ſaile, haſting towardes
our wiſhed hauen, let vs then remember
with Dauid, the valley of the ſhadowe of
death.
            
            3 The third Argument, may be the conſideration
of the dayly deaths of others,
which we either ſee with our eies, or heare
of with our eares; how many graue and
ſage Councellors, noble Peeres, worthy
men at armes, luſty gallants of the world,
yea neere neighbours, and deere freends
haue we knowne, whoſe heads now lye
full low, the pit, hauing ſhut her mouth
vpon them; how hath death come neere

vnto all of vs one way or other, as in taking
from vs, our Parents, Kinſ folkes, acquaintance
and freends, yea taking forth
of our boſomes, our husbands, or wiues;
and our children the fruit of our loynes,
& our friends as deere as our own ſoules;
yea, how often haue we followed to the
Church, and do dayly paſſe by the graues
of many, who for age and ſtrength might
haue ſeen vs lead the way? and what, ſhall
we for all this neuer dream of death? Oh
remember, one generation paſſeth, and
another commeth, our Fathers haue giuen
place vnto vs, and we muſt giue place
to a ſucceeding poſteritie, the enterlude is
the ſame, they haue played their parts vppon
the Scaffold of this world, and wee
are acting ours. This being the concluſion
of euerie ſcene, The graue is readie for
me, as Iob ſaythDies mei extinguntur,.
            4 The Fourth & laſt Argument,Solum mihi ſuper eſt ſepulchrum. may be
drawne from conſideration of the vanitie
of all things in the world;Iob. 17. 1. 
               Salomon, whom
God for his wiſedome choſe, as it were
to be the foreman of a great enqueſt, empanelled
to make enquirie, of the ſtate of
the world, and all thinges therein, hauing
ſeene and experienced the ſame, he ſpeaketh

for all, and giueth vp this verdict,
vanitie of vanities, all is vanitie. Euen the
young Infant, is no ſooner borne, but by
his teares doth prophecie the ſameNondum loquitur, tamen prophetat.. He
that is in want, liueth in greefe; he that
hath plentie, in feare; he that is in high eſtate,
is enuied: in a word, the proſperity
of worldlings, is but a golden miſerieSplendida, miſeria.,
affording neither perfect reſt to the bodie;
nor true content to the minde; well
then, as the poore Apprentiſe, remēbring
that the yeeres of freedome are at hand,
more cheerefully endureth a greeuous
ſeruitude; and the wearied trauailer, hearing
that his Inne is nigh, more nimbly
pluketh vp his leaden heeles; euen ſo, let
the remembrance of our paſſing through
the valley of the ſhadow of death, and
our comming to Mount Sion on the
other ſide, where we ſhall for euer be freed
from all wants; be our comfort and refreſhing
in this weariſome pilgrimage,
and hereunto tendeth all which hath been
ſayd, viz: That with Dauid we may prepare
for death, in our greateſt proſperitie
of life.
            
               Ob. But ſome man may ſay, theſe paines
might well haue beene ſpared, for what

man ſo ſottiſh, as not to thinke, that hee
is mortall.
            
               Sol. Indeed, nothing more common
than theſe, and ſuch like ſpeaches, wee ſee
what we are, we muſt all die, when our
turne commeth. But alas, this is more of
cuſtome, and ſpecially, when ſome preſident
of mortalitie is before our eies, than
of any true feelingMagis vſu, quam ſenſu.: whereby they might
be prouoked, to keepe a good conſcience
before God, and all men
               Act. 24. 16. So that as S.
Paule chargeth ſome men, for profeſſing
that they knowe God, when as in their
workes, they denyed him, being abhominable,
diſobedient, & to euerie good work reprobate
               Tit. 1. 16; So may moſt be charged in theſe
daies, becauſe though they profeſſe in
words the remembrance of death, yet by
their workes, they doe denie it, and plainly
bewray, that they doe not remember their
laſt end
               Lam. 1. 9, as Ieremy complained of Ieruſalem:Non eſt recordata finis.
and therefore much more to haue
ſayd, had not been ſufficient, for the preſſing
of ſo neceſſarie a dutie: but I will now
proceed to handle this verſe more particularly,
wherein theſe thinges are to bee
conſidered:1. The diuiſion of this verſe. firſt, a diſcription of death,
through which Dauid and all Gods ſheep

muſt paſſe, (it is a darke, and ſhadowye
valley) of death. Secondly, Dauids and
euerie Chriſtians courage againſt death,
(I will feare no euill.) Thirdly, the ground
or reaſon of this true courage or fortitude,
viz: Gods preſence (for thou art with
me.) Laſtly, the benefits of Gods preſence
vnto his Saints, (Thy rodde and ſtaffe doe
comfort me) &c.
               Subdiuiſion of the firſt part, of this verſe. For the firſt, viz: the deſcription
of death, it affoordeth vs theſe
points to be conſidered: Firſt, what death
is: Secondly, what are the kinds of death,
& of which Dauid here ſpeaketh: Thirdly,
the difference betwixt the death of a
Chiriſtian, and of a bruit beaſt: Laſtly,
the titles, tending to the deſcription of
death here vſed. For the firſt:
            Death is the diſſolution of nature,1. VVhat Death is. and
depriuation of that bleſſed life, which he
vouchſafed vnto man, by his creation, being
inflicted vpon him, as a puniſhment
for his ſinne; thus God threatned Adam,
The day that thou eateſt thereof, thou ſhalt
die the death
               Ge. 2. 17.. But Adam did eate of the
forbidden fruit
               1 Gen. 3. 6.. And thereupon the Apoſtle
ſaith, By one man ſinne entred into the
world, and death by ſinne
               Ro. 5. 12., which death is
the puniſhment, and wage of ſinne, as elſewhere

the ſame Apoſtle affirmethRo. 6. 23..
            Secondly,2. VVhat are the kinds of death. as concerning the kindes
of death, there is mention made of a
foure-fold death in the Scripture, viz: firſt
a death in ſinne: 2. A death vnto ſinne:
3. The death of the bodie: Laſtly, the
death both of bodie and ſoule. For the
firſt, the man or woman is ſaid to be dead
in ſinne, in whome, ſinne raigneth
               Rom. 6. 12., and
who ſauoureth altogether the things of the
fleſh
               Ro. 8. 5., and perceiue not the thinges of the
ſpirit
               1. Cor. 2. 14.: and this is the death of euery naturall
man, and the wretched eſtate and
condition of euerie mothers child, as wee
come from the wombe: ſo Dauid confeſſed;
Behold I was borne in iniquitie, and in
ſinne, hath my mother conceiued me
               Pſ. 51. 5.. And
in generall; the Apoſtle hath pronounced
of vs all, that by nature, wee are dead in
treſpaſſes, and ſinne
               Eph. 2. 1.. And in particular,
ſayth of the widdow liuing in pleaſure,
that ſhee is dead, whilſt ſhee liueth
               1. Ti. 5. 6.. And
ſurely,The reaſon why all vnregenerate perſons liuing in ſin, are ſayd to be dead. the reaſon why ſuch as are aliue in
the fleſh, and be neuer ſo actiue, agill, and
nimble; yet ſo long as they continue in
their naturall corrupt eſtate, may iuſtly be
ſaid to be dead, is very great; for what is
there elſe but death in ſuch as are not vnited

vnto God, the Fountaine of life
               Pſ. 36. 9.?
and therefore as the immortalitie of thoſe
that are damned, is called death
               Reu. 20. 6: becauſe
they are ſeparated from God, and the glorie
of his power
               2. Theſſ. 1. 9.. So the knitting together of
the bodie and ſoule, is properly no life,
but rather death, in ſuch as are not ruled
by the ſpirit of God, which is the Fountain
of life
               genus mortis, ſine poenitentia viuere. Aug..
            2 Secondly, concerning death vnto ſin,
it is this,VVhat it is to be dead vnto ſinne. when by the power and vertue
of Chriſt his reſurrection
               Phi. 3. 10, conuayed from
Chriſt as the head, to all the faithfull, as
members of his myſticall bodie; the power
of ſinne is deſtroyed, and all his Saints
quickned vnto newneſſe of life, whereof
the Apoſtle thus ſpeaketh: How ſhall wee
that are dead to ſinne, liue yet therein
               Rom. 6. 2. And
againe in the ſame Chapter, hee ſaith likewiſe:
Thinke ye alſo, that ye are dead to ſin,
but are aliue to God in Ieſus Christ our
Lord
               Ro. 6. 11.. And this is called by S. Iohn, in
the Reuelation, the firſt Reſurrection
               Re. 20. 6., and
is indeed the verie firſt degree of euerlaſting
life.
            3 Thirdly,VVhat bodily death is. concerning the death of the
bodie, this it is: when the ſoule (whoſe
preſence, is cauſe of bodily life) returneth

vnto God, that gaue it
               Eccl. 12. 7., and the bodie deſtitute
of ſence and motion, returneth vnto
duſt, from whence it was takē
               
               Gen. 2. 7. 3. 19.: Of which
our Sauiour ſpeaketh vnto his diſciples,
Our friend Lazarus is dead
               Io. 11. 14.; and this is
called the firſt death
               Re. 20. 6: becauſe it goeth
before; and vnto all reprobate perſons, is
as the dore that openeth, & the entrance
into eternall death.
            4 Laſtly,VVhat is the death of body and ſoule. concerning the death of the
bodie and ſoule, it is this: when both of
them ſhall be ſeparated from God, and the
glorie of his power
               2. Theſſ. 1. 9., and haue their portion
giuen them in extreame darkeneſſe
               Mat. 8. 12, without
all hope of mercie or fauour
               Lu. 16. 25 26., and therfore
called euerlaſting perdition
               2. Theſſ. 1. 9., and the
ſecond death
               Reu. 2. 11.
            Three of theſe, viz: The death in ſinne,
2. Death vnto ſinne. 3. The death of
the bodie: are in this life; The fourth, viz:
The death of the ſoule and bodie, is in the
world to come; to be dead in ſinne, is of
nature: 2. to be dead vnto ſin, is of grace:
3. the death of the bodie, (not changed
by Chriſt:) and 4. the death of bodie and
ſoule, are of iudgement; by being dead
vnto ſinne, we are freed, 1. from death in
ſinne, 2. from eternall death, and 3. haue

the death of the bodie changed, from a
puniſhmēt for ſin into a bleſſing, to make
an end of ſinne; it being heauens churliſh
porter to let vs in to the preſence of God;
three of them. 1. The death in ſin; 2. The
death of the body. 3. Eternall death, are
moſt fearfull: but the fourth to die vnto
ſin, is moſt comfortable and ioyfull.
            Now,Of which kind of deaths Dauid here ſpeaketh. of which of theſe kinds of deaths
Dauid here ſpeaketh, may eaſily be gathered,
not of death in ſin, for with ſuch perſons
God is not; neither doth he ſpeake
of death vnto ſinne, for therin no euill is
to be feared; much leſſe doth he meane
the death of ſoule and bodie, which is a
perpetuall ſeparation frō the preſence of
God, and all euill in full meaſure powred
out: then by conſequent, he muſt needes
meane the death of the bodie, which to
nature is verie fearefull, but wherein the
Lord is graciouſly preſent with his, thorough
aſſurance wherof, the natural feare
of death is ſuppreſſed. And ſo much for
the kinds of death, and of which hee ſpeaketh
in this place.
            Concerning the third poynt,3. The difference betwixt the death of man, and beaſt. viz. the
difference betwixt the death of man and
beaſt; although in ſome ſenſe it bee

moſt true, which the wiſe man, ſaith, viz.
that there is one condition of the children of
men, and of beaſtes: for as the one dieth ſo dieth
the other, for they haue all one breath, and
there is no excellency of man aboue the beaſt,
for all is vanitie, all go to one place, and all
was of the duſt, & al ſhal returne to the duſt,
who knoweth whether the ſpirit of man aſcend
vpward, and the ſpirit of the beaſt deſcend
downeward to the earth
               Ecclc. 3. 19 20, 21.. q. d. No man
is able by his carnall reaſon and iudgement,M. Perkins in his treatiſe, of dying well.
to put difference betwixt man and
beaſt, for the eie cannot iudge otherwiſe
of a man being dead, thē of a beaſt which
is dead: yet by the word of God, and eie
of faith wee learne and ſee, a wonderfull
difference, both in regard of the bodies
and ſoulesThe great difference betwixt the bodies of man and beaſt, both being dead.. For firſt in regard of the bodie,
though it returne vnto duſt and ſee
corruption, as the bodie of a bruit beaſt;
yet whereas the bodies of beaſts returne
into their firſt matter, and ſhall neuer bee
remembred, and ſo periſh in this valley,
and neuer go through it, yet the bodie of
man, and ſpecially of the elect, ſhall goe
through this valley, and be raiſed againe
the ſame for ſubſtance, but perfected in
qualities, as Chriſt himſelfe hath affirmed

in the Goſpel, and that with great aſſeueration.
Verely, verely, the houre ſhall come
in the which all that are in the graues ſhall
heare his voyce, and they ſhal come forth that
haue don good, vnto the reſurrectiō of life; but
they that haue done euill to the reſurrection
of condemnation
               Ioh. 5. 28. Which Article of faith,
Iob beleeued, as hee hath witneſſed in his
booke, ſaying: I am ſure that my Redeemer
liueth, and though wormes destroy this
bodie, yet ſhall I ſee God in my fleſh, whom I
my ſelfe ſhall ſee, and mine eies ſhall behold,
and none other for me
               Iob 19. 25. 26. 27: which Article of
faith is euery where taught vs in the holy
Scriptures, both of the old and new TeſtamentExo. 3. 15 Eſa. 26. 19 1. Cor. 15 1. Theſ. 4. 16 Reu. 20. 21, and in all ages confirmed, both
by the taking vp of Henoch before the
lawGen. 5. 24, by the raiſing vp of the widowes
ſonne of Zareptha, by Eliah
               1. Kin. 17 22, and of the
Shunamites ſonne, by Eliſha
               2. King. 4 34. 35, in the time
of the law; and the raiſing of the Rulers
daughter, being newly deadMat. 9. 18, and of the
widow of Naims ſonne, being longer
dead, and carying towards the graueLuk. 7. 11,
and of Lazarus being both dead and buried,
and hauing lien 4. dayes in the graue
               Ioh. 11. 39,
were raiſed by Chriſt: alſo of Dorcas raiſed
by Saint Peter
               Act. 9. 40, and of Eutichus, by

Saint Paule
               Act. 20. 10, in the time of the Goſpel.
            Yea, here is wrapped vp a moſt comfortable
myſterie to be vnfolded, viz. that
the bodies of Gods Saints, euen in their
greateſt corruption, rotting in the graue,
drowned in the Sea, or burned to Aſhes,
yet remaine truly vnited vnto Chriſt, and
are euē then no leſſe his mēbers then before,
for the whole mā is vnited ſpiritually
to whole Chriſt, & death cānot diſſolue a
ſpiritual vnionRo. 8. 38., but as Chriſt his body &
ſoule, being ſeuered each frō other as far
as ParadiſeLu. 23. 43, & the hart of the earth,Mat. 12. 40 yet
neither of them were euer ſeuered frō the
Godhead of the ſon: ſo though our bodies
and ſoules for a time be ſeuered by death;
yet neuer cā either be diſioined frō Chriſt
vnto whō they are both of them indiſſolubly
vnited, & by vertue wherof, the body at
the laſt day ſhal riſe againe to eternall life.
            
               The great difference betwixt the ſoules or ſpirits of man and beaſt being dead. Secondly, wheras the life (or as the Philoſophers
call it, the ſoule, and the wiſe
man, the ſpirit
               Eccl. 3. 19) of the beaſt, being but a
naturall vigor or qualitie, ariſing from the
temperature of the bodieSunte ſubſtantia ipſorum corporū. Zanch. de operibus dei 3. part-li. 2 c. 1. fol. 62
                     •
                  
               , and hauing
no being of it ſelfe, but wholy dependeth
vpon the bodie, and therefore dieth with
the bodie, & vaniſheth away like ſmoake

in the aire, the ſoule of man being a ſpirituall
ſubſtance created and infuſedBeza in quaeſt. fo. 5. 2 Zanch. de ope. fol. 762 Hieronim. Theodoret., aſwell
ſubſiſting forth of it, as in it, when
the bodie returneth to the duſt, it returneth
to God that gaue it
               Eccl. 12 7.
            Now let vs briefly view the titles which
Dauid here vſeth, and whereby he deſcribeth
death; calling it (a darke or ſhadowie
valley) not, but that death is moſt
lightſome and comfortable vnto Gods
Saints, no doubt but in the verie moment
and inſtant of death, though the
outward mā periſh & the bodily eie grow
dimme, Gods Saints do ſee ſuch glorious
ſightsActs. 7. 55, as heart cannot conceiue; their
eies being then lightned, as at noone day,
to ſee God as he is, vvho dwelleth in that
light which no mortall eie can pierce into
               1. Tim. 6. 16.
But Dauid in this place of purpoſe, bending
himſelfe to deſcribe the terrors of
death (to the end that his Chriſtian courage
and fortitude in the contempt therof,
might more liuely appeare) ſpeaketh
of it as of a dark way, then which there is
nothing more fearefull vnto naturePſa. 91. 5; oh
then ſee the power of a liuely faith, which
maketh men not afrayd to goe through
places moſt fearefull.
            
               
Q. But did not Chriſt paſſe through
this valley and taſte of death for vs; why
then doth it yet remaine?
            A. It remaineth not, as it was threatned,
and is ſtill inflicted vpon the reprobate,
viz. a puniſhment for ſin, (for then
were God iniuſt to puniſh ſinne twice.)
But by Chriſt his death (though it remaine
for triall and exerciſe of our faith,
courage, patience, &c.) the nature of it
is changed to his elect, to become a bleſſed
freeing of them from ſinne, for the
ſting being taken away, it cannot hurtAdeſt▪ ſed non obeſt.;
but is rather a bleſſing; that whereas ſinne
brought forth death, death will bee the
bane and deſtruction of ſinne, it was ſayd
to Adam and Euah, If you ſinne, you ſhall
die
               Gen. 2. 17: But now it is ſaid to all Gods elect,
You must die, that you may ceaſe to ſinne
               Dictum fuit homini morieris ſi peccaueris: a nunc dicitur morere ne pecces. Aug. Ciuit. dei. 13. 4.;
No man then truly wearied with the
burthen of ſinne, but as the wearied traueller
deſireth the ſhadow, ſo will he deſire
to be diſſoluedPhi. 1. 23, & to paſſe through
this valley, that he may dwell at reſt
with Chriſt, freed from all ſin,
vpon mount Sion for
euer. It followeth.
         
         
            
            THE
FIFTH SERMON
vpon the 23. Pſalme.
            
               I will feare no euill.
            
            
               I 
               Will feare no euill.
               2. Part of this verſe. In
theſe wordes is contained
the ſecond part of
this verſe, declaring the
great valour and courage
of euerie true Chriſtian,
not fearing to paſſe, through this
ſhadowie valley; where firſt we will conſider
the ſenſe of the wordes,The ſenſe of the words. The kinds of feare. and then the
doctrines and vſes. There is a feare which
accompanieth the nature of man, & may
be called a naturall feare, frō which Chriſt
Ieſus himſelfe taking our true nature vpō
him, was not free, as may appeare from
the Goſpel of Saint Mathew, where it is

ſaid, He began to wax ſorrowfull and grieuouſly
troubled.
               Mat. 26. 37. And in Saint Markes
Goſpel it is ſaid, He began to be troubled &
in great heauineſſe
               Mar. 14. 33: Which though ſome
haue held rather to be a propaſſion, then a
paſſion, and ſeeme to collect the ſame frō
the words themſelues, becauſe it is ſayd,
He began to be afraid
               Ierome. 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  . yet the holy Ghoſt
in another place alluding therunto, doth
put it out of doubt, where he ſaith, That
in the days of his fleſh, he did offer vp praiers
and ſupplications, with strong crying and
teares, vnto him that was able to ſaue him
from death, and was alſo heard in that which
he feared
               Heb. 5 7. Secondly, there is a fond and
fooliſh feare, whereof the Pſalmiſt maketh
mention, ſaying, The wicked do feare
where no feare is
               Pſal. 53. 5, So the Diſciples were
afraid at the ſight of their maſter after his
reſurrection, ſuppoſing they had ſeene a
ſpirit
               Lu. 24. 37 Mat. 14. 26. This is one of the curſes which
God hath threatned in his law, ſaying,
Vnto them that are left of you, I will ſend
a cowardneſſe into their hearts, in the land of
their enemies, and the ſound of a leafe ſhaken
ſhall chaſe them, and they ſhall flie as from a
ſword, and fall no man purſuing them
               Leu. 26. 36.
Which curſe was executed vpon the huge

armie of the Midianites, who fledde and
were deſtroyed of Gedeon, and three hundred
men not ſtriking a blow, but breaking
their pitchers, holding their lampes in
one hand, and their trumpets to blow withall
in the other, and crying the ſword of the Lord
and Gedeon:
               Iud. 7. 17
               Gladius domini & Gedeonis.. The like alſo we reade of
the Aramites, who beſieging Samariah,
the Lord cauſed them to heare a noyſe
of Chariots, and horſes, and of a great armie,
which made them to flie, for their liues, caſting
away their cloathes, aud all that euer
they had
               2. Ki 7. 6 Wherein is verefied the ſaying
of wiſe Salomon, The wicked flieth when
none purſueth him, but the righteous are bold
as a Lion.
               Pro. 28. 1. Thirdly,3 there is a religious
feare, whoſe obiect is God, which in ſome
is a baſe, ſlauiſh, and ſeruile feare, full of
hatred,Oderunt peccare mali formidine poenae. malice, and contumelie, if they
durſt bewray it; this made that ouergrowne
ſinner Felix to tremble, when he
heard mention of iudgemētAct. 24. 25. Oderunt peccare boni virtutis amore.
               Pene eſt & pene non, in others,
it is filiall, ſuch as the child honoureth his
father with, wherein there is nothing but
loue, reuerence, purity, ingenuitie: ſo neare
in affinitie vnto loue, that it can hardly bee
diſcerned from itPene eſt & pene non, whereof Dauid ſaith, there is mercie with thee, O Lord, therefore

ſhalt thou be feared
               Pſ. 103. 11. But leauing theſe other
kinds of feare to their proper places,
we are here to vnderſtand the Prophet, as
ſpeaking of a natural fear, which in it ſelf
is not euill, no more then the other humane
affectiōsNon culpat affectum, ſed exceſſum Bern. in Cant. ſer. 26. though it be hard (if not
impoſſible) for man being ſo corrupt, to
keepe the right meaſure in his affections,
and not to ſinne, as Chriſt did not, which
point a godly learned man hath well illuſtrated
by this common and plaine ſimile:
               H. I. in his treatiſe of the ſufferings of Chriſt. fol. 56.
If two glaſſes be filled, the one with muddie
water, the other with cleare Chriſtall
ſnowe water, and let them ſtand till
all the muddineſſe in the one bee ſetled
at the bottome, then ſhake both theſe
Glaſſes, in the one the mudde ariſeth
ſtraight way, and defileth all the water
there: in the other although ſhaken
neuer ſo much, yet it remayneth all
ſtill as cleare as Chriſtall: euen ſo if any
of vs bee ſhaken with any affection
of ioy, ſorrow, feare, &c. We are preſently
defiled with mudde: but Chriſt,
(in whom was mans true nature, but
not the defilement of nature,) yet remayneth,
ſtill cleare from any the leaſt
ſin though neuer ſo much troubled, &c:

ſo that the Prophet, in ſaying (hee will not
feare) doth not condeme the affection it
ſelfe, as euill, which we haue alſo heard,
to haue ben in Chriſt, who together with
our nature, tooke theſe vnpleaſant paſſions
vpon him, yet without ſinne; but
this is a ſpeech of faith, not condemning
natural fear, but ordering it, that it exceed
not meaſure; and is as much in effect. q. d.
Seeing Lord,
               The ſumme of the ſecond part of this verſe. 
               thou wilt be with me, I will ſecurely
caſt my ſelfe vpon thy prouidence, and
not be diſtracted or oppreſſed with immoderat
feare, though thou lead me thorough the valley
of the ſhadow of death: whoſe example
directeth vs, to ſtriue to keep an excellent
meane in all troubles and dangers, neither
on the one ſide to bee deſperate and
feareleſſe, nor on the other ſide, to be caſt
downe, and oppreſſed with feare, but to
caſt our ſelues vpon God, vſing all honeſt
and lawfull meanes, and leauing the iſſue
and ſucceſſe vnto God. So much for the
opening of the ſence of the words: now
for our inſtruction.
            Our Leſſon is this,Doctrine. That all ſuch as are
ſheepe of the Lordes paſture, and foldmates
with Dauid, of whome the Lord
hath taken charge, as a faithfull ſhepheard

to prouide al good things for them,
and to goe in and out before them: all
theſe I ſay, need not to be diſtracted with
immoderate feare of any euill, but when
others are hard beſtead, and at their wits
ends, they may ſecurely reſt on Gods prouidence,
and ſay with Dauid, The Lord is
my light, & my ſaluation, whom ſhall I feare?
the Lord is the ſtrength of my life, of whome
ſhall I be afraid?
               Pſ. 27. 1. This doctrine is confirmed
by many other places of ſcriptures,Confirmation.
it is recorded in the prophecie of Eſay,
that the vnbeleeuers, hearing of warres,
and the ſword threatned, for want of
faith, they ſought to ſtrengthen themſelues
by wicked league, and friendſhip
with ſtraungers, and Idolaters; but the
Lord hee admoniſhed all the faithfull, by
his Prophet thus: Say not ye, a confederacie
to all them, to whome this people ſayth a confederacie,
neither feare ye their feare, nor be
afraid of thē, but ſanctifie the Lord of hoaſts,
and let him be your feare and dread, and he
ſhall be as a ſanctuarie vnto you
               Eſay. 8. 12 13..
            Againe, when tyrants moſt cruelly rage
and perſecute, yet Chriſt biddeth vs not
feare them that can but kill the bodie, but
feare him that is able to destroy both bodie

and ſoule in hell
               Mat. 10. 28.: Yea, when that great &
terrible day of the Lord ſhall come, euen
the day of wrath and vengeance, when
the Lord Ieſus ſhall ſhew himſelfe from heauen
in flaming fire, as the Apoſtle Paule
ſaith2. Theſſ. 1. 7, 8.: Yea, when the elements ſhall melt
with heat, the heauens goe away with a noiſe,
yea, and the earth with all the workes therein
be burnt vp, as S. Peter ſaith2. Pe. 3. 10, The waters
roare, that vnbeleeuers hearts ſhall faile
them for feare, as ſaith the EuangeliſtLu 21. 25, 26, 28.: Yet
euen then our Sauiour biddeth his Diſciples
not to be afraid, but lift vp their heads
with ioye, knowing that their redemption
draweth nigh
               Lu 21. 25, 26, 28.. But becauſe nothing is
more fearefull to nature, thā death, which
is the enemie and diſſoluer thereof
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  . Ariſt. Eth. lib. 3., and
wherein many of Gods deere Saints, bewary
great weakeneſſe, I will therefore
gather a fewe Argumetns from the holy
Scriptures; the conſideratiō whereof, may
ſerue to ſtrengthen our faith,Foure Arguments for the ſtrengthning of faith, and ſuppreſſing the immoderat feare of death.. & ſuppreſſe
in vs the immoderate feare of death, that
in ſome meaſure wee may triumph in
Chriſt, and ſay with the Prophet, I will
feare no euill. And whereas the ſcriptures
afford vs many, yet I will content my ſelfe
onely with theſe foure.
            
               
               The firſt Argument for this purpoſe,
               The firſt argument is drawne, from conſideration of thoſe manifold and great euils, from which by death, we are for euer deliuered.
               may be the conſideration of thoſe manifold
and great euils, from which by death
the faithfull are deliuered, which that we
may the better conceiue, and diſcerne, are
of two ſorts, generall, and ſpeciall; by ſpeciall
euils, I doe meane thoſe, which for
ſome great and extraordinarie cauſes, are
to be inflicted vpon ſome particular perſons
and places, as the burning of Sodome
and GomorhaGe. 19. 24, the carrying of Gods people
into captiuitie2. Kin. 24▪ 15.
               VVhat are the ſpeciall euils, from which by death, Gods Saints are deliuered.. This was the bleſſing promiſed
to old Father Abraham, ſaying:
Know for a ſuertie that thy people ſhall bee a
stranger, in a land that is not theirs foure
hundred yeeres, and ſhall ſerue them, and
they ſhall intreat them euill, but thou ſhalt
goe vnto thy fathers in peace, and ſhalt bee
buried in a good ageGen 15. 13. 15.. This was a bleſſing
which God promiſed to wicked King Ieroboams
ſonne, ſaying: I will bring euill
vpon the houſe of Ieroboam, and will cut off
him that piſſeth againſt the wall, aſwell him
that is ſhut vp, as him that is left in Iſraell,
and will ſweep away the remnant of the houſe
of Ieroboam, as a man ſweepeth away dung,
till it be all gone, the dogs ſhall eat him, that
dyeth of Ieroboams ſtocke in the citie, and the

foules of the aire, ſhall eat him that dieth in
the field; yet that child (for whom his mother
came diſguiſed to the Prophet) ſhould
die in his bed, and all Iſrael ſhall mourne for
him, and burie him, for hee onely of Ieroboams
ſtocke, ſhall come to the graue, becauſe
in him, there is found ſome goodneſſe towards
the Lord God of Iſrael, in the houſe of Ieroboam1. Ki. 14. 10, 11, 12, 13..
            Alſo this mercie the Lord promiſed vnto
good King Ioſiah, ſaying: The wordes
that thou hast heard, ſhall ſurely come to
paſſe, but becauſe thine heart did melt, and
thou haſt humbled thy ſelfe before the Lord,
when thou heardeſt what I ſpeake againſt this
place, and againſt the Inhabitants of the
ſame. viz: That it ſhould bee deſtroyed, and
accurſed, and haſt rent thy cloathes, and wept
before me: I haue alſo heard it, ſayth the
Lord, Behold therefore I will gather thee to
thy Fathers, and thou ſhalt bee put in thy
graue in peace, and thine eies ſhall not ſee all
the euill, which I wil bring vpon this place
               2. Ki. 22. 19. 20.. Yea, this is a courſe which the Lord many
times, taketh with his faithfull ones,
thogh the world do not obſerue it, whoſe
taking away, is a prognoſtication of ſome
fearefull euill, to befall that place, as the

Prophet Eſay noteth, ſaying: The righteous
periſheth, and no man conſidereth it
in his heart, that mercifull men, are taken
away from the euill to come
               Eſay 57. 1 2.. And ſurely,
in this reſpect, it muſt needes bee a great
bleſſing for Gods Saints, to die and go to
the graue in theſe happie daies of peace,
before the Lord bring vpō vs, thoſe great
euils which hee hath many waies threatned,
& we euery way deſerued, in ful meſure
to be powred vpon vs, as for the wicked
it is not ſo with them; God is ſo farre
from taking them away, from the euill to
come, that rather he taketh them away in
full meaſure, to ſuffer the euill to come,
ſo that the day of death of all other, is
moſt woefull vnto them: and therefore no
maruaile, though they feare death, ſo
much as they doe, that skinne for skinne,
and all that euer they haue, they would giue
for their liues
               Iob. 2. 4., and as the Gibeonites
were contented to be hewers of wood, and
drawers of water
               Ioſh. 9. 23 25; ſo they had rather endure
any miſerie, than die: and therefore
muſt euen be pulled from home, with no
leſſe violence, thā 
               Ioab was from the hornes
of the altar
               1. Kin. 2. 30.. Whereas the Godly, knowing
that when the earthly houſe of this tabernacle,

ſhall bee deſtroyed, they ſhall
haue a building giuen of God, an houſe,
not made with hands, but eternall in the
heauens, doe therefore ſigh, deſiring to
be cloathed with that houſe, which is from
heauen
               2. Cor 5. 1. 2..
            By generall euils (from which by death
we are deliuered) I meane ſuch as either
all or moſt men doe ſuffer, and they are
of three ſorts, either ſuch as concerne
ſpecially the bodie,2. VVhat are the general euils, from which Gods ſaints by death are freed. or 2. ſuch as concerne
the ſoule, or 3. ſuch as doe ioyntly concerne
both.
            The generall euils which chiefely concerne
the bodie,VVhat are the general euils of the bodie. are many, as ſickneſſes,
diſeaſes, aches, paines, hunger, and wearineſſe;
cold, and nakedneſſe; toyle, and
labour; loſſes and croſſe; greefe and
ſorrow; troubles and perſecution: And
laſtly death it ſelfe, which maketh an end
of all, for Iohn heard it proclaimed from
heauen, and was commanded to write it
for the comfort of Gods Saints: Bleſſed
are the dead which die in the Lord, for ſo
ſayth the spirit, they reſt from their labour
               Re. 14. 13,
For God ſhall wipe away all teares from
the eies of his children, and there ſhall
neuer be any more ſorrow, crying, paine,

or death, for the firſt things are paſſed
               Eſay 25. 8 Reu. 21. 4..
            2 The generall euils which chiefely
doe concerne the ſoule,VVhat are the general euils which doe cheefely concerne the ſoule. in compariſon
whereof, the former is but a flea-biting,
are alſo many, and eſpecially that great
burthen of originall corruption, which
continually luſteth againſt the ſpirit, and
hindreth vs from doing the good, which
we would
               Gal. 5. 17.. Yea, is as a furnace, which continually
breatheth out many euill things,
as doubtings of Gods fauour, prouidence,
infidelitie, pride, hardneſſe of heart, hypocriſie,
couetouſneſſe, ambition, hatred, &c.
And what not, which is a miſerie of all
miſeries, and made the Apoſtle ſo vehemently
crie out, Oh wretched man that I
am, who ſhall deliuer me from this bodie of
Death
               Ro. 7. 24? This is a hell which Gods children
goe thorough,Originall corruption, the hell, of Gods children. and the greateſt torment,
that can poſſibly bee deuiſed, for a
man that hath any ſpark of grace, and true
deſire to glorifie God, to bee continually
exerciſed, turmoyled, yea many times ouermatched
and foyled, by the homeborne
rebellious corruptions of his owne
heart, whereby hee is pinnioned, and led
as a poore captiue, and ſo fettered & hampered,
that though hee deſire to runne in

the waies of Gods commandements: yet
is he conſtrained to creep with the ſnaile,
and make no way.
            
               vvhat are thoſe generall euils, which concerne both bodie and ſoule. 3 The generall euils which doe concerne
both body and ſoule, are alſo many,
and eſpecially theſe three: The firſt is a
continuall temptation vnto ſin, for wherſoeuer
they become,1. The firſt generall euill, concerning ſoule and bodie. Sathan that roaring
Lion, which goeth about continually,
ſeeking whome hee may deuoure
               1. Pe. 5. 8., alwaies
doggeth them at their heeles, and whenſoeuer
they intend any good thing, he is
by & by at their right hands to reſiſt thē
               
               Zach. 3. 1.
and watcheth full narrowly euerie occaſion
to tempt and draw them to euill
               2. Sa. 11. 2.: wherupon
ariſeth the greateſt ſtrife, wreſtling,
and combate, betwixt Sathan and a faithfull
ſoule, that euer was: whereof S. Paule
thus ſpeaketh; We wraſtle not with fleſh and
blood, but against principalities and powers,
and worldly gouernours, the Princes of the
darkeneſſe of this world, againſt ſpirituall
wickedneſſes, which are in the high places
               Eph. 6. 12.,
and ſayth of himſelfe, that the meſſenger of
Sathan was ſent for to buffet him2. Cor. 12. 7 Of
which buffetting and beating, onely the
Saints of GOD haue experience, for
worldlinges, in whome all thinges are at

peace
               Lu. 11. 21, woonder at it, and perceiue it not▪
but by death, Gods Saints get a final conqueſt:
for though now hee compaſſe the
earth to and fro
               Iob. 1. 7., and hath great wrath, becauſe
he knoweth his time is but ſhort
               Reu. 12 12, and
being let looſe of the Lord, is become the
Prince of the ayre
               Eph. 2. 2. that wee can no way
flie from him, but he will find vs out; yet
can he neuer come within the compaſſe
and liſts of heauen, for from thence this
wretched accuſer of the brethren is caſt
               Reu. 12. 10,
that though hee had acceſſe to tempt Adam
in the earthly Paradiſe, yet can he neuer
come to tempt his ſoule, or the ſpirits
of iuſt and perfect men
               Heb. 12. 23, in the heauenly Paradice,
yea after the day of iudgement,
when there ſhall be a new heauen, and a new
earth, for qualitieEſa 65. 17 66, 22 Reu. 2
                     •
                  . 1 A ſua qualibet corruptione prius contracta., & both of them made
one habitacle for Gods Saints; then ſhal he
haue his portion in the fiery lake
               Mat. 25. 41, and chained
in the blackneſſe of darknes for euer
               
                  Iude. 6. The ſecond great & generall euill in regard of the whole man, is the continuall practiſe of ſinne..
            The ſecond euill generall, in regard of
the whole man, and which lieth heauy on
Gods Saints in this life, is a continuall
practiſe of ſinne, by reaſon that their ſanctification
in this life, though true, yet imperfect,
wherby it cōmeth to paſſe, that as
Salomon ſaith, there is no man that liueth and

ſinneth not: and Saint Iames, In many things
we ſinne all
               Iam. 3. 2.: oh what a wretched thing
is this, that wee ſhould continually offend
the Maieſtie of ſo good & louing a God,
who dayly powreth his bleſſings vpon
vs: but when death commeth and cloſeth
our eies, there is to all the elect an
happie end of ſinning any more, for
their corruption of nature, ſhall bee aboliſhed,
Sathan baniſhed: and their ſanctification
perfected without all ſinne, or the
temptations thereunto to doe the will of
God willingly, ſpeedily, and perfectly.
            The third and laſt generall euill is this,The third general euil and miſerie, is conuerſation with the wicked.
that in this life Gods Saints are cōſtrained
to conuerſe, & liue in the cōpanie of wicked
ones, as ſheep mingled with vncleane
goates, yea, ſo thicke are they ſowne, that
if we will not keepe companie with fornicators,
couetous, extortioners, and Idolaters;
we muſt go out of the world1. Cor. 5. 10: now
what a miſerie of all miſeries is this, that
being ſo wretched,M. Perkins in his treatiſe of dying well. fo. 780. 781 & ſinful in our ſelues,
we are conſtrained to be in the companies
of ſuch, whoſe onely delight is in ſwearing,
lying, blaſpheming, filthie and fooliſh
talking, ſpeaking euill of God, and all
godlineſſe, curſing the bleſſed of God,

and loading them with all vile reproches,
and diſgraces that may bee; what man
that is truly grieued for his owne ſinnes,
whoſe ſoule within him is not vexed to
heare, as Lots was2. Pet. 2. 8, and guſh out into
tears, as Dauids did, to ſee men ſo fearfully
tranſgreſſe the commaundements of the
Lord
               Pſal. 119. 136.? yea, and complaine of this miſerie
as he did, Wo is mee that I remaine in
Meſech, and haue mine habitation amongſt
the tents of Kedar
               Pſ. 120. 5 But bleſſed bee the
houre of death, which maketh a perpetuall
ſeparation, and an euerlaſting farewell
betwixt the godly and wicked, when we
ſhall no more liue amongſt prophane ſinners,
by whom the name of God is blaſphemed,
all the day long: but ſhall be gathered
to the glorious and innumerable companie
of Angels, to the aſſembly and congregation
of the firſt borne, which are written in
heauen, and to God the iudge of all, and to the
ſpirits of iuſt and perfect men
               Vbi, tot gaudia, quo
                     •
                   ſocios faelicitatis. Aug. de ſpirit. & anima. 
               and to Ieſus
the Mediator of the new testament
               Heb. 12. 22, 23, 24.. If
then by death we be freed from theſe, yea,
from all euils, then ſurely there is great
reaſon, that with Dauid, we ſhould feare no
euill, to go through it, &c. And this is the
firſt Argument.
            
               
Now becauſe it is not inough vnto perfect
felicitie,The cōſideratiō of thoſe ineſtimable and incomprehenſible ioyes, into the poſſeſſi
                     •
                   whereof we enter by death; a notable means to giue vs courage againſt it. to be deliuered from all miſerie
and euill; therfore the ſecond Argument
which may ſerue to giue vs great
courage againſt death, may be the conſideration
of thoſe in eſtimable and vnconceiueable
good things, into the poſſeſſion
and fruition whereof, we enter by death;
which is one of thoſe great reſpects, in
regard whereof Salomon hath pronounced,
That the day of death, is better then
the day that one is borne
               Eccle. 7. 3. for by our birth
we enter into a world of ſinne and iniquitie;
but by death we enter into the preſence
of God, where are the fulneſſe of
ioyes
               Pſa. 16. 11. Oh then conſider this thing, ſo
ſoone as euer death hath cloſed our eies,
our bodies rest from labour and toyle, and go
vnto the graue as a bed of reſt
               Eſay. 57. 2, where it
ſhall more ſoundly ſleepe, then euer
in this life vpon a bedde of Downe,Illa, domus laetitiae, haec militiae, illa laudis, haec orationis, illa requiaei, haec laboris. vntill
it be awakened by the ſound of a trū
               pet;
and the ſoule immediately returneth
vnto God that gaue it, for euer to abide
in the preſence of the liuing God, of
Chriſt, and of all the Angels and Saints in
heauen: the greatneſſe whereof cannot
be conceiued with heart,Bern. or expreſſed

with tongue; for if Saint Paul ſay of the
miſteries of the Goſpel, and firſt fruits of
the graces of Gods ſpirit, that they are
ſuch, as eie hath not ſeene, eare heard, nor
heart of man can conceiue
               1. Co. 2. 9 ſignified by the
white ſtone, wherein is written, a new
name, which no man knoweth but he that receiueth
it
               Reu. 2. 17. What ſhall then the harueſt
be? And if in this ſhadowie valley: where
we ſee God but darkly, as it were through
ſpectacles, and know but in part
               1. Cor. 13 12.; yet the
ſweetneſſe of the remiſſion of our ſinnes,
iuſtification, ſanctification, peace of conſcience,
and ioy in the holy Ghoſt; doe
paſſe all vnderſtanding, & no man knoweth,
but he that receiueth them; oh how
infinitely ſhall they bee powred vpon vs,
when wee ſhall come to the mountaine
of Gods holineſſe, to ſee him face to face
               Viſio dei beatifici ſola; ſummū bonum eſt, Aug lib de Trin. ca. 13.,
& know him as he is
               1. Cor. 13 12. Surely if the Queen
of the South, ſeeing but the glorie of an
earthly king, his houſe, meate, order of
ſeruants, and their apparell, yet proclaimed,
Oh happie are theſe thy ſeruants, becauſe
they might euer stand before him, and
heare his wiſdom
               1. Ki. 10. 8. Then 1000. times more
happie they, that ſhall euer be in the preſence
of the euerliuing god, king of kings,

               where is mirth without mourning, ioy without
ſorrow; health without ſickneſſe; and life
without end, in compariſon of whoſe glorie,
riches, and wiſdom; Salomons, was but
vanitie, beggerlineſſe, and folly. And if ſo
be that Moſes was thought ſo happie,
and in all ages renowmed, for that God
vouchſafed him ſo great fauour, as to ſee
his hinder parts as he paſſed byExod. 33 23: then
how much more happie ſhall they be,Videbis, poſteriora mea. that
are admitted into the preſence of God, to
ſee his face for euer? Now though no man
either for the ending of preſent miſeries,
or preuenting of future calamities, or for
the deſire to enioy theſe good things,
muſt ſhorten their dayes, as Saul, Achitophel,
Iudas, or that fooliſh martyr of Philoſophie
Cleombrotus, tales, ſtulta Philoſophia, habet Martyres., who reading Platoes booke of
the immortalitie of the ſoule, is reported
to caſt himſelf headlong from a wall, that
ſo he might haue experimentall knowledge
of that which he read;Hieron. ad Marcell. yet what mā
or woman with ſpirituall vnderſtanding,
duly conſidering what miſeries by death,
wee leaue behinde vs; and with the eyes
of faith beholdeth, what ineſtimable
good things by death we are put in poſſeſſion
of, but ſhall moſt willingly die

when God calleth; yea, ſing with the
Swanne, when death approacheth, and
ſay with old father Simeon, Lord now lettest
thou thy ſeruant depart in peace
               
                  Lu. 2. 2 9. A ſanctified and holy life a notable meanes, to procure a couragious and comfortable death.
            
            The third maine ground of true Chriſtian
valour and reſolution, and effectuall
meanes, for the repreſſing of the immoderate
feare of death, is, to leade a Chriſtian
an and conſcionable life: what a comfort
was it to Ezekiah, when he receiued from
the Lord the meſſage of death,3. Argument. by the
hands of the Prophet Eſay, that he could
appeale vnto God, and ſay, Oh Lord, remember
how I haue walked before thee in
trueth, and with a perfect heart, and haue
done that which is good in thy ſight
               Eſay. 38. 3. For
although it be a moſt hereticall doctrine,
taught and maintained in the Church of
Rome, that God giueth euerlaſting life
and glorie to men, for, and according to
their good workes, as hee giueth damnation
for the contrarieRhem. in Rom. 2. 2. Sect. & 1. Co. 3. ſect. 2.; and therefore wee
renounce it, and ſay with the Apoſtle, Eternall
life is the gift of God through Ieſus
Chriſt our Lord
               Ro. 6. vlt.. And though a reward
ſhall be giuen vs according to our workes
               Rom. 2. 6,
yet not for our works.Rhem. in Rom. 2. 2. Sect. & 1. Co. 3. ſect. 2.; Yet ſeeing good
workes, though they bee no cauſe of

raigning, yet are the way to Gods Kingdome
Secuudum opera, ſed non propter Greg. in Pſal. 140.. Therefore as it muſt needes bee
a great comfort in our liues, ſo much
more at our deathes to remember that
we haue walked in the way that leadeth
to Gods kingdom.Non cauſa regnandi, ſed via ad regnum. Aug. Wherefore, if we Miniſters
deſire a comfortable death, let vs
be diligent in ſeaſon and out of ſeaſon
               2. Ti. 4. 2, to
feede the flocke of God
               1. Pet. 5. 2, whereof the holy
Ghoſt hath made vs ouer ſeers
               Act. 20. 28, that wee
may bee able to proteſt in ſome meaſure
with the Apoſtle and ſay: I haue kept back
nothing that was profitable, but haue ſhewed
you all the councell of God, I am pure from
the blood of all men, I haue coueted no mans
ſiluer gold, or apparell
               Act. 20. 20, 26, 27. Let euerie ruler
that would haue a comfortable death, ſo
carrie himſelfe in this life, that he may be
able to ſay with Samuel, Beare record of
me before the Lord whoſe Oxe haue I taken?
or whoſe Aſſe haue I taken? or whom haue
I done wrong to? or whom haue I hurt? or of
whoſe hands, haue I receiued any bribe, to
blind mine eies withal
               1. Sa. 12 3.? Yea, let euery one
ſtriue to keepe a good conſcience before
God, and al men, that on their death beds
they may ſay with Iob, Let God weigh me
in the inſt ballance, and he ſhall know mine
               
vprightneſſe, mine heart hath not beene deceyued
by a woman, neither haue I laid wait
at the doore of my neighbour, I haue not reſtrained
the poore of their deſire, nor cauſed
the eyes of the widow to faile, I haue not
eaten my morſels alone, but the fatherleſſe
haue eaten therof, I haue ſeene none to periſh
for want of clothing, but the loynes of the
poore may bleſſe me, which haue beene couered
with the fleeces of my flocke
                  Iob 31. 6 9. 16. qualis vita: finis ita.. yea, doth
not dayly experience confirme,Iren. that as
the life is, ſo is the death? What a comfortable
thing is it to bee preſent at the
deathes of the godly? What notable confeſſions
of faith? teſtimonies of repentance?
patience in their paines? feruencie
of the ſpirit? zeale in prayer? ioy in the holy
Ghoſt? power in exhortation? and comfort
in their farewell, Is there to bee
ſeene and heard, if by violence of the diſeaſe,
they be not hindered? whereby it
appeareth true, that Dauid witneſſeth,
that towalke in the wayes of gods cōmaundements
bringeth peace at the laſt: on the other
ſide moſt miſerable and comfortleſſe
are the ſickneſſes and deathes of the
wicked, who for the moſt part die like
ſottes, as Naball, whoſe heart was as dead

as a ſtone
               1. Sam. 25. 37.: or deſperate like Caine
               Gen. 4. 13: their
conſciences awaking as a mad dog out of
ſleepe, and tormenting them for their ſins
moſt extreamely. Well then, we muſt
liue the life of the righteous, if euer wee
looke to die the death of the righteous,
and if with the Apoſtle we will haue death
our aduauntage
               Phil. 1. 21: We muſt firſt with the
Apoſtle ſerue God with all good conſcience
               Act. 24. 16. Late repentance is ſeldome ſound,
wee reade but of one that became righteous
at his laſt end; of one, that none may
deſpaire for their long led ſinfull life: and
but of one, that none may preſume, to
continue in ſinne. The ſafeſt way is to begin
betime, and euen this day
               Pſa. 9
                     •
                  . 7. Heb. 3. 7. 13., to turne
to the Lord. For though ſomtime a good
death may follow an euill life, yet an euill
death can neuer follow a good life; and
therefore correct and reforme thine euill
life, and feare not an euil death, for he can
not die ill, that liueth wellCorrige male viuere, et n
                     •
                  li timere, non poteſt male mori qui bene vexerit. Aug. de diſcip. Chriſt. cap. 3., So much for
the third ſpeciall meanes, which do procure
a bold and comfortable death? the
fourth and laſt remaineth, which is the
greateſt of all, and muſt giue life to all the
reſt, as without which they are but dead,
and nothing worth.
            
               
               A true and liuely faith.
               The fourth and moſt effectuall meanes for the procuring of a comfortable death; is a ſtedfaſt faith. For a man may
conſider the euils of this preſent life, and
the happineſſe of the other, yea and lead
a life for ciuill duties vnrebukeable, and
yet not his death bee comfortable vnto
him, but rather, he hath great cauſe to fear
much euill therein; but when to the conſideration
of freedome from miſerie, the
fruition of happineſſe, and an honeſt and
vpright life; there is laſtly ioyned a true
and liuely faith, whereby wee are aſſured
of Gods fauourFides ambiguum non habet, aut ſi habet, fides non eſt, ſed opinio Bern., and the remiſſion of ſins,
and that through the obedience and paſſion
of Chriſt, we ſhall bee receiued into
Gods kingdome: theſe togither doe bring
a moſt ioyfull, comfortable, and bleſſed
death. When death ſeazeth vpon a carnal
man, wanting faith, who can ſee no further
then by the light of blind naturall
reaſon, and ſeeth that he muſt leaue al his
honour, riches, pleaſures, friends, and families,
& that his body, which hath beene
ſo daintily fed, coſtly clothed, and much
made of, muſt now be laid in the duſt, and
become meate for the wormes, and ſee
corruption; and when hee ſeeth that his
ſoule muſt go to iudgement, to render account
for thoſe ſinnes which he hath vngodly

committed, oh how doth this torment
and maſſacre him? oh death how
bitter is thy remembrāce to ſuch an one?
but to the ſpirituall man, that by the eye
of faith, looketh further then to the preſent
corruptible eſtate of his body, namely,
to that glorious eſtate, wherein it ſhall
be rayſed by the power of God at the laſt
day, and by the eye of faith, beholdeth
the brazen Serpent, Chriſt Ieſus, lifted vp,
vpon the pole of the croſſe, by which one
ſacrifice once offered God is well pleaſed;
oh how little doth ſuch an one feare any
euill in death? ſo that by faith wee liue,
and faith is our ſtay when we doe die: let
vs then with all diligence heare the word
of God, and pray continuallyImo, demus operam, vt moreamur 
                     •
                  n precatione. Aug., for the
begetting and increaſe hereof, that wee
may in ſome meaſure triumph ouer death
and ſay with Dauid, I wil feare no euill,
to go through the valley of
the ſhadow of death.
It followeth.
         
         
            
            THE
SIXT SERMON
vpon the 23. Pſalme.
            
               For thou Lord art with me, thy
rodde and ſtaffe. &c.
            
            
               IN this third circumſtance,The third Circumſtance declaring the true cauſe, and ground of a Chriſtians courage in paſſing thorough the valley of death.
is layd downe
the ground of a Chriſtians
boldneſſe and
courage; which is not
deſperat madneſſe, &
raſhnes, wherby many
a Swaſh-buckler, caſteth himſelf headlong,
into the danger of death, as though
he feared no euill therin; but it is the aſſurance
of Gods preſence, and fauour, that
is the ground of a true Chriſtians boldneſſe.
A point moſt neceſſarie to be conſidered,
leaſt otherwiſe we may imagine,
that Dauids boldneſſe is appropriate to

himſelfe, and grounded vpon ſome ſpeciall
promiſe and aſſurance, not communicable
vnto any other, and ſo it ſhould
be great preſumption, in any other, to ſay
as hee did, I will feare no euill in death &c.
Vnleſſe he had the ſame warant that hee
had; I ſay to preuent this ſurmiſe, heere
Dauid layeth downe the ground of his
ſpeach, that if wee haue promiſe of the
ſame, aſwell as he had; wee may boldly,
and with as good warrant ſay as he did,
I will feare no euill, to goe thorough the valley
of the ſhadow of death, (for thou Lord
art with me) &c.Method.
            
            For the orderly,The ſence of the words. and more profitable
handling whereof, wee will firſt obſerue
the ſence of the words:How God is preſent, in a generall maner with all his creatures. ſecondly, the doctrine
and reaſons: thirdly, the vſe and
practiſe thereof.
            For the ſirſt, the wordes ſeeme verie
plaine, yet for the better vnderſtanding
of them,Apud homines, poteſt quis quaerere latebras, ſed nihil latet Deum. and the like phraſe elſewhere,
we are to note, that God is ſaid to be with
men, two waies; firſt, generally in reſpect
of his eternall power, wiſedome, and prouidence,
whereby he preſerueth, and diſpoſeth
all thinges, at all times, and in all
places,Moll. in pſ. fol. 1560. whereof Dauid thus ſpeaketh:

               Whither ſhall I goe from thy spirit? or whither
ſhall I flie from thy preſence? if I aſcend
into heauen, thou art there, if I lye downe in
hell, thou art there alſo, &c. If I take the
wings of the morning, and dwell in the vtmoſt
parts of the ſea, yet thither ſhall thine hand
lead me, and thy right hand hold me
               Pſ. 139. 7, 8, 9, 10. Yea,
the Lord himſelfe ſaith in the prophecy of
Ieremie: Can any hide himſelfe in ſecret places
that I ſhall not ſee him? doe not I fill heauen
and earth, ſayth the LordIere. 23. 24? Hereof
S. Paule alſo ſpeaketh in the Acts:Iouis omniae plena virg. 
               Doubtleſſe,
the Lord is not farre from euerie one of
vs, for in him we liue, mooue, and haue our
being
               Act. 17. 27.: And the Author to the Hebrewes
ſaith, There is no creature which is not manifest
in his ſight, but all things are naked to
his eies, with whome we haue to doe
               
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                   quod, omnia, intueatur.. So
the Lord ſaw, and was neere to Pharaoh
and the Egyptians, ſpending his plagues,
and beſtowing his arrowes vppon them,
till in the end hee destroyed them in the red
ſea
               Ex. 14. 27; So was he neere vnto Ieroboam, who
ſtretching out his hand, to lay hold on Gods
Prophet, it withered, that he could not pull
it in againe
               1. Ki. 13. 4. So was he neere to Goliah,
when he directed Dauids stone, to hit him
in the forehead
               1. Sa. 17. 49, neere to Ahab, when he

directed the arrow to ſmite him dead, through
the ioints of his brigandine
               1. Kin. 22. 34.. And thus is he
vnto all worldly men, to ſpie out all their
wicked waies, & many times to take them
tardie in their ſins, in conſideration wherof,
S. Iames biddeth vs beware of ſinne,
and rendreth this as a reaſon, For behold
the Iudge ſtandeth before the doore
               Iam. 5. 9, ſo was
he at Abrahams dores, to behold the mocking
and perſecution of Iſmaell againſt Iſaack
               Gen. 21. 9.: at Iſaacks dores, to heare the intended
murther of Eſaw, against his brother Iacob
               Gen. 27. 41: at Labans doores, to heare and ſee,
his hard & vnconſcionable vſage of Iacob
               Gen. 31. 41.;
at Saules dores, to ſee his cruell perſecuting
of Dauid
               1. Sa. 18. 12.: at Dauids dores, to ſee
his ſin with Berſheba
               2. Sa. 11. 4: Yea, he is at all our
dores, beds, and boards, and at our heeles
whereſoeuer we become, as Dauid confeſſeth,
Thou art about my path, and my bed,
and ſpyeſt out al my wayes, there is not a word
in my tonge, but thou knoweſt it altogether
               Pſ. 139. 3.
In a word, there is neither heauen nor
hell, nor vtmoſt part of the ſea, neither
day nor night, light nor darkeneſſe, that
can hide vs from his face; our ſitting, riſing,
lying downe, the thoughts of our
hearts, wordes of our tongues, wayes

of our feet: yea our raines, bones, & mothers
wombes, wherein we lay in our firſt
informitie, and imperfection, are ſo well
knowne vnto him: as the Prophet in that
Pſalme declareth, for hee ſitteth vppon the
circle of the earth, and beholdeth the Inhabitants
of the earth as Graſhoppers
               Eſay. 40. 22., whoſe
throne is the heauen of heauens, and the earth
his footstoole
               Eſay 66. 1, and his waies are in the great
deepe. Wherefore Adam and Euah were
deceiued, when they thought that they
could hide themſelues from the preſence
of God,Magns caecitas, ſugere quem non poſsunt effuger, Paulus ſagius in Gen. cap. 3. amongſt the trees of the garden
               Ge. 3. 8.,
and thoſe wicked ones, who encourage
themſelues in their ſinnes, ſaying: The
Lord ſeeth not, neither doth the God of Iacob
regard it
               Pſa. 94. 7.. And therefore are iuſtly reproued
by the Pſalmiſt, in the next words:
vnderstand ye vnwiſe amongſt the people,
and ye fooles, when will ye be wiſe? hee that
planted the eare, ſhall he not heare? or he that
fourmed the eie, ſhall hee not ſee
               How God is after a more ſpeciall manner preſent with his elect, in all their troubles, to ſtrengthen & comfort them.? So much
for Gods generall preſence.
            
               Secondly, hee is after a more ſpeciall
manner preſent with his elect, whome
he loueth for to comfort, ſtrengthen, protect,
and defend them, this preſence hee
promiſed to Moſes being afraide to goe

to Pharaoh: Certainly, I will be with theeExo. 3. 12..
The like he renued to Ioſhua, his ſucceſſour:
as I was with Moſes, ſo will I be with
thee al the daies of thy life, I wil not faile thee
nor forſake theeIoſh. 1. 5., and vnto Ieremy he ſaith,
Speake all that I haue commaunded thee, and
feare not their faces, for behold I am with
thee, to deliuer thee, ſayth the Lord
               Iere. 1. 8. 19.. And
Chriſt alſo giueth the like promiſe to his
Apoſtles; Behold, I will be with you alwaies,
to the end of the worldMat. 28. 20.. This is the preſence
which Iacob, ſo earneſtly prayed for,
If God will be with me, and will keepe mee in
this iourney which I goe, and giue mee bread
to eat, and cloathes to put on, then ſhall the
Lord bee my GodGe. 28. 20. And of this preſence
Dauid here ſpeaketh, (Thou art with mee)
q. d. I will feare no euill, for thou my moſt
louing Shepheard, wilt alwaies be with me, to
comfort, ſtrengthen, protect, and defend me,
that I be not ouercome of any euill: And ſo
much for the ſence of the words.
            
            Our leſſon,Doctrine. for inſtruction naturally,
hence ariſing, is this, viz: That the Lord
is euer after a ſpeciall maner,Confirmation of the firſt member, of this doctrine. preſent with
his Saints, both in proſperitie and aduerſitie,
in life, and death; the aſſurance wherof,
is the ground of much comfort, patience,

and courage, in whatſoeuer condition,
&c.
            
               For the firſt braunch of this doctrine,
the Author of the Epiſtle to the Hebrews
confirmeth it, where hee teacheth vs, to
make application of the promiſe which
God made to Ioſhua, as made vnto vs: let
your conuerſation be without couetouſneſſe,
and be content with thoſe thinges, that you
haue, for he hath ſaid, I will not faile thee,
neither forſake thee, ſo that wee may boldly
ſay, the Lord is my helper, neither will I fear,
what man can doe vnto meHeb. 13. 5: yea, we haue
the promiſes, aſwell as Ioſhua had, both
to the Church in generall, and the faithfull
in particuler: God hath promiſed his
Church in generall; ſaying, In that day
ſing, of the vineyard, of red wine, I the Lord
doe keepe it, I will water it euerie moment;
leaſt any aſſaile it, I will keepe it night and
dayEſay 27. 2. 3.. Yea and Chriſt hath moſt comfortably
promiſed vnto euery faithful ſoule,
in particuler, in the Goſpell, ſaying: If any
man loue me, he will keepe my vvord, and my
father vvill loue him, and vvee vvill come
vnto him, and vvill dvvell vvith himIoh. 14. 23. In
regard whereof, Dauid affirmeth, that the
Lord is nere vnto them, that are of a contrite

heart, and wil ſaue ſuch as be afflicted in spirit,
for many are the troubles of the righteous,
but the Lord deliuereth him out of allPſ. 34: 18.,
And elſewhere alſo to the like purpoſe, he
ſayth: God is our hope and ſtrength, & help
in troubles, readie to be foundPſ. 46. 1..
            
               Q. But ſome may hereupon obiect, &
ſay: Did not Gedeon complaine, in the
perſon of all the people (when the Angell
of the Lord ſaluted him, in this manner,
the Lord is with thee thou valiant man)
Ah my Lord, if the lord be with vs, why then
is all this come vpon vs? and where bee all
his miracles which our fathers told vs off? but
now the Lord hath forſaken vs, and deliuered
vs into the handes of the midianitesIudg. 6. 14.. Did
not Dauid complaine: Will the Lord abſent
himſelfe for euer, are his mercies cleane
gonePſ. 77. 7. 8? Did not Chriſt complaine: Oh my God, my God, way hast thou forſaken meMat. 27. 46..
Yea, and the Saints of God alſo: Oh
Lord, why haſt thou made vs to erre from thy
waies? and hardned our hearts from thy fear?
returne, for thy ſeruants ſake, and for the
tribes of thine inheritanceEſay 63. 17.. How then doe
we ſay, that God is thus preſent with his
people?
            
            A. Indeed, God many times, for their

good
               Ro. 8. 28., doth vex his Saints with his ſtorms, and lay his hand heauie vppon their loynes
               Pſ. 32. 4.:
ſo that their enemies iudge, as they did of
Dauid, God hath forlaken him, perſecute
him, and take him, for there is none to deliuer
him
               Pſ. 71. 11., and themſelues alſo may bee ſo
perſwaded, as their complaints teſtifie;
but the truth is, howſoeuer for our tryall
and humiliation, hee may turne away his
cheerful countenāce from vs
               Eſay 54. 8.; yet, either he
taketh not away the grace, but the feeling
of itFides, quando
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   ſine ſenſu, vt cauſa, ſine effectu. Greenh. fol. 449., (in which caſe men and women are
not to be regarded what they ſay, becauſe
they ſpeake not according to the trueth,
but according to their iudgement, & feeling
which is corrupted, as a mans taſt
in a feauer, to whom euerie ſweet ſeemeth
bitter) or if he take away one grace, he wil
giue vs another in ſtead of it
               2. Cor. 12. 9.. Yea, it ſhall
ſtand as a ſealed truth for euer, the Lord
is nigh to all ſuch as call vpon him faithfully
               Pſ. 145. 18, in due time to deliuer them out of
diſtreſſe, that ſo they may acknowledge
as Iacob did, The Lord was in this place, &
I was not aware
               Gen. 28. 16., the Lord was with me, &
I thought not ſo. Which truth is confirmed
by the manifold examples of Gods deere
Saints, who hauing been humbled to the

gulf of deſpair, yet now are lifted vp again
& their mouths filled with a pſal. of praiſe
& thankſgiuing, vnto our God, confeſſing
with Dauid, & ſaying: though heauines endure
for a night,
               Pſa. 30. 8. 2 
               yet ioy cōeth in the morning.
            
            Q. Againe, ſome for the infringing of
this doctrine, doe demaund, how we can
be perſwaded, that God is with them in
death, whoſe ſickneſſes, and death are ſo
comfortles, ful of idle & rauing ſpeeches?
            A. Howſoeuer ſome, and eſpecially
the ſottiſh ignorant Papiſts, if a man die
quietly and patiently like a lamb, (though
there was neuer any faith, repentance, or
remorſe in his heart, at his death, or holineſſe
and honeſtie in his life) doubtleſſe,
they thinke hee is ſaued; but if any that
profeſſe the truth of Ieſus Chriſt, doe endure
any violent or extream paines, which
thorough weakeneſſe procure impatiencie;
but ſpecially if they vtter any wordes
tending to diſtruſt or deſpaire, Oh then
whatſoeuer his life was, they crie out:
Oh, ſee the end of theſe men, and will
not ſpare to brand ſuch an one, with the
black marke of a reprobate: yea, to condemne
the whole profeſſion of the Goſpell
thereupon: Yet the truth is this, That

Sathan as hee neuer ceaſeth in our whole
life, ſo much more is he buſie at our death
(taking the aduantage of ſickneſſe, and infirmitie
of nature) as knowing that hee
muſt then recouer, or for euer looſe his
Kingdome: and God may for a time (as it
were) ſtand aloofe, and leaue his children
in this great combate, that ſo hee might
bring thē to heauen, by the gates of hellCuncta dei opera, ſunt in mediis contrariis..
Whereupon they may vtter harſh words,
according to their corrupt iudgement,
which are not to bee regarded, as before
we hard. Or elſe theſe things may proceed
from weaknes of nature, & the violence of
the diſeaſe, the brain being diſtempered, as
in hot burning feauers, &c. and then it is
not the man, but the diſeaſe, and they ſhal
die with the diſeaſe, and neuer preiudice
his ſaluation in Chriſt: nay, doubtleſſe
their ſpirituall comfort may abound notwithſtanding
theſe thingsVera conſolatio perpetuo durat in electis, potiſſimum autem efficax eſt circ
                     •
                   vitae finem, & mortis articulum.. In a word, it
is a bleſſed life, which giueth comfortable
aſſurance of a bleſſed death, for ſurely many
a prophane vnregenerate man, may
haue his memorie & reaſon, and die moſt
meekely (as in conſumptions, and ſuch
like diſeaſes) and yet goe to hell; as thoſe
reprobates, of whome Dauid ſpeaketh,

ſaying: they haue no bands in their death
like other men
               Pſ. 73. 4. 5. Whereas many a righteous
man, hauing led a ſanctified life; (by
violence of his diſeaſe) may be drawne to
great torment, idle ſpeeches, and ſtrange
behauiours, and yet goe to heauen: wherfore,
let vs refourme our iudgement herein,
and learne Salomons leſſon, not to iudge
of mans eſtate with God, by his outward
condition in life or death
               Eccl. 9. 2.. And thus wee
haue heard the firſt braunch of this doctrine
confirmed, viz: That the Lord is
al waies with his elect, after a ſpeciall maner,
in due time to cōfort, & relieue them.
            The ſecond braunch of our doctrine
was this,Confirmation of the ſecond branch of the doctrine. viz: That the aſſurance of Gods
preſence, is the ground of much patience,
and comfort vnto Gods Saints, paſſing
through any euill. So that in nothing
haue Gods Saints more reioyced, than in
this, and ſurely the Reaſons hereof are many
and verie great, but eſpecially theſe
two.
            Firſt,The firſt Reaſon, why the aſſurance of Gods preſence, is a matter of ſuch great encouragement to his Saints, is, becauſe he is able to helpe and deliuer them. becauſe he onely is able to helpe
& deliuer his Saints, which the greateſt &
mightieſt Princes of the world, cannot do
though they vſed all their power, dignity,
and authoritie thereunto, no, they are not

able, in ſome caſes, for to help themſelues,
in regard whereof Dauid biddeth, That
we truſt not in Princes, nor in any child of
man, for there is no helpe in him, for when his
breath departeth, he returneth to the earth,
and all his thoughts periſh
               Pſ. 146. 3. 4., but if the Lord
be with vs, who can be against vs
               Ro. 8. 31.? Which
thing the Prophet Eliſha wel knew, whoſe
man being greatly diſcouraged, with the
ſight of the Syrian horſes, and chariots,
and mightie hoaſt: he cryed, Alas maſter,
what ſhall we doe? to whome he anſwered,
Feare not, for they bee moe that bee with vs,
than that bee with them, meaning that God
and all his Angels were on their ſide, for hee
prayed, and the Lord opened his ſeruants eies,
that he ſaw the mountaines full of horſes, and
chariots of fire
               2. Ki. 6. 17.. If therefore our enemies
be neuer ſo many, mightie, or politick, yet
the Lord being with vs, and on our ſide,
we need not to feare them, as Caleb and
Ioſhua ſayd to the people, whoſe hearts
did faint, when they heard by the other
ſpies, that the ſonnes of Anake dwelt in
the promiſed land: Oh, ſaid Caleb & Ioſhua,
feare them not, they ſhall bee bread for vs,
their ſhield is departed from them, and the
Lord is with vs
               Num. 14. 9.. Yea, if death be before

our eies, we need not to feare Sathan, nor
hell, the Lord being with vs, as heere the
Prophet ſpeaketh, and this is the firſt reaſon,
why the Saints of God haue ſo heartily
deſired, and ſo greatly gloried in Gods
preſence, becauſe with whome hee is, to
them is he a moſt ſure defence in all dangers,
as being able to deliuer them out of
all aduerſities.
            The ſecond Reaſon, is this, becauſe
God is an inſeparable companion; wee
may haue friends that loue vs verie deerely,
yea, as their ſoules, in proſperitie; and
yet will faile or forſake vs in aduerſitie, as
Dauid complaineth: My louers, and my
frends ſtand aſide from my plague, & in kinſmen
ſtood a farre off
               Pſ. 38. 11. And yet Iob more
lamentably complaineth, ſaying: My brethren
are remooued farre from me, and mine
acquaintance are become ſtrangers vnto me,
my neighbours haue forſaken me, and my familiars
haue forgotten mee, they that dwell
in mine houſe, and my maides tooke me for a
stranger, I called my ſeruant, but he would
not anſwere, though I prayed him with my
mouth, my breath was ſtrange vnto my wife,
though I prayed her, for the childrens ſake
of mine owne bodie
               Iob. 19. 13, 14, 15. &c.. yea, Chriſt himſelfe

had experience heereof, Iudas betrayed
him
               Mat. 26. 16; his Diſciples forſooke himMat. 26. 56; and Peter
for ſware him
               Mat. 26. 72, according as Chriſt fore
told them, All you ſhall be offended with me
this night, for it is written, I will ſmite the
Shepheard, and the ſheepe of the flocke, ſhall
be ſcattered
               Zac. 13. 8: but though our frends ſtick
neuer ſo faſt vnto vs, and their loue continue
conſtant, aſwell in aduerſitie as proſperitie,
as the loue of Ionathan, whoſe
loue paſſed the loue of womē
               
               2. Sa. 1. 26, towards Dauid,
that hee hazarded his life for him, and
that when he was perſecuted of his father
               1. Sa. 20. 33.,
yet when death commeth, all men forſake
vs: this ſeparateth husband and wife,
parents and children, friend and friend,
though neuer ſo deerely beloued; but if
God be once with vs, he will bee with vs
for euer; if afflictions come, hee will partake
with vs. For ſo he hath promiſed; whē
thou paſſeſt through the waters, I willbe with
thee, and through the floudes, that they do not
ouerflow thee; when thou walkeſt through the
verie fire, thou ſhalt not be burnt, neither ſhal
the flame kindle vpon thee
               Eſay 43. 2: He wil be with
vs to diſpoſe of the euils, not a haire falling
from our heads, but according to his
will
               Mat. 10. 30. Secondly, to ſtrengthen our weakneſſe,

he knowing whereof we be made
               Pſal. 103. 14.
Thirdly, to giue iſſue to all our troubles,
as ſhal be for his glory and our good
               1. Cor. 10 13.: And
laſtly, if death come, yet then will he alſo
be with vs, to ſtrengthen, and comfort vs,
when all worldly delights faile, and vaniſh
away, ſo that we may boldly ſay, neither
life nor death, nor any thing, can ſeperate
vs from the bleſſed preſence, and
loue of God in Chriſt Ieſus: and ſo much
for the doctrine, and reaſons for confirmation
thereof.
            
               Now then,
               Vſe. 
               that wee haue learned, that
the Lords preſence is ſo comfortable: the
vſe hereof is, that aboue all thinges wee
ſhould deſire and ſeeke it, wherin we haue
this holy Prophet for an example, who
ſayd thus, One thing I haue deſired of God,
which I will require, euen that I may dwell
in the houſe of the Lord all the dayes of my
life, to behold the beautie of the Lord, and
to viſit his templePſ. 27. 4.. Againe, My ſoule thirſteth
for God, euen for the liuing God, when
ſhall I come and appeare before the preſence of
GodPſ. 42. 2.? And in another place alſo he ſaith,
Whome haue I in heauen but thee? and there
is none that I deſire in compariſon of theePſ. 73. 25.
For the practiſe of which vſe, there is required

a double dutie.
            
            
               Firſt to ſeeke God,
               1. Dutie. ſeeke the Lord and his
ſtrength, ſeeke his face for euermorePſ. 105. 4, and
to encourage vs herein, he hath made vs
this promiſe, I loue them that loue me, and
he that ſeeketh me early ſhal find mePro. 8. 17, Aske,
and you ſhall haue, ſeeke, and you ſhall find,
ſaith Chriſt
               Mat. 7. 7., Whoſoeuer then deſireth
the preſence of God, when as God ſaith:
ſeeke ye my face, his ſoule muſt anſwere
with Dauids like an eccho: Thy face Lord
will I ſeekePſ. 27. 8.:Vox dei, in animis noſtris, non ſecus at
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   eccho, in cō
                  cauis locis, reſonare debet. Calu. in Pſ. 
               And ſo ſoone as euer God
ſhall pronounce thou art my people, wee
muſt preſently anſwere, and thou Lord art
our God, as the Prophet ſaythZac. 13. 9..
            Q. But how are wee to ſeeke God?
            A. Principally theſe foure wayes: By
an outward profeſſion, yea though it bee
not alwaies in ſinceritie and truth, yet the
Lord hath pronounced of it, that it is a
drawing neere vnto him, ſaying: This people
commeth neere vnto me with their lippes,
and honoureth mee with their mouthes, but
their hearts are farre from me
               Eſay 29. 13. Mat. 15. 8.. How much
neerer then do they come vnto God, that
profeſſe him in ſpirit and truth?
            2 We ſeek & find the Lord by faith, for
ſo it is ſaid in the Epiſtle to the Hebrews.

He that commeth vnto God, muſt beleeue
that God is, & that he is a rewarder of them
that ſeeke himHeb. 11. 6. And by faith (ſaith ſaint
Paule in many places of his Epiſtles) wee
haue entrance vnto God, and acceſſe to the
throne of his graceRo. 5. 2 Eph. 3. 12., without which it is impoſſible
to come neere vnto God, or to pleaſe
himHeb. 11. 6..
            3 We ſeek and find the Lord by praier,
which is (as it were) a paire of wings to
carrie vs vnto him, and whereby as a key,
the doore of the kingdome of heauen is
opened, Yea the Lord (ſaith the Pſalmiſt)
is nigh to them than call vpon him faithfully
               Pſa 145. 18.. Was not the Lord nigh vnto
Moſes, when by his prayer, and as
long as hee held vppe his hands, the
Iſraelites ouercame the Amalekites
               Ex. 17. 11?
But was he not neerer vnto him, when as
by prayer he did (as it were) euen reſtraine
the Lord from executing his fierce wrath
vpon the people, that the Lord ſaid, Let
me alone, that my wrath may waxe hote
               Ex. 32. 10.
Was not the Lord neere vnto Ioſhuah,
when at his prayer, the Sunne ſtoode in the
Firmament
               Ioſh. 10. 13., and neere vnto Paul and Silas,
when as at their prayer, the very foundation
of the priſon ſhooke, that the doores opened,

and euery mans bands were looſed
               Act. 16. 26.
how ought we thē to pray cōtinually, that
ſo we may be cōtinually in the preſence of
God1. Theſſ. 5 17.. If we begin the day, let vs ſay with
Abrahams ſeruant, O Lord ſend mee good
ſpeed this day, Gen. 24. 12. that ſo we may
walke with the ſtaffe of Gods prouidence:
if we be couered with the ſhadows of the
night, let vs beg with Dauid, Lightē mine
eies that they ſleepe not in death, Pſal. 13. 3.
that ſo wee may couch our ſelues in the
mercies of God: and whatſoeuer wee attempt
in either of theſe two ſeaſons, let vs
preuent it with the bleſſing of that other
Pſalme, Lord proſper the worke of our hands,
Pſal. 99. 17.
            4 Fourthly and laſtly, we find God by
repentance, for ſo the Lord ſaith: O Iſrael
returne vnto me
               Ier. 4. 1., And in another place,
Turne vnto mee, and I will turne vnto you,
ſayth the Lord of Hoaſts
               Zac. 1. 3.. So long then as
we liue in infidelity, & do nether earneſtly
pray, ſoundly repent, nor ſincerely profeſſe
God; we are eſtranged far from God,
and as we forſake him, he will forſake vs,
both in life and death: but whoſoeuer by
a true faith, ſhall ſtedfaſtly lay hold vpon,
and imbrace the promiſes of God, ſoundly

repent of his ſinnes, zealouſly call vpon
the name of the Lord, and ſincerely profeſſe
his word, hee ſhall not onely come
neare vnto God, but aſſuredly hee ſhall
find God, yea God will find him, and loue
him, and dwell with him, yea in him, his
body ſhal become the Temple of the holy
ghoſt, as the holy Apoſtle S. Paule in many
places calleth it1. Cor. 3. 16. & 6. 19. 2. Cor. 6. 16.. O happy that man,
that ſhall entertaine ſo honorable a gueſt,
he commeth not emptie handed, nor will
leaue his hoſt vnſalutedFoelix homo, qui hunc hospitem recipit, eſt enim ſatis magnificus hoſpes, nec venit vacuis manibus; nec abit, inſalutato hoſpite. ferus. in Ioh. cap. 14. fol. 401. Abraham entertained
but Angels, and had a ſonne beſtowed
vpon himGen. 18. 10.. Lot did the like, and
he was deliuered from the ſubuerſion of
Sodom
               Ge. 19. 17. Obed-Edom the Gittite, gaue but
houſe-roome to the Arke of God, and the
Lord bleſſed him and all his houſhold2. Sam. 6. 11..
what good thing ſhall he want in whom
the whole Trinitie dwelleth? But there is
no leſſe care to bee vſed, to retaine God,
then to find himNon minor eſt virtus. 2. Dutie.. And therefore the ſecond
dutie in the practiſe of this vſe, is,
that with all care and conſcience, wee ſo
carrie and behaue our ſelues, that we may
retaine the Lord, and not prouoke him to
depart from vs: whereunto tendeth the
counſell of the Apoſtle, Let euerie one poſſeſſe

his veſſell in holineſſe and honour
               1. Theſſ. 4. 4.. For
there is nothing that ſo much grieueth
the ſpirit of GodEph. 4. 30., as ſinne; he can brooke
pouertie, ſickneſſe, perſecution, ſlaunder,
or any miſerie, there is no diſgrace ſhall
make him wearie of dwelling with vs, or
aſhamed of vs, onely ſinne ſeparateth him
and vs, as he himſelfe hath teſtified in the
Prophecie of Eſay, Behold the Lords hand
is not ſhortned that it cannot ſaue, neither is
his eare heauie that it cannot heare, but your
ſinnes haue ſeparated betwixt you and your
God, and your ſinnes haue hid his face from
you, that he will not heare
               Eſa. 59. 1. 2.. Which thing
the Saints confeſſe, We haue ſinned and rebelled,
therefore haſt thou couered thy ſelfe
with a cloude, that our prayer ſhould not paſſe
through
               La. 3. 44.. Oh then if we would diligently
ſeek him (as we haue learned) then ſhould
we find him, and if wee made conſcience
of ſinne, he would dwell and abide with
vs, to bee our ſtay and comfort with his
bleſſed preſence in life, and in death, and
afterwards we ſhould dwell for euer with
him in his kingdome.
            But now if wee make application of
theſe things to our ſelues,Application. alas wee ſhall
find there are but a few that haue any deſire

vnto God, either to finde him, or
haue him with them; nay how many are
there that think the Lord too nere them,
and therfore ſay in their hearts with thoſe
curſed ones in the booke of Iob, Depart
from vs, for wee deſire not the knowledge of
thy wayes
               Iob. 21. 14.. All that they deſire, is, to find
and retaine with them, gold, and ſiluer,
goods, houſes and lands, friendſhip, credit,
honor and promotion: if theſe things
be with them, they care for no euill, and
therefore no maruell though ſo many in
the world, when afflictions and death cō
               meth,
wherin theſe things can ſtand them
in ſmall or no ſtead, bee deſtitute of true
comfort.Exhortation. I beſeech you then, let vs aboue
all things ſeeke, and hauing found, make
conſcience to enioy Gods preſence, that
as the people ſaid: Some put their truſt in
horſes, and ſome in Chariots, but wee will
remember the name of the Lord our God
               Pſ. 20. 7.,
ſo we may ſay, ſome put their truſt and reioyce
in riches, and ſome in honor: but we
will put our truſt, and reioyce in the preſence
of the Lord. And ſo I will conclude
this poynt, with the worthy exhortation
which Azaria made to Aſa, and all Iudah
and Beniamin, ſaying, The Lord is with

you, whilest you be with him, and if you ſeeke
him he will be found of you: but if you forſake
him, he will forſake you
               2. Cro. 25 2., and then ſhall
both life and death become moſt fearfull
and miſerable. It followeth.
            
               Thy rod and thy ſtaffe do comfort me.
               4. Circumſtance. In
this fourth and laſt circumſtance of this
verſe,The ſence of the words. the Prophet Dauid declareth the
wonderfull, ſweete and comfortable benefites
of the Lordes preſence, very elegantly,
perſiſting, and dwelling in his receyued
Metaphor,Virga, & pedum, virga corrigit, temere diuagantes, aut negligētur ſequentes; pedo, inimicos confringit, & vt vas figulinum diſſipat: Mollin Pſa. fol. 222. ſetting forth Gods gouernment
by the ſhepheards rod and ſtaffe:
the rod is for correction; the ſtaffe for defence;
with his rod hee conſtraineth the
declining ſheepe, to ioyne with their foldmates,
compelleth the wanderers to accompanie
their fellowes, and forceth the
ſlouthfull plodders to pace it better; and
with his ſtaffe he doth driue away, and if
they will not be feared, doth breake to
peeces, & deſtroy the enemies of his flock,
according to that in the Pſalmes, Thou
ſhalt bruiſe them with an yron ſcepter, and
breake them in peeces like a potters veſſell
               Pſ. 2. 9..
So then the ſumme of it is thus much in
effect. q. d. O Lord, as thou art with me, ſo
do I conceiue exceeding comfort, both

from thy fatherly rods, & corrections towards
mee, and all thy children, and alſo
from thy ſeuere and iuſt iudgements towards
thine enemies.
            Our leſſon for inſtruction hence is,Doctrine. that
Gods ſaints haue great matter of ioy and
comfort, both from his ſharpe correcting,
and chaſtiſing of his children, and from
his ſeuere and iuſt puniſhing of his enemies,
both of them included in this ſhort
ſtrain, Thy rod and ſtaffe do comfort me, &c.
But it will bee profitable further to inſiſt
vpon this point, and to illuſtrate and confirme,
both the parts or braunches of this
doctrine by the holy ſcriptures: for the
firſt, it may ſeeme very ſtrange, that Gods
Saints ſhuld conceiue ſuch great comfort
from Gods ſcourging rod, but there are
 three things chiefly, the conſideration
whereof may make vs greatly to reioyce
in,To conſider wha
                     •
                   mooueth the Lord, to correct his children, a ſpeciall meanes of 
                     ••
                  mfort in 
                     〈…〉
                  . yea to embrace and kiſſe this rod. viz.
            1 Firſt, to conſider what it is, that moueth
the Lord to correct his children; and
that not furie, and rage (whereby men are
prouoked raſhly and vnaduiſedly, to doe
that many times which afterwards they
are ſorrie for) but loue, for ſo himſelfe
hath pronounced in the booke of the Reuelation,

               So many as I loue, I rebuke and
chaſten
               Reu. 3. 19. The naturall parents, that loue
their children dearely,
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  : Prius verbum, ad verba: poſterius ad diſciplinam refertur. Bull. in Apo. and had rather feel
ſmart themſelues, then it ſhould light vpon
their children; yet will rather (though
it bee to their owne griefe) make them
thoroughly feele the ſmart of ſharpe
correction, then that they ſhould for want
of nurture caſt themſelues headlong into
miſerie: and the holy Ghoſt witneſſeth,
that our heauenly father dealeth after the
ſame maner with his children, if inſtruction
and admonition by words will not
ſerue, but wee will runne on in an euill
courſe to the diſhonor of God, ſlander of
the Goſpell, offence of the weake, hardening
of the wicked, and to our own great
hazard, and perill of eternall deſtruction,
rather then hee will ſuffer vs to runne in
this broad way to eternall deſtruction,
(though he delight not in our miſeries)
yet will he preſſe vs downe with rebuke,
& ſorrow; and yet all in loue; which the
wiſe man Salomon knew, whē he gaue this
coūſel, my ſon refuſe not the chaſtening of the
Lord, neither be grieued with his correction,
for the Lord correcteth him whom he loueth,
euen as the father doth the child in whom he

delighteth
               Pro. 3. 12: Whereof the Author to the
Hebrewes making vſe, ſayth: If you endure
chaſtening, God offereth himſelfe vnto
you, as vnto ſonnes: but if you bee without
correction, you are baſtards, & not ſonnes
               Heb. 12. 6, 7, 8, &c..
How ought wee then to reioyce in the
rodde, which is ſuch an infallible pledge,
and teſtimonie of Gods loue towards vs?
            2 The ſecond Argument of comfort,
is the conſideration of the manner,To conſider the manner of Gods correcting his children, a ſweet comfort. how
God correcteth his childrē, which Dauid
layeth downe in another place, ſaying:
He dealeth not with vs after our ſinnes, nor
rewardeth vs according to our wickedneſſe,
but as a father hath compaſſion on his children,
ſo hath the Lord compaſſion on them
that feare him
               Pſ. 103. 10. 13.: as then a Father will correct
his child, yea ſharply, that the blood
follow, yet with wonderfull compaſſion,
yea many times with teares, and when he
hath done, burneth the rod; So God is
conſtrained many times to take vs in
hand, and to chaſten vs, leaſt wee be condemned
with the world
               1. Cor. 11 32, but it is with
wonderfull compaſſion, and earning of
bowels, as the Lord himſelfe ſayth, How
ſhall I giue thee vp Ephraim? mine heart is
turned within me, and my repentings are rowled

together
               Hoſ. 11. 8: and no ſooner doe his children
turne vnto him, and take vnto them
words of repentance, and ſay: receiue vs
graciouſly, we will doe no more ſo
               Hoſ. 14. 3, but the
Lord preſently, healeth the wound
               Hoſ. 6. 1., and
burneth the rod; when I haue accompliſhed
my worke vpon Sion, and Ieruſalem, I will
viſit the fruit of the proud heart of the King
of Aſhur
               Eſa. 10. 12. Oh then ſhall wee refuſe the
correction of him that dealeth ſo mildly,
and mercifully with vs, nay rather let vs
with Dauid, reioyce in it, and pray with
Ieremie, Correct me oh Lord, but in iudgement,
or in meaſure, according to mercie
               Ier. 10. 24.
            3 The third conſideration,To conſider the manifold good fruits of Gods rod ſanctified; a ſinguler meanes of comfort, when we be whipped therewith. which may
make vs reioyce in Gods rod, is, of the
wonderful benefits, and fruit that it bringeth
forth, being ſanctified vnto his children;
whereof the Apoſtle thus generally
ſpeaketh, in the Epiſtle to the Romanes,
ſaying; Alſo we know that all thinges work
together, for the beſt vnto them that loue
God
               Ro. 8. 38.: and more ſpecially in the Epiſtle to
the Hebrewes, ſaying: No chaſtiſing for
the preſēt ſeemeth to be ioyous, but grieuous:
but afterwards it bringeth the quiet fruit of
righteouſneſſe, vnto them which are thereby
exerciſed
               Heb. 12. 11.. And that we may be the better

perſwaded hereof, we will conſider a
few of the cheefe of them, as the Scriptures
lay them downe.
            Firſt, afflictions are notable meanes to
humble vs before God, which is an excellent
grace, as the Prophet ſheweth,
ſaying: Oh man the Lord hath ſhewed thee
what is good, to doe iuſtly, to loue mercie, and
in humilitie to walke with thy God
               Mic. 6. 8.: and
God reſiſteth the proud, and giueth grace to
the humble, ſaith S. Iames
               Iam. 4. 6., and Marie
in her ſong, thus confeſſeth: Hee caſteth
downe the proude and mightie from their
ſeats, and exalteth them of low degeee
               Lu. 1. 51.: and
our ſauiour Chriſt hath pronounced, Bleſſed
are the poore in ſpirit, for theirs is the
Kingdome of heauen
               Mat. 5. 3.. Now how proane
men are in proſperitie to grow proudDiuitiarum morbus, ſuperbia.,
both the Scriptures, and examples doe
teach; S. Paule biddeth Timothie, Charge
the rich men of the world, that they bee not
high minded, nor trust in vncertain riches
               1. Ti. 6. 17,
and Dauid chargeth, That if riches doe increaſe,
we ſet not our harts thereon
               Pſ. 62. 10. What
need theſe ſtrait charges, if God did not
foreſee, a proaneſſe vnto this ſinne? Pharaoh
in his proſperitie, demaunded who
was the Lord
               Exo. 5. 2.?
            
               
But in his aduerſitie, hee deſired Moſes
and Aron to pray for him
               Exo. 8. 8.: Nabuchodonozer,
in his proſperitie boaſted of
mightie Babell, which he had built for the
honour of his Maieſtie; but when he was
driuen from men, and did eate the graſſe
with the Oxen, and his bodie was wet
with the deaw of heauen; his vnderſtanding
being reſtored, hee could humble
himſelfe, and acknowledge that ſuch as
walke in pride, the Lord is able to abaſe
               Dan. 4. 34:
And that we may not thinke, this is onely
proper to the wicked; marke what
Dauid, (a man after Gods owne heart)
confeſſeth of himſelfe, In my prosperitie,
I ſayd, I ſhall neuer bee remooued;
then didst thou hide thy face from mee,
& I was troubled, then cried I vnto the lord,
and prayed vnto him right humbly
               Pſ. 30. 6, 7, 8.. This
is then one ſpeciall benefite of Gods
rod, to humble them before the Lord.
            Secondly, by Gods rod, men are brought 
to a more diligent examination of their
waies, and repentance for former ſinnes,
which thing God declareth himſelfe, ſaying:
I will goe, and returne to my place, till
they acknowledge their fault, and ſeeke me
in their affliction, they will ſeeke me diligently
               Hoſ. 5. 15.

Which how true it is, their owne practiſe
in the firſt verſe of the next Chapter,
ſheweth, where they exhort and encourage
one another, ſaying: Come let vs returne
to the Lord, for he hath ſmitten, and
he will heale vs; hee hath wounded, and hee
will bind vs vp
               Hoſ. 6. 1..
            
                Thirdly, afflictions are moſt wholeſome
documents, and inſtructions vnto future
amendment, ſo ſaith the Prophet Eſay,
When Gods iudgements are in the earth, the
inhabitants therof ſhall learn righteouſnes
               Eſay 26. 9.
And this doth Dauid acknowledge to
haue found by his experience, Before I
was corrected, I went wrong, but now haue I
learned to keepe thy law
               Pſ. 119..
            
                Fourthly, by Gods rod and afflictions,
our zeale, and other his graces are kindled
in vs, ſo Chriſt teacheth the Church
of Laodicea, ſaying: As many as I loue,
I rebuke and chaſten, bee zealous therefore,
and amend
               Reu. 3. 19. When did Ionah ſo feruently
pray vnto God? Surely, (as hee confeſſeth)
when he was in the belly of hel, when
the depths cloſed him round about, and
the weeds were wrapt about his head
               Ionah. 2. 1. 5, that
is, whē he was in the belly of the Whale,
which deſcended with him downe to the

deepes of the Seas, and rowled in the
weedes. In the time of his proſperitie, hee
neglected his calling, was diſobedient to
the voice of the Lord, and being called to
goe to Niniuie, he went poſt haſt another
way, downe to Iapho, and finding a ſhippe
going to Tarſhiſh, he payd the fare of it,
and downe hee went into the belly of it,
and ſlept, but he that ſlept in the belly of
the ſhip, which floated vpon the waters,
is awake in the belly of the whale, tumbling
amongſt the weeds, in the bottome
of the ſea, he that fledde from Gods preſence,
is now, as readie to flie to God, by
prayerRes mira, vigilat in ceto, qui ſtertebat in naui: orat, in mare, qui fugiebat in terra. 
               Manaſſes, when he was in proſperitie
in Ieruſalem, with his chaines of
gould, and pearle, about his necke, then
he forgat God, and gaue himſelfe to doe
euill, like the abhominations of the heathen:
But when he was bound in chaines
and fetters of yron, and caried into Babilon,
then hee could humble himſelfe, and
moſt earnestly pray vnto God
               2. Cro. 33 18.. The people
of Iſraell when they were in Sion, they liued
at eaſe, and though God ſent his
Prophets early and late, to call them to
repentance, yet they would not heare, but
put off the euill day, and approached to

the ſeat of iniquity, ſtretching themſelues
vpon their Iuorie beds, eating the lambes
of the flocke, and calues of the ſtall, ſinging
to the ſound of the violl, and annointing
themſelues with the beſt oyntment
               Amos 6. 4, 5, 6.. But
when they ſate by the riuers of Babilon,
then they could weepe full bitterly, to remember
Sion
               Pſ. 137. 3. In this reſpect S. Peter calleth
aflictions fierie trials
               1. Pet. 4. 12.: For as fire
doth purge the droſſe from the mettall,
and maketh it much more pure and ſhining;
ſo by afflictions, the Lord doth conſume
and purge the droſſe of his Saints,
that they may appeare, more pure, bright
and ſhining, zealous of good workes.
            5 Laſtly, afflictions are moſt excellent
meanes for to weane our affections from
the world, and to breed in vs a diſlike of
the ſame, together with an earneſt longing
after thoſe heauenly manſions, where
we ſhall be freed from all miſeries; ſo the
Lord exerciſed his people, with much
hardneſſe, both in Egypt, and the wilderneſſe,
that ſo they might the more earneſtly
long for the promiſed land: and
ſurely, to that end, doth the Lord ſend
manifold afflictions, in the wilderneſſe of
this world, that we may the more earneſtly

long for the ſpirituall Canaan, flowing
with better things than milk and honie;
whereas otherwiſe, if wee had all
thinges at our heartes deſire, it is to bee
feared, we ſhould not bethinke our ſelues
of any better place. Seeing then Gods
rod being ſanctified, is euerie way ſo profitable
and fruitfull to his Saints, ſhall we
not with Dauid comfort our ſelues in it?
God forbidde that wee ſhould not moſt
thankfully receiue, and vnfainedly reioice,
in that whatſoeuer, is any means to bring
vs neerer vnto God, and to further our
ſaluation in Chriſt, bee it neuer ſo bitter
and vnpleaſant, to fleſh and blood for a
time, for the end thereof, will bee full of
ioy and peace at the laſt.
            In the ſecond part of the doctrine,The ſecond braunch, of the doctrine confirmed. we
learned, that Gods Saints haue matter of
great comfort from Gods ſtaffe: 1. From
the fearefull plagues, and puniſhments,
which God powreth vppon the heads of
his, and their enemies. So ſayth Dauid,
The righteous ſhall reioyce, when hee ſeeth
vengeance to come, and ſhall waſh his foot
in the blood of the wicked
               Pſ. 58. 10. Not that the
godly ſhall cruelly inſult ouer the calamities
of the wicked, but conſidering that

God is glorified, by theſe his righteous
iudgements, they doe with ioye (free
from hatred, crueltie, impatiencie, and
other ſuch like turbulent affections) approoue
of the ſameNiſi, vt deum ex toto corde dilligunt, ita nihil illis maiorem ad fert voluptatem, quā ipſius nomen illuſtrari, etiam cuiuſcun
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   id pernicie fiat. Bucer. in Pſ.. So Moſes and all
Iſrael reioyced, and ſung Pſalmes vnto
God, for the destruction of the Egyptians
               Exo. 15. 1. Deborah, and Baracke reioyced,
for the ouerthrow of Siſerah, and Iabins
hoaſt
               Iudg. 5. 1.: And in the laſt verſe thereof,
with a zeale to Gods glorie, pray for
the like confuſion of all his enemies,
ſaying: So let all thine enemies periſh, oh
God. So alſo it is ſaid, that the ſoules
of them who haue beene killed for the
word of God, and teſtimonie which they
maintayned; cried with a loud voice, ſaying:
How long Lord, holy, and true, doeſt
thou differre, to auenge our blood, on them
that dwell on the earth
               Reu. 6. 9. 10? Yea doubtleſſe
at the day of iudgement, when our affections,
ſhall be made thoroughly comformable,
to the will of God, and our ſoules
rauiſhed, with his glorie; it ſhall greatly
adde, to the fulneſſe of our ioye, to
ſee GOD glorifie himſelfe, by cruſhing
to peeces, with his ſtaffe or yron
rod, Sathan, and all the wicked, though

neuer ſo neere, or deere vnto vs, in this
lifeParentes, vxores, & liberos, prae Deo, ſi res poſcat, odio habent, fideles; Buc. in Pſ.. And thus we ſee what great comforts,
both GODS ſtaffe, and rod
affoord his Children, &c.
it followeth.
         
         
            
            THE
SEVENTH SERMON
vpon the 5. and 6. verſes of
the 23. Pſalme, preached at Aſhford
in Kent, the 26. of March 1603. being
the firſt Saturday after her Maieſties
departure, and the day that
the King was proclaimed there, in
the Audience of many right
Worſhipfull Knights,
and Gentlemen.
            
               Thou doeſt prepare a Table before me, in the
ſight of mine Aduerſaries, &c.
            
            
               SVch is the force of ſorow,
(right worſhipfull,
and beloued) as
Phiſitians ſay, that
being in great meaſure,
& ſodenly conceiued,

it ſo vehemently pearceth the
heart, and cauſeth it to call in the naturall
heart, from the externall parts of the body,
and is not able, to diſpierce or ſend it out
again; that it either procureth ſodē death,
or ſome mortall ſickneſſe, which ſeemeth
to be verefied, by examples in the Scriptures;
we read of Eli, that hearing how
the Philiſtims, had put the Iſraelites to
flight, and taken the Arke of God; with
the extremitie of the ſoden feare, and ſorrow
conceaued, Hee lost his ſtrength, fell
backward from his ſeat, and brake his neck
               1. Sa. 4. 18,.
Likewiſe, it is ſaid of Naball, that (ſo ſoon
as his wife had acquainted him, with Dauids
intent, to be reuenged on him, and all his family,
for his churliſh anſwer to his ſeruāts
               1. Sa. 25. 10)
his heart dyed within him, and he was like a
ſtone
               1. Sa. 25. 37.. Alſo Balthaſar, ſeeing the palme
of an hand to write his doome, vppon the
plaiſter of the wall, ouer againſt him in
the middeſt of that royall Feaſt, which he
made to a thouſand of his Princes: his
countenance was changed, & his thoughts
ſo troubled him, that the ioynts of his loynes
were looſed, and his knees ſmote one againſt
another
               Dan. 5. 5. 6, &c. And ſurely, the great ſorrow
which euerie true Chriſtian in this land,

may iuſtly conceiue, from the great loſſe,
of our lately deceaſed, (oh that I am conſtrained
to ſay deceaſed) gracious Princeſſe
Elizabeth, (who was the verie light
of our eies, and breath of our noſe thrils,
a tender nurſing-motherEſay 49. 23., (as the Prophet
ſaith) in whoſe lappe we haue been more
than 44. yeeres, nurſed and fed, both with
the ſincere milke of the word of God
               1. Pet. 2. 2: and
with the good things of the land
               Eſa. 1. 19) may iuſtly
(at the leaſt) aſtoniſh vs; this I ſay, together
with the view, of ſo great a concourſe
of people, and ſpecially of the beſt
& learnedder ſort, (whoſe expectation is
not eaſily ſatisfied, though vpon long, mature,
and peaceable premeditation, wheras
ſmall or no time is now allotted, and
my thoughts troubled, and diſtractedCarmina ſeceſsum, ſcribentis, & otia quaerunt: me mare me ventus, &c. Ouid.;
haue much diſabled me, to the perfourmance
of this great and waightie dutie;
and I could be content, rather to exerciſe
mine eare in hearing, than my tongue in
ſpeaking, being fitter and readier to learn,
than to teachAbſit, vt non ſim paratior diſcere, quam docere., (and ſpecially vpon ſo ſoden,
and extraordinarie occaſion, when
euerie man is ſwift to heare, as S. Iames
ſaith, and their eares much more attent,
and ſharper,Iam. 1. 19 than at other times.) But ſeeing

this is a day of good tidings, aſwell
as of heauie newes, in that the Lord hath
not left vs in the bitterneſſe of mourning,
but comforted our hearts by giuing vs a
moſt religious, zealous, and prudent
King, (oh happie word of comfort, that I
may ſo ſay) to ſit vpon her throne, (as this
day ſhall be proclaimed in your eares, as
elſewhere it hath been with generall applauſe,
and conſent of all) ſhall I hold my
peace? Let the leproſie of thoſe men,
cleaue to my skinne, if it be not as ioyfull
a thing to me, to ſpeake of the honour of
this day, as euer it was to the foure Leapers
of Iſraell, to publiſh in Samariah, the
happie tidings of the Aramities flight2. Ki. 7. 9..
Oh then, that my tongue were as the pen
of a ſwift writer, that I might indite the
honour of our King
               Pſ. 45. 1., that it were as ſhrill
as a trumpet
               Eſay 58▪ 1., to ſound forth the praiſe of
God, who hath thus graciouſly diuerted
our deſerued iudgements; bringing ſhame
vpon our enemies, (that haue longed for,
& by all treacherous meanes ſought this
day) and giuen vs glorie and honor, (that
feared and praied vnto god, that we might
neuer liue to ſee it) Oh if I had the winges
of the morning
               139., I would take Dauids
               Pſ. 148. 2. 3, 4, &c.
               
               courſe, and ſoare vp, or aſcend into heauen,
and call for the Angels, and armies
thereof, the Sunne, moone, planets and
ſtarresEt ſi non cogitatione, aut voce, aliae creaturae, preter Angelos, & homines, deum celebrant; ſunt tamen omnes, 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , in ſuo ordine, taciti laudatores, & canori praecones. Greg., I would deſcend by the aire, and
call the fire, hayle, ſnow, vapours, and
ſtormy winds; diue into the deepe, and
call for the Dragons; yea end in the earth,
and call for mountaines and hils; fruitfull
trees, and Cedars, beaſts, and all cattell,
creeping thinges, and feathered foules;
Kings of the earth, and all people, Princes,
and Iudges, young men, and maidens, old
men, and children; to lend vs their harmonie,
with the beſt inſtruments that they
haue, and to accord vnto vs, to praiſe the
name of the Lord, by whom the horne of
this Engliſh people, hath been ſo mightily
exaltedO bona, ſi ſua norint, Angli., but I ſhall haue more fit occaſion,
largely to proſecute, theſe things
anon; ſo much for the quickening of our
dull ſpirits: now let vs reuerently, attend
to the word of the Lord.
            
               Thou doest prepare a table before me in the
ſight of mine Aduerſaries.
               The ſecond Allegorie. This portion of
Scripture, I haue not curiouſly ſelected,
and choſen,The ſumme of this verſ and the intent or ſcope, of the holy Ghoſt therein. (though verie fit and pertinent,
for this preſent purpoſe and occaſion)
but God by his prouidence, hath offered

it to our conſideration, by the orderly
proſecuting of this text, in this place;
wherein this princely Prophet (hauing in
the foure firſt verſes of this Pſalme, declared,
the ſinguler mercie and prouidence
of God towards his people, vnder the
parable of a Shepheard, prouiding all neceſſaries
for his ſheepe:) doth now in this
5. verſe, thankefully publiſh the ſinguler
mercie, kindneſſe, and bountifulneſſe
of God, towardes his people in generall,
and ſpecially towards him in particuler, as
by experience hee had found; vnder a ſecond
metaphor, taken from a moſt kind,
and liberall hoſt, moſt franckely entertaining
his inuited gueſts, with all comfortable
dainties, and delicates, both for
neceſſitie and delight, the ſcope and drift
of the holy Ghoſt wherein, is all one with
that in the former, and therefore I may
the leſſe ſtand vpon it, hauing ſo largely,
and fully opened the former (as you haue
heard) yet ſome things doe naturally offer
themſelues, from this place, to be conſidered
of, which we haue not met withall
in the former Allegorie, and whereof
ſpeciall vſe and application are to bee
made, according to the preſent occaſion.

For the better conceiuing wherof, we are
to note, that this metaphor, hath a double
ſenſe; the firſt is literall, wherein Dauid
in way of thankefulneſſe publiſheth
to all the world, the great mercie and
goodneſſe of God, in aduancing him to
the crowne and Kingdome, with woonderfull
peace and proſperitie, in deſpight
of all his enemies, who ſought his ruine
according to that in another Pſalme, The
ſtone which the builders refuſed, is become
the cheefe ſtone in the corner, this was the
Lords doing
               Pſ. 118. 22.. And by conſequent alſo
here is ſhadowed out, the wonderfull
mercie of God towards his people, euen
in the things of this life, giuing them all
good things, aboundantly to enioy
               1. Tim. 6. 17., that
their cups doe runne ouer.
            The ſecond is myſticall, as ſignifying
Gods wonderfull care, and prouidence to
miniſter all good things, which may bee
for the comfort, refreſhing, and ſaluatition
of the ſoules of his people in Chriſt.
And the parts of this metaphor, or Allegorie,
(being a metaphor continuedPerpetua metaphora, dicta.) are
principally theſe three, firſt this metaphor
is briefely and ſummarily layd downe in
theſe words,Diuiſion of this verſe. (Thou doest prepare a Table

before me:) Secondly, it is amplified by
a ſpeciall circumſtance, in regard of his
Aduerſaries, as it were gnaſhing with
their teeth, at that his proſperitie, in theſe
words, (in the ſight of mine enemies.) Thirdly
and laſtly, he doth illuſtrate the Metaphor,
declaring the ſumptuouſneſſe and
plentie of this table, both for neceſſitie
and delight, and that by two particulers;
firſt (Thou doeſt annoint mine head with oyle)
Secondly,The ſence and meaning of this firſt part, of this verſe, according to the letter. (my cup runneth ouer.) Of theſe
parts in order, and firſt according to the
litterall ſence, as Dauid vnderſtandeth it,
in regard of corporall or outward things.
            
               Thou doeſt prepare a Table before me, by
table metanimically are meant, all ſuch
good things as for our nouriſhment and
comfort, are ſet vpon the table, and by table
alſo metaphorically, a proſperous, &
flouriſhing eſtate is repreſented; ſo Dauid
in thoſe greeuous imprecations, wherewithall,
(according to the motion of the
holy ghoſt, with an holy zeale, and moſt
pure affections,) he curſed the enemies of
God, thus hee ſayth: Let their table bee
made a ſnare, and their prosperitie their ruine
               Pſ. 69. 22 Secondly, for this his proſperous
and flouriſhing eſtate, ſignified by (Table)

he giueth thanks vnto God, acknowledging
that the Lord (prepared it,) and that
it was not his own bowe, nor ſword, neither
the counſaile, power, and ayd of his
Nobles, & Peeres, for theſe reiected him,
but (as elſewhere he confeſſeth) it was the
Lords owne doing, and moſt maruailous
in the eies of men. Thirdly, and laſtly,
he vſeth a word of continuall act, he ſaith
not thou haſt prepared, or wilt prepare,
but (doest) prepare, thereby ſignifying,
that hee that had aduaunced him, would
alſo preſerue him; So then the Summe of
it, is thus much in effect. q. d. O Lord, I
acknowledge,
               The ſumme of this firſt part, of the verſ. 
               that it was not my wiſedome,
ſtrength, or courage, that promoted me, but
by the power of thy right hand, and ſtrength
of thy moſt holy arme, haue I at laſt obtained
the peaceable fruition of my crown and kingdome,
in despight of all mine enemies. Now
let vs conſider the doctrines.
            Our Leſſon,Doctrine. moſt naturally ariſing from
this place is, that there are none aduaunced
to place of rule and gouernment, but
by the Lord.Confirmation. 
               Promotion (ſaith Dauid)
commeth neither from the Eaſt, nor yet from
the Weſt, but God is the Iudge, it is hee that
maketh high and low
               Pſa. 75. 6.. And in another

place, It is the Lord that raiſeth the needie
out of the duſt, that he may ſet him, with the
Princes of his people
               Pſ. 113. 7, 8.. God himſelfe ſaith,
By me Kings raigne, and Princes decree
iuſtice
               Pro. 8. 15.. And S. Paule affirmeth no leſſe,
There is no power but of God, and the powers
that be, are ordained of God
               Ro. 13. 1., yea though
they bee wicked, cruell, and idolatrous
Tyrants, and ſeeme by fraud, ambition, &
crueltie to aduaunce themſelues, as Ieroboam,
concerning whom, God reprooued
the people, ſaying: You haue ſet vp a King,
but not by me; 1. not according to my reuealed
will
               Hoſ. 8. 4. yet notwithſtanding the Lord
hath prepared them, euen for a rodde or
ſcourge, whereby to puniſh the ſinnes and
vnthankefulneſſe of his people, as the
Lord hath ſaid, I gaue thee a King in mine
anger
               Oſay 13. 11.. Yea, and concerning Ieroboam, we
know that God reuealed it vnto Ahiiah,
before the death of Salomon, That hee
would rent ten tribes from his ſonne, and giue
them him, for confirmation whereof, he tooke
the new garment, that Ieroboam woare, and
rent it in twelue peeces, giuing him tenne of
them
               1. Kin. 11. 29. 30.. So proud heatheniſh Aſhur, is called
the rod of Gods wrath
               Eſay 10. 5, Cyrus, his ſhepheard
               Eſay 44. 28., and Nabuchodonezer, his ſeruant
               Ier. 25. 9..

Yet muſt this by the way be remembred,
that though wicked ones haue their power
from God, yet not their ſinfull malice,
whereby they abuſe their power, to doe
hurt, and therfore Iulian ſhall anſwere for
his Apoſtaſie, deriding, and perſecuting of
the SaintsSocrat. Scholaſt. lib. 3. cap. 1.. Pharaoh, for his tyrannicall
oppreſſing of the IſraelitesExo. 1. 16▪ 5. 7, 8., Ahab, for
his cruell perſecuting of the Prophets
               1. Ki. 18. 13., Herode
and Pilat, for their iniust condemning
of Chriſt,
               Lu. 23. 12, Neroh, for his bloudie executing
of the Apoſtles
               Euſeb. Pamph. lib. 2. ca. 25: and all other, who
to the diſhonor of God, abuſe their power,
to iuſtifie the wicked, and condemne
the innocent, both which are an abhomination
to the Lord.
            The firſt vſe of this doctrine,1. vſe, that the Kings, Princes, & all rulers are to make of this doctrine. concerneth
Kings and Princes themſelues, that
cōſidering they come not by their places,
and authoritie, by chance or fortune, but
by the prouidence, and appointment of
God, whoſe the earth is, and all that therein
is, the compaſſe of the world, and they
that dwell therein
               Pſa. 24. 1., that therefore they doe
carefully and conſcionably apply themſelues,
to doe his will, that hath promoted
them, and whoſe Vicegerents they are,
knowing, that aſſuredly the Lord that

placed them, will one day, require a ſtrickt
account of them
               Pſ. 82. 2.: which thing Salomon
well knew: and therefore when the Lord
appeared to him, and bad him aske what
he ſhould giue him, hee deſired aboue all
things, that God would giue him an vnderstanding
heart, to iudge that great people
               1. Kin. 9..
So it is ſaid, that the Lord choſe Dauid his
Seruant, and tooke him from the Sheepefolds,
euen from behind the Ewes great with young
brought he him, to feed his people in Iacob, &
his inheritance in Iſrael
               Pſ. 78. 70. Yea, the Prophet
Eſay more effectually expreſſeth the dutie
of a Prince, in the perſon of our Sauiour
Chriſt, ſaying: Righteouſneſſe ſhall bee the
girdle of his loynes, and faithfulnes the buckle
of his raynes
               Eſay 11. 5. 1. His care muſt bee to
defend the fatherleſſe and widdow, relieue
the oppreſſed, and haue no reſpect of perſons
in iudgement, and euerie way that he
can to prouide for the peace and ſecuritie
of his people, that they may haue eaſe in
this way-faring Citie; but his chiefeſt and
greateſt care muſt bee for Religion, to
maintaine the Goſpell, that ſo his people
may be trayned vp, in the knowledge
and feare of the LordIta, Deo preſtabunt obſequium longe gratiſſimum, & regna mument, praeſidio omnium validiſſimo, illius fauore, qui dixit, honorantes me honorabo. Gualt. in Eſa.. In regard whereof,
the Lord hath called them nurſing Fathers,

and nurſing mothers
               Eſay 49. 23.. The conſideration
whereof, made thoſe noble Kings,
Dauid, Salomon, Aſa, Iehoſhaphat, Ezekias,
Ioſias, to make moſt godly, and zealous
reformations in religion, and the worſhip
of God
               1. Ki. 15. 12, 13. 1. Kin. 22. 41. 2. Kin. 8. 4.: without which, it had now
nothing profited their ſubiects, to haue
ſate peaceably vnder their vines and figge-trees
               1. Kin. 4. 25., to haue had ſiluer as chippes,
and gould as the ſtones of the ſtreet, for
what wil it profit a man, to winne the whole
world, and looſe his owne ſoule
               Luke. 9. 25. And therefore
wee haue great cauſe to praie vnto
God, to bleſſe and ſtabliſh our Religious
King, and to giue him a wiſe heart, to cō
               ſider
who it is that hath prepared this Table
for him; that with Dauid hee may
make conſcience of his dutie, of whome
the holy ghoſt hath witneſſed, That he fed
them according to the ſimplicitie of his heart,
and guided them by the diſcretion of his
hands
               Pſ. 78. 72.
            A ſecond vſe of this doctrine,2. A ſecond generall vſe of the former doctrine, concerning all ſubiects. concerneth
all ſubiects, which the Apoſtle layeth
downe, in theſe wordes: Let euerie
ſoule be ſubiect to the higher powers
               Ro. 13. 1., both
in all conſcionable obedience to their iuſt
and lawfull commaundements, as alſo by

ſuffering of their iniuſt puniſhmēts, without
reſiſtance, knowing that if hee bee a
good, and Religious ruler, the Lord hath
giuen him for a bleſſing; but if a wicked
one, the Lord hath giuen him as a curſe,
for the tryall of his people, and therefore
the high way, is ſeriouſly to repent, that
ſo God, who hath giuen ſuch an one in
his anger, may alſo take him away in his
wrath
               Oſay 13. 11. So Ieremie commanded the poore
captiues, to pray for the peace of Babilon
               Ierem. 29▪ 6, 7.:
Chriſt commaunded, to giue to Caeſar, the
things that are Caeſars
               Mat. 22. 21:, and S. Peter, that
we ſubmit our ſelues to all manner of ordinance,
for the Lordes ſake
               1. Pe. 2. 13: Yea, and S.
Paule in the forecited place, vrgeth this
duetie by many and waightie reaſons, as
that whoſoeuer reſiſteth, reſiſteth the ordinance
of God, and they that reſiſt, ſhall receiue
to themſelues condemnation
               Ro. 13. 2.
            
               In the ſight of mine Aduerſaries:
               2. part of this verſe. The
Prophet hauing ſummarily layd downe
his proſperous eſtate, in the former
words.Sence, of the words. Now in theſe, (which are the ſecond
part of this verſe) he doth amplifie
the ſame by a ſpeciall circumſtance, that
God had thus aduanced, and done theſe
great thinges for him in the verie ſight of

his enemies, or (as the Hebrew phraſe
will beare it, and doubtleſſe the intent of
the holy Ghoſt is) in deſpight of mine enemies;Summe of the words.
So then the Summe of it, is thus
much in effect. q. d. O Lord, although I
haue had many most mightie, and ſubtill enemies,
who enuyed me, and ſought my ruine;
yet thou oh Lord, hast taken my part, and in
despight of them all promoted me. So that
in effect, it is the verie ſame thing, which
Dauid elſewhere, vnder a moſt elegant
metaphor expreſſeth, ſaying: The ſtone
which the builders refuſed, is become the
head ſtone in the corner
               Pſ 118. 22. This ſtone was
Dauid, whom the cheefe builders, that is,
Saule with his Councellors, Peeres, and
Nobles did contemne, reiect and perſecute,
as vnworthy to haue the baſeſt place
in the common wealth, and yet by the
maruailous prouidence, and diſpoſition
of God, was aduaunced to become the
head of the corner, euen the King and
cheefe of the peopleLapis hi, Dauid eſt, aedificantes, Saul, & proceres, weſtmer. in Pſ. Non dicti ſunt aedificatores, arte, ſed aedificantes, actu, non artifices, officio, ſed exercitio; vbi ergo ſunt, qui dicunt, praelatos poſse non reſidere? Paulus de Palatio, in Mat. ca. 21▪ fol, 683., which is alſo agreeable
to his own ſpeech vnto Saule, ſaying:
If the Lord haue ſtirred thee vp againſt me,
let him ſmell the ſauour of a ſacrifice; but if
the children of men haue done it, curſed bee
they before the Lord, for they haue cast mee

out this this day, from abiding in the inheritance
of the Lord, ſaying: goe ſerue other
Gods
               1. Sa. 26. 19..
            Our Doctrine from this place is,Doctrine. that
what thing ſoeuer the Lord will haue, either
for the good or euill, of any people
or perſon, it ſhall come to paſſe, and all
the world ſhall not be able to withhold a
bleſſing, or preuent a curſe.Confirmation. So the Lord
himſelfe hath ſayd: my counſaile ſhall ſtand
and I will doe whatſoeuer I will
               Eſay 46. 10.. Yea, it
ſhall ſtand more durable, than the firmament
of heauen, as the King of Babilon
hath teſtified, ſaying: according to his will,
he worketh in the armie of heauen, and in the
Inhabitants of the earth, and none can stay
his hand, nor ſay vnto him, what doeſt thou
               Dan. 4. 32.?
Dauid alſo witneſſeth no leſſe, ſaying, Our
God is in heauen; and doth whatſoeuer hee
will, in heauen, in earth, in the ſea, and in
all deepes
               Pſ. 135. 6. And Salomon alſo hath ſaid,
There is no wiſedome, counſaile, or ſtrength
againſt the Lord
               Prou. 21. 30? If the Lord will bring a
bleſſing, who then can with-hold it? who
would haue thought, that Dauid being ſo
mortally hated, and cruelly perſecuted,
that he was glad to flie from hold to hold,
yea, to verie heathen Kings for ſuccour
               1. Sa. 27. 1,

that euer hee ſhould haue enioyed the
Crown, yet you ſee, Dauid findeth a time
whē to giue God thanks, for preparing his
table, in deſpight of all his enemies. And
if the Lord bee angrie, and will bring a
plague or puniſhment, vpon any people or
perſon for their ſinnes; who can preuent
it? If his anger be once kindled, and his
wrath thoroughly fired, all the Riuers of
the ſouth cannot quench it, it encreaſeth
by goingIncandeſcit, eundo., and gathereth ſtrength, moſt
fearefull is it for ſinners, to conſider that
which God himſelfe, by ſolemne proteſtation
hath deliuered, ſaying: I lift vp
mine hand to heauen, and ſay, if I whet my
glittering ſword, and mine hand take hold of
iudgement, I will execute vengeance vppon
mine enemies, and will reward them that
hate me, I will make mine arrowes drunke
with blood, and my ſword ſhall eate fleſh
               Deut. 32. 41, 42.
There is a time, when his ſword is dull,
and (as it were) ruſteth in the ſcabberd of
his long patience, and his hands are ſo filled
with mercie, that iudgement is layd
aſide, and hath no roome to be ſpanned
in them; but if hee once whet his glittering
ſword, and his hand take hold of
iudgement, hee will ſtrike home, and recompence

the ſlacknes of his iudgement,
with the heauineſſe thereofTarditatem ſupplicii: grauitate compenſat:. The vſe of
this doctrine is double.
            Firſt, that wee doe ſubmit our ſelues,
to Gods reuealed will,The firſt vſe. not ſtrugling againſt
it, be it for our weale or woe; for
what ſayth the Apoſtle, doe wee prouoke the
Lord to anger? are we ſtronger than he
               1. Cor. 10 22? No
ſurely, we are but as clay in the hands of
the PotterIer. 18. 6., it is but the labour of Siſyphus,
if we build, he will pull downe
               Malach. 1. 4.; as the
Prophet ſaith, A league with all the elements
of the world, with the beaſts of the
field, ſtones in the ſtreets, yea with death and
hell themſelues, cannot ſecure vs
               Eſay 28. 18. And
therefore whatſoeuer befall vs in our bodies,
children, goods; away with impatiencie
which is one of Sathans broodImpatientiae, natales, in ipſo diabolo, deprehendo. Tertul.;
and let vs hang faſt on that golden chain,
and vereſie the trueth of the Apoſtles
words, where he ſayth: Tribulation, bringeth
foorth patience; patience, experience; experience,
hope; and hope, will neuer ſuffer
vs to be aſhamed or diſmayed
               Ro. 5. 3, 4, 5..
            A ſecond, (and that more proper, and
naturall) vſe, is, that ſeeing the Lord doth
what he will, and none can with-hold, yea
and though meanes be neuer ſo ſmall, yet

it is eaſie with him, to ſaue by many or few
               1. Sa. 14. 6.;
that then, we depend not altogether vpon
ſecundarie meanes, but in all thinges caſt
our ſelues vpon his prouidence, knowing
that if the Lord bee with vs, and delight
to doe vs good (which he will, ſo long as
we walke in the waies of his commaundements)
we need not to be afraid of any
enemies.
            Now,Application. if we make application of theſe
things to our ſelues, we ſhal find, that they
doe verie neerely concerne vs,The miraculous prouidence of God, in protecting and preſeruing Queene Elizabeth, before her raigne, in her raigne, and at her death. both in regard
of our late Queene, and of our owne
perſons, in regard of our preſent King.
For the firſt, how woonderfull was the
mercie and prouidence of God towardes
the perſon of our late ſacred Queene, both
before her raigne, in the time of her raign,
& at her death, who ſo ignorant or blind
that ſeeth not, or knoweth not? In the
dayes of Queene Marie, (when as Gods
Saints were as the ſtubble before the fire,
and the Land almoſt conſumed with the
flames of hot perſecution,) how was her
ſoule hunted by Gardiner and others, like
a Partridge vpon the mountaines, as Dauid
ſaid1. Sa. 26. 20. What extreame miſerie, ſickneſſe,
feare and perill was ſhe often in? into

what great care, trouble of mind, and
feare of death was ſhe brought, being toſſed
from houſe to houſe, from priſon to
priſon, and from poſt to piller: in what
danger of wolues or butchers was ſhee,
when her righteous ſoule criedTanquam ouis., ſhee was
led as a ſheepe to the ſlaughter
               Pſa. 44. 22: and that
ſhee had no friend but God, fearing that
the Scaffold of the Ladie Iane, ſtood for
another tragedie, wherin her ſelfe ſhould
haue played the wofulleſt partActs, and Monumēts, the ſecond vol. pag. 1895.. But oh
ſee the goodnes of God, who neuer ſlumbreth
nor ſleepeth whē his are in diſtreſſe,
who as ſtill hee raiſed one friend or another,
euen in her perſecution & miſerie, to
be ſome meanes of comfort vnto her: ſo
in due time, all her greateſt enemies by
opportune deaths, dropped away, whereby,
by little and litle her ieopardie decreaſed,
feare diminiſhed, hope of comfort, began
to appeare as out of a darke cloude; till
in the end by the death of her ſiſter, the
Lord preuented her with liberall bleſſings,
and ſet a Crowne of pure gould vpon
her head
               Pſ. 21. 3. exalting her from thrall, to libertie;
from danger, to peace and ſecuritie;
from dread, to dignitie; from miſerie,
to maieſtie; briefely, of a Priſoner,

made a Princeſſe; of a mourner, a Ruler;
to the glorie of God and endles comfort
of his Saints. Yea, and ſince, how many
great and fearefull dangers hath ſhe eſcaped?
The Pope, and his curſed inſtruments,
neuer ceaſing by all diueliſh means
to worke our woe, and quench our light;
and yet how miraculouſly hath the Lord
from time to time deliuered, and preſerued
her through-out her long, and happie
raigne: and now alſo (a matter of ſinguler
comfort to all that loued her) taken
her ſoule to himſelf, to liue in perfect reſt,
and neuer ſuffered the Sonne of violence
to doe her hurt, or ſhorten her dayes; that
neuer might any King or Queene, more
truely apply the words of my Text, than
ſhe, and ſay; O Lord, thou haſt prepared my
Table, and in despight of all mine enemies,
maintained it to the end. Secondly, for our
ſelues,How wonderfull both Papiſts, and Atheiſts, were deceiued, and their miſcheeuous purpoſes frustrate, by the ſoden and ioyfull Proclamation of our King. this is the day, which we iuſtly feared,
to be the day of our bane and ruine,
the periode and end of our proſperitie,
for on the one ſide, the Papiſts, (whoſe
number God decreaſe, either by conuerſion
or confuſion, as hee ſeeth beſt) they
haue long wiſhed and ſought for it, hoping
that then Chriſt ſhold die with her,

and the Goſpell bee buried in her Sepulchre.
On the other-ſide, a great number
of inordinate walkers, verie idle Rogues,
who liue by ſtealing, robbing, and vnlawfull
ſhifts, (who fooliſhly ſuppoſing, that
betwixt changing of Kinges, there is no
Law in force, but all things common, and
men may doe what they liſt) haue long
expected this day, when as like Vultures,
they might deuour the fruites of honeſt
mens labors, and commit what miſchiefe
and villanie they would, without any controlement.
But behold, and wonder at
the prouidence of God, who hath prepared
for vs, ſo religious, godly, and wiſe a
King (this day to be proclaimed vnto vs,
as elſewhere he hath beene) whoſe verie
name proclaimed, hath ſo daunted, both
the enemies of our Religion and peace,
that they ſtand amazed, in the beholding
of our peace and happineſſe, and rather
bethinke whither to flie and hide their
heads, than to commit any outrage. So
that neuer was there any people, might
more truely apply this Text of Scripture,
to themſelues, and ſay with Dauid, than
we: The Lord hath prepared a Table before
vs, in despight of all our enemies; O Lord

for thy mercie, and Sions ſake, finiſh the
good worke that thou haſt begunne, that
our Table may be maintained ſtill.
            
               Thou doest annoint my head with oyle,
               3. part of the verſ. 
               and
my cup runneth ouer. In theſe wordes, the
Prophet doth illuſtrate, this generall metaphor,
by two ſpeciall thinges, both of
them tending to one and the ſame purpoſe,
viz: To ſhew the great plentie of
precious and comfortable good things,
which God had prouided, aſwell for his
delight as neceſſitie, for though the Lord
condemne all prodigalitie and ſuperfluity,
whereunto Sathan ſpecially tempteth vs,
as one verie well obſerueth from the
manner of Sathan his tempting of Chriſt,
who would not haue a ſtone, but (stores)
turned into bread
               Mat. 4. 3.
               Non dixit, vt lapis hic, panis fiat, ſed lapides, volens Chriſtum ad ſuperflua inſtigare, eſurienti enim vnus panis ſufficit, &c. Theophilact. in Mat. 4.. Yet doth not God
diſallow a plentifull, and delightfull vſe
of his good creatures. For the firſt, oyle
is reckoned vp, by the Pſalmiſt, as one of
thoſe comfortable bleſſings which God
hath giuen vnto man in this life, ſaying:
the Lord giueth bread to ſtrengthen the hart,
and wine to make it glad, and oyle to make a
cheerefull countenance
               Pſa. 104. 15.: and wherof there
was great vſe in thoſe hot CountreysCreauit oleum, ad nitorem & alacritatē, at
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   agilitatem corporis, ideoque magnus in calidioribus regionibus, eius fuit vſus. Moll. in Pſ.,
and ſpecially in their great, honourable,

and ſolemne Feaſts, inſomuch that they
were thought, not louingly and freely to
entertaine their gueſts, vnleſſe they did
annoint them with precious and fragrant
oyntments, as may be gathered from our
Sauiours ſpeech vnto Symon the Phariſie,
concerning the ſinfull womans fact, Symon,
mine head with oyle, thou didſt not annoint,
but ſhee hath annointed my feete with
oyntment
               Lu. 7. 46.. Yea, and to auoide all appearance
of hypocriſie, rather than we ſhould
looke ſower, as the Phariſies, to the end
that we may ſeeme vnto men to faſt; hee
biddeth vs annoint our ſelues with oyle,
which may giue vs a cheereful countenance
               Mat. 6. 17.
So Ioab he gaue counſel to the ſubtill woman
of Tekoah, (whom he ſent to the King
in the behalfe of Abſolom) to put on mourning
apparel, and not to annoint her ſelfe, that
ſhee might ſeeme to the King, that ſhee had
mourned a long time for the dead
               2. Sa. 14.. So that
oyle, and ſweet oyntments were vſed in
times of great feaſtings and ioy: and therfore
Dauid, to ſhew how royally the Lord
had prepared for him, and entertayned
him; alludeth to the cuſtome of thoſe
daies, and ſaith vnto God: Thou doeſt annoint
mine head with oyle. Hereunto alſo

tendeth the other circumſtance: in theſe
words (My cup doth ouerflow, or runne ouer)
a thing alſo ordinarie, in great feaſts
or banquets, to haue plentie of wine: ſo
at the mariage feaſt in Canah of Galilie,
our Sauiour, when the wine fayled (by
example, to approoue the liberall vſe of
Gods bleſſinges) turned ſixe pots of water
(containing two or three firkins a peece)
into wine
               Ioh. 2. 6, 7
               vnde intelligimus, quam largum fuerit, domini beneficium. Ianſen. Concord. fol. 144.. And at that great Feaſt
of Ahaſhueroſh, which he made for all his
Princes and ſeruants, there was ſuch great
plentie of wine, according to the power
of the King, that thereupon it was called
a banquet of wine
               Heſt. 5. 6.: though with this edict,
that none ſhould be compelled, but euery
man drinke according to his own pleaſure
               Heſt. 1. 8..
A heatheniſh edict, to condemne innumerable
profeſſed Chriſtians, yea, & ſuch
as are in authoritie, who ſhould reforme
it in others, but ſpecially with Dauid
               Pſ. 101. 7,
and Ioſhua haue regard to their owne families
Ioſh. 24. 15., and yet they are no better than
Schooles of Bacchus and drunkenneſſe,
their ſeruants ſtraining thēſelues, & compelling
others, ſo long to drinke of cups,
filled to the brimme and running ouer,
with wine, and ſtrong drinke, till all bee

filled with wantonneſſe, vomitie, blaſphemie,
fightings, and other ſuch like brutiſh
effects of intemperancie. Well, you
ſee Dauids purpoſe and meaning, in effect
aſmuch, q. d. O Lord, thou hast not
onely aduaunced me to the Crowne and dignitie
royall, but hast ſo plentifully enriched
me, with all good things,
               The ſumme of this third part, of this verſe. 
               that no man can
testifie his kindneſſe, towards his guests, (by
annoynting them with precious ointments, or
filling their cups, till they runne ouer) as thou
hast ſhewed thy ſelfe euerie way liberall towards
me.
            
            Wherein Dauid is a notable example
vnto vs all,Doctrine. but ſpecially to rich men, and
teacheth vs that wee muſt conſider what
we haue receiued of the Lord, that ſo we
may be thankefull. There be many, who
euen ſwimme in worldly wealth, but few
that with Dauid acknowledge from
whence they haue receiued thoſe good
things; yea, there are none of vs all in
perticuler, (though the Lord deale not equally
with all) but if with a ſingle ele
voyd of partiall affection, wee doe conſider
what we haue receiued, and what we
haue deſerued, and rather looke backe, to
ſee how many liue in want, & come ſhort

of vs, than to them that are before vs,
but in ſome meaſure, and in compariſon,
we ſhall bee conſtrained to confeſſe to the
glorie of God, that our cups are filled ſo
full, that they doe runne ouer. But ſpecially,The great proſperitie of England vnder the happie gouernment of Queene Elizabeth.
if wee doe in generall apply theſe
things vnto our ſelues, and conſider the
manifold bleſſings which we haue enioyed,
vnder the late happie and peaceable
gouernement of our Ladie and Queene
Elizabeth, the Temples being not ſhut vp,
nor Prophets ſlain, & Altars ouerthrown,
as in the dayes of Eliah
               1. Kin. 1. 9 10, nor the hye waies
vnoccupied, as in the daies of Iaell
               Iudg. 5. 6., nor
any leading into captiuitie, or complayning
in our streetes
               Pſ. 144. 14., but rather, mercie and
truth hauing mette, Righteouſneſſe and
peace hauing kiſſed each other
               Pſ. 85. 10; our Land
hath ſo aboundantly flowne with milke
and honie, that wee (if euer any people)
may truely acknowledge to the glorie of
God, that our cups doe ouerflow.
            And as for the eſtate of our gratious
King, (for I cannot reſtraine mine eies
from looking, and my tongue from ſpeaking
of this glorious Sunne which is riſen
vnto vs, my text miniſtring ſo fit occaſion)
this I dare ſay, that his Maieſtie (which

no doubt will bee matter of greateſt ioy)
ſhal find as many truely religious, louing,
and loyall hearts, in England, as any King
or Prince whatſoeuer, and be as ioyfully,
and thankefully receiued,The great prosperitie of our king, to be praied for, that God would continue, and ſanctifie it. as euer was any
King in Europe, both in regard of his right
title, and for his zealous defence of the
Goſpell, the life of our ſoules; beſides,
his coffers cannot be emptie, and his ſubiects
are no beggars, there being nowe
more plate, than pewter heretofore. The
Lord for his mercies ſake ſanctifie his
proſperitie, and knit his heart ſo vnto
God, in the zeale of his glorie, and loue
of his truth, that our hearts may be more
and more knit vnto him, in all loue and
loyaltie, that it may neuer bee layd to his
charge, what God complayneth of his
people, Sed ſaginatus recalcitrauit: he that
ſhould haue been vpright, when he waxed
fatte, ſpurned with his heele
               De. 32. 15. And ſo
much for the ſence and doctrines, from
this ſecond metaphor, according to the
letter; now, becauſe in this, aſwel as in the
former Allegorie, very glorious, & ſpirituall
myſteries are ſhadowed out vnto vs; it
will be neceſſarie, to ſpeake thereof a few
words.
            
               
(Thou doeſt prepare a Table before me, is
the ſight of mine Aduerſaries, thou doeſt annoint
my head with oyle, and my cup runneth
ouer.)The excellent ſweet myſteries, which are ſhadowed out vnder theſe earthly thinges. It is not vnknowne vnto any, but
meanely exerciſed in the Scriptures, that
the holy Ghoſt (condeſcending to our
ſhallow capacities) doth ſhadow out both
the incomprehenſible ioys of Gods kingdome;
and alſo the vnſpeakable ſweetneſſe,
which a Chriſtian ſoule taſteth,
from her ſpirituall vnion and coniunction
with Chriſt, and the graces that flowe
to her from him; by a daintie and coſtly
ſupper, or banquet: of the former, is that
of Chriſt to his Apoſtles, at his laſt ſupper,
I appoint vnto you a Kingdome, as my
Father hath appointed vnto me, that you may
eat and drinke at my table, in my kingdome
               Lu. 22. 30;
Not that we ſhall need either food, apparell,
light of the Sunne, or moone
               Reu. 21. 23.. But becauſe
we are ſo groſſe, that we cannot cō
               ceiue
the bleſſedneſſe of that life: but by
the plentifull enioying of ſuch good
things, as are here ſpecially deſired; whervnto
alſo may be referred, the parable of
the mariage-feaſt, A king preparing a moſt
royall dinner, killing his Oxen and fatlings,
againſt the marriage of his Sonne
               Math. 22 12..
            
               
Of the ſecond ſort, is that to be vnderſtood
in the Reuelation, where Chriſt, allureth
the ſinfull ſoule to repent, and open
vnto him, with this promiſe; Behold
I stand at the dore and knocke; if any man
heare my voice, and open vnto mee, I will
come in, and ſuppe with him, and hee with
me
               Reu. 3. 20. At which Feaſt Dauid being entertained
as a gueſt, acknowledgeth his head
to be annointed with oyle, and his cup to
runne ouer; and ſurely, no maruaile, for
where Chriſt is, what good thing can
there be wanting? if hee dwell in the heart
by faith
               Eph. 3. 17, and if the graces, and power of
Chriſt be receiued in, all euill and miſerie
is driuen out, and all goodneſſe and felicitie
doe ſucceed, darkeneſſe is driuen out,
Sathan expelled; ſinne deſtroyed; and
the horrour of hell, and dreadfull iudgement
vaniſheth away: There is light, there
is God, there is righteouſneſſe, and peace, and
ioy in the holy Ghoſt
               Rom. 14. 17.. Yea, wee ſhall bee
filled with all ſweet ioyes, and of this ſupper,
ſhall bee none end. If any man yet
further deſire to know, where this royall
Feaſt is kept: 2. By whom: 3. Who are
the gueſts: and laſtly, what is their cheere:
let him read and conſider, what the Prophet

               Eſay ſayth. And in this mountaine,
ſhall the Lord of hoaſts, make vnto all people
a Feaſt of fat thinges, euen a feast of fined
wines, and of fat thinges full of m
                     •
                  rrow, of
wines fined, and purified
               Eſa. 25. 6.. The place then,
is Gods holy mountaine, euen the Church
of God here on earthMontis nomine, Eccleſia, per totum orbem terrarum, sparſa intelligitur Moll. in Pſ. fol. 212., where this feaſt is
begun, & the faithfull do taſt the ſweetnes
of ſuch good things, as eie hath not ſeene,
nor eare heard
               1. Cor. 2 9.: but it ſhall be perfected
on the mountain of Gods holynes, where
the faithful, ſhal haue their ſoules ſatisfied
with the fulneſſe of ioyes, which are in the
preſence of God for euermore
               Pſ. 16. 11.. Secondly,
he that maketh this Feaſt, and prepareth
this Table, is the Lord of hoaſts, whoſe
is the earth, with all that is therein
               Pſ. 24. 1., whoſe
are the foules of the aire, and fiſhes of the
ſea, & cattell vpon a thouſand hils
               Pſ 50. 10. 11. Thirdly,
the gueſts are not only ſuch as are inuited
forth of an hundred, ſeauen and twentie
Prouinces, as the gueſts of that mightie
Monarch Ahaſhueroſh
               Heſt. 1. 1.. but all people,
euen all beleeuers, of what age, ſex, qualitie
or condition, in what place, or what
time ſoeuer they liued, the poore and afflicted
ſhall be as welcome gueſts as the
rich, yea, the poore ſhall eate and be ſatisfied
               Pſ. 22. 26..

Laſtly for cheere, there are no dainties
there wanting, there are Oxen and fatlings
               Mat. 22. 4: yea, a Feast of wines fined and purified,
and of fat thinges full of marrow, ſayth
the Prophet, whereby are ſignified the
ſweete graces of God, conuayed vnto
faithfull ſoules, by the miniſtrie of the
word and Sacraments, as the remiſſion of
ſinnes, and aſſurance of Gods loue and
fauour, and full conqueſt ouer ſinne, Sathan,
death, and hell: which are farre
ſweeter than moſt fined & purified wines
               Cant. 1. 1:
Yea, than honie, and the honie combe,
and wherein they reioyce with ioy vnſpeakable
and glorious
               1. Pe. 1. 8. Oh, that we could truely
hunger and thirſt after this heauenly
banquet, and follow the counſaile of our
Sauiour Chriſt, not labour ſo earneſtly,
for the meat that periſheth, but for that
meat which endureth to eternall life
               Ioh. 6. 27. It
followeth.
            
               Doubtleſſe kindneſſe and mercie, ſhall follow
me, all the daies of my life, and I ſhall
remaine a long ſeaſon, in the houſe of the
Lord. The Prophet Dauid, hauing (as we
haue heard) expreſſed, the ſinguler fauor,
loue, and prouidence of God, towardes
him and his people, by two pleaſant and

familier metaphors, now he commeth in
this laſt verſe, to ſhew the vſe thereof, viz:
That hereby his faith was confirmed, and
ſetled in the prouidence of God, whereby
to be preſerued vnto the end. The Summe
whereof,The ſumme of this verſ. is thus much in effect: q. d. Seeing
I haue had ſuch great experience of
Gods fauour and loue, I am perſwaded, that
he will continue the courſe thereof vnto mee,
euen vnto the end, that now hauing paſſed
thorough ſo many dangers, and peaceably obtained
the Kingdom, I may now spend all the
reſt of my daies, in the ſeruice and worſhip of
God, and ſound forth the Lords praiſe, in the
houſe of my God.
            
            And this verſe conſiſteth of two principall
parts:The diuiſion of this verſe. firſt what hee doubted not to
receiue, (kindneſſe and mercie ſhall follow me,
all the daies of my life:) Secondly, what vſe
he would make thereof, (euen dwell a long
ſeaſon,
               The ſubdiuiſion of the firſt part. 
               in the houſe of the Lord.) The firſt
part may be ſubdiuided againe into theſe
members or branches; firſt, what he looked
for to receiue, (kindneſſe and mercie:)
Secondly, how to receiue it, (it ſhould follow
him:) Thirdly how long, in this manner,
theſe things ſhould be beſtowed vppon
him, (euen all the daies of my life.)

Theſe things doe affoord verie profitable
obſeruatiōs, if I could ſo inſiſt vpon them,
but time hath preuented me, and I am deſirous
to make an end of this Pſalme, becauſe
it ſo well fitteth the preſent occaſiō:
wherefore that I may not bee tedious, I
will but point out the cheefe matter, and
leaue the reſt to your Chriſtian meditations.
            Doubtleſſe kindneſſe,
               1. part. 
               and mercie. When
Dauid purpoſed to build God an houſe,
ſaying vnto Nathan the Prophet of God,
Behold, I dwell in an houſe of Cedar trees, &
the Arke of God remaineth within the curtaines
               2. Sa. 7. 2. Nathan (before hee had asked
counſaile of God) approoued therof, and
ſaid: Goe and doe all that is in thine heart,
for God is with thee.
               3. But Dauid being a
man of blood,4. was not fit for ſuch a work,
and therefore the ſame night, the word of
the Lord came to Nathan,
               12. 
               he ſhould
tell Dauid, hee was not the man, that ſhould
build Gods houſe, but his ſonne, that ſhould
proceed out of his loynes: concerning whom
the Lord thus promiſed.
            
               I will be his Father,
               14. 
               and hee ſhall be my
Sonne, and if he ſinne I will chaſten him with
the rod of men,
               15. 
               and with the plagues of the

children of men, but my mercie ſhall neuer
depart away from him. Surely, neuer was
this promiſe more truely fulfilled vnto Salomon,
than it was to Dauid himſelfe, God
was his Father, and therefore when Dauid
ſinned, both committing whoredome
and murther
               2. Sa. 11. 4. 17., the Lord ſharpely corrected,
and chaſtiſed him many waies, as by
the death of the child, which was begotten
in Adulterie
               2. Sa. 12. 18., by his ſonne Amnons
incest, defiling his owne ſiſter Thama
                     •
                  
               
               2. Sa. 13. 14, by
Abſoloms killing of Amnon
               2. Sa. 13. 29., by Abſoloms
treaſonable practiſes, perſecuting him, and
ſeeking to get the Kingdome from him
               2. Sa. 15. 2. 14., by
Shimeis curſing of him to his face
               2. Sa. 16. 7., by Abſoloms
abuſing of his Fathers Concubines
               2. Sa. 16. 22.,
by the fearefull death of Abſolom, being
hanged in an Oake
               2. Sa. 18. 9; yea in a woord, the
hand of God, was ſtill ſtretched out againſt
him, all the daies of his life; yet
did God neuer take away his mercy from
him, ſo that hee might ſay with the Apoſtles,
I haue been perſecuted, but not forſaken
               2. Cor. 4. 8, 9.: and ſo to the like effect, heere hee
ſaith, doubtleſſe kindneſſe, and mercie, &c.
            
            He ſaith not,
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  
                
               Doubtleſſe, my head ſhall
still bee annointed with oyle, doubtleſſe, my
cup ſhall ſtill run ouer, or doubtleſſe, my proſperitie

ſhall neuer decay. For that was a
ſpeech of infirmitie, (as he himſelfe afterwards
confeſſed) I ſayd in my prosperitie, I
ſhall neuer bee mooued, but had miſerable
experience of that his weakneſſe, for the
Lord turned away his face, and then hee
was ſore troubled
               Pſ. 30. 6, 7, 8.; yea, & (to omit all the
great miſeries and ſtraits, that he ſuſtained
before he came to the Crowne, through
the hot and long perſecution of Saul:) after
he was annointed King, (and as it ſeemeth,
penned this Pſalme in thankefull
remembrance of Gods mercie towards
him;) Yet ſometimes, his cup did not
runne ouer, as when he was readie to faint
for thirſt, and ſo greedily longed, but for
a cup of water, of the Well of Bethlehem by
the gate
               2. Sa. 23. 15.; and alſo when for that great
ſinne, in cauſing the people to bee numbred,
the Lord ſent Gad vnto him, and
put it to his choice, whether hee would
haue ſeauen yeeres famine, to come vpon
him in his Land, or ſlye three moneths
before his enemies; or three daies peſtilence.
Whereupon Dauid himſelfe confeſſeth,
hee was in a wonderfull ſtrait
               2. Sa. 24. 13, 14, &c.:
but yet Dauid, by the aſſurance of faith,
cleaueth faſt to this hold, that doubtleſſe,

kindneſſe and mercie would follow him,
q. d. Let what chaunge or alteration ſoeuer
befall me, in regard of mine outward estate,
and condition, yet am I ſure Gods kindneſſe,
and mercie, ſhall neuer bee taken away from
me.
               Doctrine. Hence then, we haue a verie comfortable
leſſon taught vs,Confirmation. viz: That howſoeuer
it pleaſeth God for our ſinnes, to
alter our outward eſtate, to giue vs ſtormie
and gloomie weather, aſ well as faire
and Sun-ſhine daies, ſometimes to make
vs glad, and ſometimes to giue vs plentie
of teares to drinke
               Pſa. 42. 3. and 80. 6., yet is God no changling,
that he ſhould breake off the courſe
of his fauour and loue, towards his elect,
but whome hee loueth, he loueth to the
end
               Ioh. 13. 1
               Vſ
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   ad mortem continuauit, & poſt mortem etiam, perſeuerat. Tollet. in Ioh. Tom. 2. fol. 20., and whom hee embraceth, it is
with an euerlaſting compaſſion
               Eſay 54. 8.: his mercie
and loue doth aſwell appeare (if God open
our eies) in Aduerſitie, as in proſperitie,
in fatherly chaſticements, and corrections,
as in giuing vs our hearts deſire.
And therfore howſoeuer Sathan is exceeding
ſubtill to perſwade, (and thorough
our weakneſſe, we are readie inough for
to apprehend the ſame) that if God lay
neuer ſo little ſickeneſſe, trouble, or loſſe
vppon vs; by and by we thinke, and ſay;

Oh, God loueth me not, if he did, he would
not deale thus, and thus with me, or this
and that ſhould not befall mee.Vſe. Let vs
take heed we be not deceiued, this is no other
temptation, than Chriſt Ieſus himſelfe
was acquainted with, who no ſooner
was an hungred, but by and by Sathan
was at his elbow, to perſwade him, that
he was not the Son of God
               Mat. 4. 3. Let vs therefore
follow the example of our Captaine,
and draw forth the ſword of the ſpirit, and
ſay: auoid Sathan, for howſoeuer God
take away my health, wealth, peace, and
libertie, yet his mercie and louing kindneſſe
he will neuer take away from mee:
but rather by theſe thinges, doth ſeale
the aſſurance thereof vnto mee, for it is
written, as many as I loue, I rebuke and chaſten
               Reu. 3. 19, and God correcteth euerie child
that hee receiueth, as the father doth the
child, in whome delighteth
               Pro. 3. 11 Heb. 12. 5.. But of this
wee haue ſufficiently heard, and ſpoken
before. But how ſhall Dauid receiue this
kindneſſe and mercie?
            
               Shall follow me.
               2. part. This is a word of ſinguler
comfort, and teacheth vs,Doctrine. that God
will not onely ſhew vs kindneſſe and fauour,
when we doe earneſtly ſue and ſeek

for it,Confirmation. which is our dutie to doe, but euen
when through weakeneſſe, we ſhall (as it
were) forſake God, and flie from him,
then will he follow, purſue, and ouertake
vs with his mercie; ſo the Lord hath promiſed,
not onely to bee nigh to them that
call vpon him faithfully
               Pſal. 145. 18: but before wee
call, he hath promiſed to anſwere, heere
I am
               Eſa. 65. 24. So hee followed Adam with his
mercie, when he had ſinned and hid himſelfe
amongſt the trees of the Garden, Adam
where art thou
               Gene. 3. 9.? So hee followed Ionah,
when he fled poſt-haſt from the preſence
of the Lord, and ſent forth a great wind,
and a mightie tempeſt, to fetch him home
againe
               Iona. 1. 3 4.: and ſo he followed Dauid, when
he made ſuch great ſpeed towardes hell,
committing one ſinne, and then a greater
to couer it withall, and by the miniſtrie
of Nathan, brought him to the ſight of
his ſinne, and repentance, that he might bee
ſaued
               2. Sa. 12 13: wherin appeareth, the great difference
betwixt Gods dealing, and mans,
for men follow after them that they are
to receiue any thing off, but God followeth
them, to whome he may giue his mercie
Homines magis perſequuntur eos, a quibus accipiant, quam quibus dent. Muſc. in Pſ.. Yea, ſo proane is God to doe good,
that he doth good both to the wickedMat. 5. 45,

               and to beaſts
               Pſ. 36. 6.. Yea, the Lord delighteth
to doe his people good, as hee himſelfe
hath ſayd, in Ieremie
               Ier. 32. 41. And this is the
ground of our perſeuerance, and continuance
in the ſtate of grace; to the end,
that howſoeuer, we bee weake and froward,
readie to ſtart aſide like a broken
bow, and to turne our backes vppon the
Lord, and flye from him, as hee complaineth
by his ProphetIer. 32. 33: yet God will
not leaue vs, but follow and ouertake
vs with his bleſſings. For ſo hee hath
promiſed, I will make an euerlaſting couenant
with them, that I will neuer turne
away from them to doe them good, but I
will put my feare in their hearts, that they
ſhall not depart away from mee
               Ie. 32. 40. Secondly,
Chriſt (who was heard in all things
               Iohn 11. 42.)
hath thus prayed for his Saints; Holy
Father, keepe them in thy name
               Ioh. 17. 11. By vertue
of which prayer, and Gods promiſe,
wee are ſure, wee ſhall ſtand and continue
in the ſtate of grace, to the end;
and that hee will proſecute vs with his
mercie, notwithſtanding our great weakneſſe,
and frowardneſſe. But how long
doth Dauid aſſure himſelfe, to enioy
this mercie?
            
               
(All the daies of my life.)
                  
                     •
                  . part. Such is the
great inconſtancie of man, in that which
is good, that without any cauſe, to morrow
he will perſecute with hatred, him,
whome to day hee proſecuteth with all
kindneſſe, and be as readie to hurt, as euer
to helpe him: But GOD is no ſuch
changeling, hee is neuer wearie, but
ſtill delighteth to doe his Saints good,
though for a moment in his anger, hee
turne away his face from them, yet
with euerlaſting compaſſion doth hee embrace
them
               Eſay 54. 8, hee hath ſayd it, and will
not alter the thing that is gone out of
his lippes, I will not faile thee, nor forſake
thee, all the dayes of thy life
               Ioſh. 1. 5., he that
is our God in our youth, ſtrength, wealth,
and life, will bee our God in old age,
in our weakeneſſe, pouertie, and death,
to goe thorough the valley thereof with
vs. But what will Dauid doe for all this
mercie continued?
            
               I ſhall dwell a long ſeaſon in the houſe
of the Lord.
               2 part of the verſe. A moſt notable example of
one rightly vſing his riches & honor, to the
glorie of God, by promoting the ſeruice
and worſhip of God, both in himſelfe
and others, hee ſayeth not as that

wicked rich man in the Goſpell, when he
had pulled downe his old barnes, and
builded new, and filled them with corne,
Soule bee merrie, eate, drinke, and take
thine eaſe
               Lu. 12. 19; But rather he ſayth: Oh my
ſoule, God hath aduaunced thee,
               The ſumme of theſe words. 
               in despight
of all thine enemies, and therefore
now forget not Gods benefits, but be thankfull,
and deuote thy ſelfe to his ſeruice, and
worſhip, and aduaunce Gods honour, in
his holy Temple. Oh that men could thus
vſe their wealth, and honour, as helps
to further, and not as pul-backes to
hinder them in the way of ſaluation,
it was Dauids greateſt ioy, when he
might freely ioyne with the people of
God, in the publick exerciſes of Religion,
for ſo hee hath confeſſed, I was
glad when they ſaid, wee will goe into the
houſe of the Lord
               Pſa. 122. 1., and it was his greateſt
griefe in his perſecution and troubles,
to bee depriued of this bleſſing, as
he ſheweth, ſaying: As the Hart doth
bray for the riuers of water; ſo panteth my
ſoule after thee oh God, my ſoule thirsteth
after God, euen after the liuing God, when
ſhall I come and appeare before the preſence
of God
               Pſ. 42. 1, 2? And of all other, this

was his moſt earneſt requeſt vnto God,
ſaying, One thing haue I deſired of God,
which I will require, euen that I may dwell
in the houſe of the Lord, all the dayes of
my life
               Pſa. 27. 4. Many things hee wanted, but
becauſe his felicitie conſiſted in the feare
and ſeruice of God, therefore in compariſon
thereof he cared for no other thing.
The Lord giue the like deſire to Prince
and Subiect, paſtor and people, and then
will the Lord God of Iſrael bee the God
of England, hee will delight to doe vs
good, and in deſpight of all our enemies,
continue a happie gouernment ouer vs
ſtill.
            And now to draw towards an end,Concluſion with application.
I am to publiſh vnto you both full ioyous
tidings, and full heauie newes (both
of them I perſwade my ſelfe, newes not
heard of, of many of you before) it hath
pleaſed God to take to himſelfe from among
vs, our dread Soueraigne Queene
Elizabeth, and theſe are heauie newes)
that wee haue loſt her, who not onely
cloathed vs with Purple and Scarlet,
pleaſures and coſtly iewels, and all the
delights of the children of men, as Dauid
ſayd of Saul to the daughters of Iſrael2. Sam. 1. 24,

but as a tender nurſing mother
               Eſay. 49. 23,
fedde our ſoules with the hidden Mannah
               Reu. 2. 17, and bread of life
               Ioh. 6. 35, vnder whome
many of vs haue beene borne into the
world, and by the miniſterie of the Goſpel
(which ſhe hath maintained) begotten
and borne vnto GodGal. 4. 19., in whoſe
dayes, nothing but peace & plentie haue
beene ſeenePſal. 147. 14., whereas other our neighbour
Countries, haue beene waſted and
conſumed with warres, Ephraim eating vp
Manaſſes, and Manaſſes Ephraim, and
both of them deuouring Iudah, as the Lord
hath threatned
               Eſay 9. 21, their goodly Cities and
townes being ranſacked and deſtroyed,
graſſe, brambles, and nettles growing in
their ſtreetes, pallaces and Temples for
want of paſſengers (as Ieremie lamentethLam. 5. 1
                     •
                  
               ,
their walles and windowes inhabited by
Owles and Battes, mens hearts fayling
for feare of the continuall ſounding
of Trumpets, thundring of Drummes,
neyghing of horſes, ratling of Armor, and
roaring of Cannons, ſo neare ſome of
our borders, that our windowes and
houſes haue trembled with the report
thereofAt the looſing of Calice..
            
               
Yea, their ſtreates haue runne with
ſtreames of blood, their houſes ſet on
flaming fire, their wiues and daughters
abuſed, and children daſhed againſt the
ſtones in their ſight: whereas we haue ſate
(for more then foure and fortie yeares)
euerie man vnder his vine and figge-tree,
enioying the fruit of our labours, and
reuenues of our lands, without either hoſtile
inuaſion, or ciuil diſſenſion, our ſpeares
are worm-eaten, and our ſwords turned into
mattockes and ſithes, instruments of husbandrie,
as the Prophet ſpeakethEſay. 2. 4, or ruſty in
their ſcabberds, the noyſe of the Cart and
Whippe are heard in our streetes, our
townes full of children playing, and old men
leaning vpon their ſtaues, as the Prophet
Zacharie ſpeakethZacha. 8. 4. 5, Man goeth foorth
to his labour in the morning, and returneth
not vntill the euening
               Pſa. 104. 23. When hee goeth
from home, hee is not feared by any ambuſh
of enemies, & when he lieth downe,
he is not wakened with ſound of Alarm.
Oh happie wee that haue liued ſuch golden
dayes! But behold the inſtrument
of this our glorious happineſſe is now taken
away, and this is the cauſe of our

ſorrow, yea time of mourning. come,
wherein we haue euerie one cauſe to goe
heauily as hee that mourneth for his Mother,
as Dauid ſaythPſ. 35. 14. Yea if the Lord had
not dealt more graciouſly with vs then
either wee haue deſerued, or could expect,
this had beene to vs all that mournfull
day, whereof the Lord by his Prophet
Amos ſpeaketh, I will turne your
feaſts into mourning, and your ſongs into lamentation,
and I will bring ſackcloth on all
loynes, and baldneſſe on euerie head, and I
will make it as the mourning of an only ſonne,
and the end thereof as a bitter day
               Amos. 8. 20. Yea,
when all the orders, and companies of
this Realme, from the honourable Counſeller,
to him that draweth water; from
the reuerent Iudge that ſitteth vpon the
Bench, to the abiect begger that ſitteth
in the aſhes; from the man of gray haires,
to the ſucking childe, ſhould haue mourned
in euerie corner of the land, complained
in euerie ſtreet, and cried in euerie
houſe, Alas for the day, alas for the
day of the Lord, it is come, it is comeZacha. 12▪ 12.
And though God haue in great meaſure
turned our heauineſſe into ioy, (as anon

we will conſider) yet to mourne in meaſure,
in faith, and in the feare of God, for
the loſſe of the parents of our bodie naturall,
or politike, is agreeable to the law
of nature, allowed by the law of nations,
conſonant to the law of God, and confirmed
by infinite examples, diuine and
prophane. We reade in the Chronicles of
the Scriptures, that when king Ioſiah died,
who put away Idolatrie, reſtored true Religion,
kept the Paſſeouer, loued his ſubiects,
and ſerued God zealouſly all the
dayes of his life, ſo that the holy Ghoſt
himſelfe hath regiſtred his prayſes in
this ſort: Like vnto king Ioſias was there
no king before him, that turned to the Lord
with all his heart, and with all his ſoule, and
with all his might
               2. Kin. 23 25: I ſay it is recorded,
that when he died, the Prophet Ieremie
and all Iudah and Ieruſalem, ſo bitterly
lamented2. Chro. 35. 24., that whenſoeuer afterwards
the Scriptures did ſpeake of any great
lamentation, they did ſample it with
that of Hudadrimmon in the field of Megiddo,
as you ſhall reade in the propheſie
of Zachariah
               Zacha. 12▪ 11, and ſurely neuer had they
greater cauſe to mourne for Ioſiah, then

wee for Queene Elizabeth, but ſpecially
if the Lord for our ſinnes had giuen
vs an Eliakim to ſucceed. But why
ſhould I preſſe this poynt, ſeeing euerie
face is ſo plentifully watered with teares,
as though euerie one of you had obtayned
Ieremies requeſt, your heads being full
of water, and your eyes a fountaine of tears
               Iere. 9. 1..
Wee will therefore bend our mindes to
the conſideration of the cauſe of this euill,Propter peccata populi erunt multi Principes.
which the wiſe man telleth vs: For the
ſinnes of the people, Princes ſhall often bee
chaunged
               Pro. 28. 2.
            Let vs ceaſe then to weepe for her,
that wee haue loſt ſuch a one, and
rather bee thankfull vnto God that wee
haue had ſuch a oneNon maeremus quod talem amiſſimus, ſed gratias agimus, quod talem habuimus. Hieron., for ſhee is gone
not to prepare a place for vs, but to enioy
that place which Chriſt hath prepared
for herIoh. 14. 2., whoſe truth ſhee profeſſed and
maintained, and may ſay vnto vs, as
Chriſt ſaid to the daughters of Ieruſalem,
Weepe not for me, but weepe for your ſelues,
and your ſinnes, which haue cut aſunder the
threed of my life
               Luk. 23. 28. Fie vppon our Atheiſme,
carnall profeſſion, blaſphemie,
couetouſneſſe, whordome, drunkenneſſe,

pride, prophanation of the Sabboth, contempt
of the word, and great vnthankefulneſſe,
which raigne in Court and countrey,
wherby we haue brought many plagues
vpon vs, and now laſtly this greateſt
of all, the death of her Maieſtie, to the
baniſhing of the Goſpell and breakenecke
of our peace, and ſhip-wracke of
our proſperitie, if God had not for his
owne names ſake, dealt moſt mercifully
with vs. But let vs come to conſider
what comfort god hath mixed our mourning
with.
            And herein firſt we may conſider the
mercifull dealing of God towardes our
Queene, that notwithſtanding the Pope
and Papiſts (who haue euer beene as full
of miſchiefe to England, as euer was the
Troyan horſe to Troy, as a learned man
obſerueth.)Dr. King in Ionas. fol. 401. And many hollow hearted
Achitophels, haue by all peſtilent practiſes,
ſought to take away her life, yet the
Lord in deſpight of them all hath lengthened
it, to the full age of man, which is
three-ſcore yeares and tenne, as Dauid
notethPſ. 90. 10, and now laſtly taken her to
himſelfe in peace, and full of dayes, euen

as a ricke of corne which commeth into
the barne in due time.
            And if we looke vpon our ſelues, who
haue the choſen ſhaft of Gods Quiuer,
the high and mightie Prince, Iames the
king of Scotland to bee proclaimed (according
to his right) the king of England,
France, and Ireland, the conſtant and
zealous defender of the truth: O Lord,
what heart can conceiue, or tongue expreſſe
this wonderfull mercie of God towards
vs; what a wonder is this to all
the world,Mira canam, ſol occubuit nox nulla, ſecuta. qui non videt, cecus; qui non laudet, in gratus, qui reluctatur, inſanus eſt. that no ſooner did our Sunne
ſet, (which we feared would haue broght
vppon vs a moſt dolefull night) but in a
moment, it paſſed through the other Hemi-ſphere,
and hath riſen againe, giuing
vs comfortable hope of a more ioyfull
day then euer we inioyed, oh let vs commend
the finiſhing of this glorious worke
to him that hath begunne it, let vs pray
for our king that hee may long enioy the
honour,Honos, & onus. and bee able to beare the burthen;
and wherein wee haue fayled in
our prayers for our late Queene, let vs
double them for our preſent king, that
God would giue him the wiſdome of

               Salomon, the vpright heart of Dauid, the
zeale of Ioſiah, the corage of Ioſhuah, & the
long life of Methuſhelah; that if it bee
Gods pleaſure hee may raigne, ſo long as
Sunne and Moone endureth, and reſigne
his Scepter when he reſigneth himſelfe
into the hands of Chriſt, at his glorious
comming to iudgement; and ſpecially
let vs pray, that (with Dauid) hee
may make conſcience of Gods houſe all
the dayes of his life, that in his owne perſon
hee may bee as an example, and go
before vs his Subiects in the zealous
profeſſion of Religion, and alſo purge
Gods houſe by refining the ſonnes of
Leuie
               Malac. 3. 3, taking away the blind
               2. Sa. 5. 6. 
               and the
lame, and all ſuch as haue not gotten
ſiluer BellesEx. 28. 33 at the skirts of their garments,
the Vrim
               Exo. 28. 30 and Thummim in their
breaſt plate, and holineſſeEx. 28. 36, to the Lord,
ingrauen in letters of gold vpon their
forehead: that ſo with greater cheerefulneſſe
wee may lift vp pure hearts and
hands in his Sanctuarie. In the meane
time, (as keeping a Chriſtian meane betwixt
theſe contrarie affections, of mourning
for our late Queene, and reioycing

for our preſent king) let vs as one man,
with our ſoules giue glorie vnto God,
and with our tongues, in a ſtrong vnited
crie, ſay, God ſaue King Iames, Amen,
and let (Amen
               Reu. 3. 14) euen the faithfull
witneſſe of heauen, ſay
Amen vnto it, Amen,
Amen.
            Laus Deo.
            FINIS.
         
      
      
         
            
            
            To the Chriſtian
Reader.
            
               THeſe Sermons beeing
committed to my care,
to be printed, in the abſence
of the Author (by
meanes of the contagious
ſicknes in London:)
I am to intreate thee (curteous Reader) to
bear with ſuch defects or defaults, as haue
paſſed the Preſſe, either through my own,
or the workmens ouerſight. Wherein, no
maruaile if we might be ouertaken, conſidering
the cloſeneſſe of the Copie, and
the ſame not re-written, but deliuered
vnto vs as he did ſet it downe at the firſt
draught, (ouer-running his noates) and
referring vs by ſignes and markes to
diſplaced: wherein (peraduenture) wee
haue not rightly traced him, or diſcried
his directions in euerie place.
            This I thought good to prefix in excuſe

of the forme: but as for the matter
of the Booke, it is able to ſpeake for it
ſelfe, and that in ſuch ſort, as I doubt
not, will preuaile with ſuch as feare God,
and which can diſcerne betweene badde
Bookes or paltrie Pamphlets, (which haue
of late peſtered the land) and betweene
ſound Sermons, or profitable Treatiſes
that carrie their waight with them, and
ſerue ſubſtantially for the building and
beautifying of the Lords houſe.
            As this Booke is thus able to vouch
teſtimonie for it ſelfe, out of God his
moſt holie Oracles: ſo I can beare this
witneſſe vnto it: that being in Kent when
the moſt of theſe Sermons were preached,
I haue heard them commended, and
God thanked for the Authour, by ſuch,
as whoſe hearts, I perceyued, were touched,
nay, much mooued at the hearing
of them.
            And further, touching the man; (ſith
I am indyting this Preface without his
priuitie, and writing not to claw him,
whereby nought can bee gained; nor to
giue Tytles to men, to whom belongs
nothing but ſhame; but to gaine glorie
to God, to whom all praiſe is due, for

raiſing vp ſuch inſtruments to the furniſhing
of the miniſterie, and building vp of
his Saints:) I ſay, touching the man,
this I may truly, and not to no purpoſe report:
that hee comming from Emanuell
Colledge in Cambridge, (for want of maintenance,
(as I ſuppoſe) euen in his young
yeares, before hee was ripe: and afterwards
(as himſelfe reporteth in his Epiſtle
Dedicatorie going before) ſpending
ſome yeares (and thoſe not vnprofitably:)
as appeareth: when, after that, hee addreſſed
himſelfe to the Miniſterie, and
was newly (young, as yet) entered thereinto,
and placed at Wie in Kent, where
now he is: he ſeemed to haue the thoughts
of Moſes,
               Exod. 4. 10, 13. 
               I am not eloquent, ſend whom
thou wilt, &c: and of Ieremie,
               Ier. 1. 6. 
               I cannot
ſpeake I am a child: and of Paule:
               2. Cor. 2. 16. 
               Who
is ſufficient for theſe things? The conſideration
whereof, not onely mooued, but
euen enforced him to fall roundly to
his ſtudie, and hauing gotten good
Bookes about him; hee ſo laboured
therein, riſing earlie, and ſitting vp late,
adioyning alſo practiſe of continuall
preaching to his ſet order of reading:
as that in ſhort time hee ouer-tooke ſuch

as in thoſe parts had beene before him in
Chriſt, and had been accounted chiefe in
the labours of the Goſpell: yea, hee matched
the proceedings of many, who ſtay
longer, & take further degrees of ſchooles
in the Vniuerſities.
            And thus becomming a man well
knowne for ſufficiencie, was called vpon
to make one in the combination at Aſhford,
where for the ſpace of certaine years
he hath kept his courſe, as his turne came
about, with credite, and like a good ſteward
brought forth thoſe things both new
and old, where with hee had before furniſhed
himſelfe in his priuate ſtudies, and
by his publike and painfull preaching in
his more priuate Congregation: ſo much
of the man.
            Concerning his manner of preaching
at the firſt: I haue then noted, and ſince
heard himſelfe acknowledge it, that it
was ſomewhat conceipted and fantaſticall,
ſauouring more of Wit then of Wiſedome,
ſtuft with humane learning, and borrowing
(withall) ſome flowers of the Fathers,
out of Hibernicus, pleaſing alſo himſelfe
many times with wittie Alligories. And
(to be ſhort) taking a courſe more painfull
               
then profitable. Now, theſe his Sermons
ſhew what he hath read, and that he contemneth
not either the Schoole-men, or
the old or new Writers, no, nor the
Humanitans themſelues, as hee hath
beene challenged: yet this I can ſay withall;
that hee ſhewes himſelfe more
plentifull (by making ſhew hereof) in
this his penned Treatiſe, then hee was
in the Pulpit, in preaching of the Sermons.
The which no doubt he hath done
with aduiſed iudgement, conſidering that
a man may (by reading) at leyſure, ponder
the ſentence and ſenſe of an Authour
alledged; which (in hearing) on the ſuddaine
(eſpecially if it be cited in a ſtrange
tongue) he can not doe, without finding
his attention therewithall much troubled.
Againe, if a Preacher were bound
to cite authoritie for all that he ſpeakes;
hee ſhould neuer haue done; for, as the
Wiſe man ſaith, What is it, whereof man
may ſay, behold this is new: ſo alſo, we may
often ſay, Nihil iam dictum, quod non dietum
prius. Yea further, I do not ſee (for
my part) any ſuch profite in the great curioſitie
of ſome (of late much practiſed)
in quoting chapter and verſe ſo thicke

and three-fold as they doe, no not out of
the holy Scriptures themſelues. For it
may be obſerued, that our Sauiour himſelfe
and his Apoſtles are oftentimes contented
to quoate at large, not citing ſo
much as the Pſalme or Chapter whence
they alledge (much leſſe the Verſe:) but
pointing as it were, to the place; they
preſently bend themſleues to make vſe
of it, according to the purpoſe they haue
in hand, as in Math. 4. 10. Iohn 7. 38. Ro.
9. 25. Rom. 10. 15. Rom. 11. 26. Heb.
2. 6. Iam. 4. 4. In many of which places
we may alſo obſerue, the ſence, rather
than the words, to be alleadged, yea, the
ſence alſo, ſometimes rather collected,
than expreſſed. And ſo alſo Maſter Caluin
(a man pregnant in the Text) verie
often in his writings, doth in ſuch ſort
quoat and cite the Scriptures. And touching
the Author of theſe Sermons, as he
hath changed his firſt kind of preaching
(as I ſaid) into a better method: ſo alſo
in his preſent manner of handling the
word, he is not ſo plentifull in alleadging
places, as in this his treatiſe hee hath ſet
downe. By which his courſe and conſcience
in the labours of his miniſtrie, (ſeeking

his peoples good, not his glory) what
good hath been don in his charge, bringing
into good compaſſe, that people, which
not many yeeres agoe were out of ſquare:
I had rather ye ſhould find it in M. Stoughtons
Treatiſe, ofOr the vanitie of Poperie. 
               the Goſpels prosperous
ſucceſſe, than read it reported by my pen.
            Onely this in this place I will remember,
that theſe paines in ſtudie and carefull
ouerſight in teaching and gouerning
the people committed to his charge, hee
hath imployed in a place, where both
Parſonage and Vicaredge being impropriate,
ſwallowed downe into the gulfe
of thoſe High places that ſometimes
ſtood in this land, (as this was into the
Abbey of Battell:) the ſtinted allowance
for this mans maintenance, after all defalcations
(the fat offerings for the prieſts
who in thoſe dayes liued, being now ceaſed)
is xvii. pound by the yeare, and no
more, the reſt is ſupplied by way of contribution,
wherein I cannot but commend
both Preacher and people; the one for being
contented with ſuch allowance as is
made; the other for extending ſo farre as
they doe. But my hope is, that ere it be
long, ſome good order will bee taken

whereby Preacher and people, (both in
this place and many others) ſhall bee otherwiſe
prouided for; the one ſecured
with a certaine or ſtanding ſtipend, the other
freed from a chargeable contribution,
which comes the more vnwillingly
from them, by meanes they are neuer awhit
the more eaſed, from yeelding their
impropriate, both great and ſmall tythes.
            
            In which regard, heere fitly commeth
to be had in thankefull and honourable
remembrance, the Royall bountie of our
late Soueraigne and gracious Queene Elizabeth,
who at the inſtance of that moſt
worthie, religious, and deepely prudent
Councellour, Sir Frauncis Walſingham,
Chauncelour of the Duchie of Lancaſter:
was pleaſed to impart a large portion of
thoſe her Reuenewes (certaine hundred
pounds) to yeeld ſtanding yerely ſtipends
of Fiftie pounds a peece, to ſomeMaster Midglie. Mr. Harriſon, &c. Preachers
to labour in that ſhire, (before as it
may ſeeme, but ſlenderly prouided for in
that behalfe) which I thinke alſo to be the
cauſe that mooued this Authour (their
Countrey-man) to be ſo carefull of that
County, as appeareth before in his Epiſtle
to his friends and kinsfolks of Lancaſhire.
            
               
But to returne (and ſo to draw to an
end:) after hee had preached many other
Sermons at Aſhford aforeſaid in his ſeuerall
turnes: at laſt, hauing begun, and fully
finiſhed the 23. Pſalme, in theſe ſeuen
Sermons: hee was much importuned by
many to put them in print, eſpecially by
Maſter H. H. who being the firſt man
that gaue him certaine and full information
of our late Queenes departure, and of
the Proclaming of our preſent moſt gracious
King in London on the Thurſday
before: he did ſo ſtirre him vp to fit himſelfe
to ſpeake the next Saturday (being
his courſe to preach, which fell out to bee
the laſt of theſe Sermons) that he in ſuch
ſort ſpake vpon thoſe two (the one dolefull,
the other ioyfull) occaſions; as that
there was not an eie in that plentifull audience
of right worſhipfull and others,
(met about the ſaid Proclamation to bee
made alſo there;) but ſent out abundant
teſtimonies of that their ioyfull-ſorrow.
            Thus commending this booke to the
kind acceptance (the which I do the more
deſire, in regard of the timerous diſpoſition
wherewith I haue perceiued the Author

to be much oppreſſed, euen ſince hee
committed his booke to the Preſſe: from
which his baſhfull feare, if he ſhall be by
the curteſie in ſome meaſure ſet free, hee
may be brought to impart mo of his Meditations,
wherinto he hath alreadie made
ſome entrance:) And commending thy
ſelfe to the word of grace, which is able
to build thee further to an inheritance
among the Saints: I bid thee farewell.
            
               From London the laſt
of September,
1603.
               
               Thine in the Lord Ieſus,
Iohn Swan.
            
            
         
      
   