
      
         
            
            
            THE IOY
OF THE VPRIGHT
MAN. IN
A SERMON PREACHED AT
GRAYES INNE: BY I. B. WHEREIN IS DECLARED THE
hidden comfort, the ſure reward, the
preſent condition of the vpright-hearted
            
               PSAL. 126. 6.
               They went weeping, and carried precious ſeede: but they ſhall
returne with ioy, and bring their ſheaues.
            
            LONDON,
Imprinted by Felix Kyngston for Nathaniel Newbery, and
are to be ſold at his ſhop vnder Saint Peters Church
in Corne-hill, at the ſigne of the Starre, and in
Popes-head Alley. 1619.
         
         
            
            
            TO HIS MVCH
RESPECTED AND APPROVED
FRIEND,
Mr. DA. M.
            
               IT hath been the cuſtome of them
that penned the Booke of Bookes,
the Bible, to direct ſeuerall writings
to ſome particular and priuate
perſons, although it was in
their mindes, that the Church in
generall ſhould alſo receiue edification
and comfort by them. So then I haue in this reſpect
trod in their ſtepps, whoſe patterne cannot but be worth
the imitation. Were it as conuenient, as lawfull, I would
fully haue ſet downe your name: but (to auoide the leaſt
appearance of euill) I haue omitted that; and though
many reaſons might be produced, why I made choice of
you before others, yet it would be tedious, and to no purpoſe
to relate them; wherefore let theſe following ſuffice.
I aſſure my ſelfe that it will be well accepted, and
(as from the hands of a true (though meane) friend)
receiued. I alſo (ſo farre as my iudgement leades me)
verily beleeue, that the Lord hath begun his good worke
in you: wherefore, though the meanes be but weake, the
powerfull Creator can vſe it, as an instrument to fur-ther

the ſame. He that could cure the blind man with clay
and ſpittle, can produce the like effects by an ordinarie
meanes, who doubteth? I will not proclaime to the eares
of the world, what kindneſſes I haue receiued from you
(for that might ſeeme to ſmell of flattery; or by a more
ſecret manner of begging, to craue ſome future fauour).
But this I will onely mention, that it is out of Christian
affection, and a ſingular deſire of your good & comfort;
as alſo to declare my remembrance of you, that I haue in
this kind put pen to paper. And to ſay much in one
word: If I haue more than an ordinary affection to any
priuate perſon, the current thereof runneth towards your
ſelfe. Let theſe lines (what euer they be) therefore the
rather find a friendly entertainement: and not ſo onely,
but eſpecially ſtriue to apply them to what end I haue
aimed at, in the penning of them. They will plainely declare
vnto you, by what meanes we are to ſtand iust before
God; of which mystery the vulgar people are (for
the most part) ignorant of, or not thorowly grounded in▪
Againe, you ſhall find in them, that the ſpiritual eſtate
of a Christian is ſecret, not onely to others, but often hidden
from himſelfe, eſpecially at the time of his effectuall
vocation; for then he is like the late manured field, naked
and bare, without the leaſt true apprehenſion, or
ſight of ſauing grace, and good graine in the furrowes of
his ſoule. By this you may vnderſtand, who are the reapers
of Gods greatest benefits. And finally, you ſhall
euidently ſee confuted the opinion of thoſe, that hold
there is no mirth or comfort in a Christian courſe; who
cry out, what? turne Puritane? become a Preciſian?
then farewell all ioy, and welcome melancholy. But we
ſay (leauing thoſe names to whom they of right pertaine)

that faith in the promiſes of God, and obedience to his
precepts, will expell feare, quiet the troubled ſoule, and
make a ſad heart the merriest man in the world: for
faith in the Goſpell ſets vs euen with God; and obedience
to the Law, will bring vs to his preſence, where all
the righteous and vpright-hearted, ſhall bathe themſelues
in Riuers of pleaſure, that ſhall neuer be dried vp,
but ſpring, flow, and be full for euer. To the which
the Lord bring you in a conuenient ſeaſon,
through the merits of his Sonne, by the
hand of his bleſſed Spirit. Amen,
Amen.
            
               Your friend, if friend to any,
I. B.
            
         
      
      
         
            
            
            THE IOY OF
THE VPRIGHT
MAN.
            
               PSAL. 97. 11.
               Light is ſowne for the righteous, and ioy for the vpright
in heart.
            
            
               THeſe words conſiſt of a double
propoſition; but ſome vnderſtand
that, like Pharaohs
dreames, though diuers, the
ſame thing is onely meant.
Others thus;Rom. 8. 1. Pſal. 32. 2. that the firſt
part of the verſe is vnderſtood
of Iustification, the latter
of Sanctification; for they both vſually goe together,
and the one is neuer in Gods children ſeparated
from the other: for if the Lord iuſtifie any
perſon through Chriſt, in ſome meaſure he ſanctifieth
the ſame by his Spirit; theſe (like Naomi and
Ruth) runne together.
            In the former propoſition are two things to be

conſidered: firſt, that light is ſowen: ſecondly, for
whom, and that is for the righteous. Againe, in the
latter propoſition, are two things alſo to be noted;
the one, that ioy is ſowne; the other, who ſhall reape
it, viz. the vpright in heart.
            
            But for the better vnderſtanding of the words,
we muſt know, that this Text is an Allegory; that
is, a continued ſimilitude, wherein we may obſerue
fower things.
            Firſt, the ſower; and that is God.
            
            Secondly, the ſeede; and that is ioy and light.
            
            Thirdly, the reapers, and they be the iust and vpright
in heart.
            
            Fourthly, the ground where, and that is in Gods
Word and workes, earth and heauen, within vs
and without vs.
            This metaphor of huſbandry is often vſed in the
Scripture: for
            Firſt, it is of antiquitie; our firſt parents were to
till the ground.
            Secondly, it is of good report; therefore to bee
thought vpon.
            Thirdly, it is profitable; for he that ſoweth ſhall
reape.
            Laſtly, it is of neceſſitie; for grounds muſt bee
plowed vp, or they will not bring forth any good
fruite, but briars, thiſtles, and all vnprofitable rubbiſh.
Now wee will proceede to the meaning of
the words.
            And firſt for Light: Light is either taken litterally,
or tropically. Litterally two waies:
            Firſt, either for an accident or qualitie in a ſubiect,

as in the Sunne,Gen. 1. 3. or any cleare body: or
            Secondly, as an effect, proceeding from its
cauſe; and ſo the Fier, Moone and ſtarres are ſaid
to be Lights, and to giue light, Gen. 1. 15. Eccleſ. 11. 9.
            Againe, light is metaphorically applied many
waies.
            Firſt, God is ſaid to be light, 1. Iohn. 1. 5.
            Secondly, Christ is called the light, Iohn 3. 19.
            Thirdly, the Miniſters are ſtiled Lights, Matthew
5. 14.
            Fourthly, the Goſpell; walke in the light, Iohn
12. 36.
            Fifthly, the precepts and word was to Dauid, a
Lanthorne, or light, Pſal. 119. 105.
            Sixthly, Grace is called light, Epheſ. 5. 13. 14.
            Seuenthly, deliuerance from danger, Esth. 8. 16.
            In a word, light is taken for all true comfort, and
ſpirituall bleſſings that wee receiue from God,
through Chriſt, temporal or eternal; and ſo it may
be taken in this place (though more particularly) of
deliuerance from trouble, or ſome preſent danger
the people of God were caſt into: for the Kingdome
of Chriſt is fore-ſpoke of,Heb. 1. 6. and prophecied in
this Pſalme, ſo that we may without danger expound
it of Chriſt the true light, of his comming,
and all bleſſings that accompany the ſame.
            
               Is ſowne] that is, prepared, purpoſed and appointed
of God, to be receiued in due time and conuenient
ſeaſon:Coloſ 3. 3. for as ſeed lieth in the earth couered
for a while▪
               1. Iohn 3. 2. ſo is the ioy of the iuſt ſecret, hidden.
            
               For the righteous] Wee muſt vnderſtand, that

there is a twofold righteouſneſſe; and that either
perſonall, or by imputation.
            Perſonall righteouſneſſe hath in it two things;
firſt, integritie; ſecondly, conformitie: for there is
one frame of the perſon, another of his actions. Integritie
of nature muſt be in him that is perſonally
righteous,Eccleſ. 7 vlt. ſo was Adam, Eue and Christ by creation:
hence ſome conclude, that onely they three
were created in the image of God, and none other:
for God (in the beginning) made man righteous
(righteous in reſpect of his nature and being), and
Christ (afterward) as hee was man; for the Spirit
did ouerſhadow the Virgin, and purifie the matter
and maſſe of which his humane body conſiſted, ſo
that it was perfect, and without the ſtaine of the
leaſt originall ſinne. And againe, conformitie of
action is alſo of neceſſitie, to make a man perſonally
and abſolutely righteous: the firſt Adam had
the one, but failed in the other; therefore becauſe
he kept not the rule of iuſtice, he was neuer actually
and perſonally righteous: the ſecond Adam,
Christ, had both; and ſo was able to abide the Law,
yea, the very rigour of it, either for puritie of nature,
or holineſſe of conuerſation; and he onely,
and none but hee.1. Iohn 2. 1. Hence he is called, Ieſus Christ
the righteous: for he was righteous euery manner
of way. And although the firſt may bee without
the ſecond, yet the ſecond cannot be without the
firſt; becauſe the latter (as an effect, ſpringeth and
floweth from the former, as his true and proper
cauſe, Epheſ. 4. 24.
            And thus hauing declared what perſonall righteouſneſſe

is, wee come to ſee what is meant by
righteouſneſſe imputed.
            Now imputed righteouſneſſe, is that righteouſneſſe
which is not in mans ſelfe, or from himſelfe,
but from and by another; not by creation, but imputation.
This ſeemes to me to be prefigured by
the skinnes, wherewith the Lord, after the fall, clothed
our firſt Parents; the bodies of the beaſts
were for ſacrifice, the skinnes to put them in mind,
that their owne righteouſneſſe was like the figgeleaues,
imperfect; and therefore they muſt bee iuſtified
another way. Yet howeuer that be, Paul is
plaine for this diſtribution of double righteouſneſſe:
for (ſaith he) I labour not to be found in mine
owne righteouſnes, which is by the Law, but that which
is by faith in Christ, Phil. 3. 9. So that it is manifeſt,
there is an imputatiue, as well as a perſonall righteouſneſſe.
And here we are to note two things in
righteouſneſſe imputed: firſt, what it is that maketh
righteous: ſecondly, how or by what meanes
we are made partakers of this that maketh vs righteous.
The thing or matter is Christ and his obedience;
Christ is made our righteouſneſſe, &c. 1. Cor.
1. 30. And we muſt haue both his perſon and actions
to be the matter of our iuſtification: for we are
conceiued in ſinne; therefore we muſt haue a righteouſneſſe
to ſatisfie the iuſtice of the Law in that:
for the parts of Diuinitie at the Creation, ſeeme to
be Holineſſe of nature, and Perfection of life; ſo
that this rule being iuſt and good, muſt be fully ſatisfied,
either by our ſelues, or ſome other, elſe no
fleſh ſhould be iuſtified, or ſaued. Againe (I ſay) his

obedience muſt be imputed alſo, and that actiue
and paſſiue (the which ſome, but without iuſt reaſon,
deny; affirming, that the paſſiue is of it ſelfe
ſufficient).
            And the reaſon is this: the Law after Adams fall
required a double debt; the one, that the breach
thereof might be repaired; the other, perfectly obeyed;
that, that was done, muſt be vndone; and
that which was vndone, muſt bee done: and by
whom? euen by Christ our ſurety. And obſerue
how fitly the actiue and paſſiue obedience of Chriſt
anſwere theſe two: for his paſſion remooued the
curſe, and his actiue obedience brings the bleſſing,
and confirmes man being reconciled. And this is
that which the Apoſtle intendeth (though ſome otherwiſe
expound the place) where he ſaith, If by
the death of Christ (that is, his paſſiue obedience) we
be reconciled to God, when wee were enemies; much
more being reconciled, we ſhall be ſaued by his life (that
is, his actiue obedience); Rom. 5. 10.
            For the better vnderſtanding of this, let vs compare
Adam vnto a pot, or ſome ſuch earthen veſſell;
firſt, it is framed, molded, and well figured; then it
is put into the ouen or furnace, and hardned. Now
ſuppoſe that this veſſell bee hit with a foote, and
daſhed in pieces before it was hardned; muſt it
not haue a double act to make it perfect, one to
mould it anew, another to ſeaſon and harden it?
Why, man by Creation was by God excellently
framed; but he was not hardned and confirmed by
the obedience of the Law, but broken to pieces in
daſhing himſelfe againſt it: ſo that now hee ſtandeth

in need of more than at his creation; for he is
broken, therefore wants molding, and then hardening
too; elſe notwithſtanding his caſe were mutable,
and his condition ſubiect to breaking ſtill.
Now the paſſiue obedience of Chriſt doth frame
him anew, that is, ſet him in that condition, wherein
he was at the firſt by creation; and then his actiue
obedience like the furnace, doth confirme and
make him a veſſell vnchangeable, and fit for the
Lords vſe for euer. And doth it not ſtand with
iuſtice, that death ſhould remooue death, and
life procure life? I write my opinion (ſubmitting
my ſelfe to the iudgement of the reuerend
and learned), that the ground of this error had its
beginning from miſunderſtanding of perſonall
righteouſneſſe: for Adam was iuſt by creation, in
reſpect of his eſſentiall properties: but neuer actually
righteous in the obedience of the precepts by
practiſe; ſo that Adam was no ſinner, yet not iuſtified:
for not a ſinner and a righteous perſon are not
equall and equiualent termes, they may not bee
conuerted; for Adam, though iuſt by creation, yet
not by action; ſo that he did but anſwere to one
part of the rule, not the other; neither could hee,
vntill this created righteouſneſſe had been produced
into act; for as the breach of the Law made
him actually a ſinner & vniuſt, ſo the performance
of it would haue made him actually righteous, the
which he neuer was. The death of Chriſt will reſtore
vs to that eſtate, from which we fell in Adam,
and that is, of enemies to make vs friends; and to
heale (meritoriouſly) our wounded nature: but his

life muſt confirme vs, and make vs actually iuſt:
and there can be no danger at all in holding this
doctrine; and I wonder that any man can either
aſcribe too much to Christ, or beleeue too much
in him: for if the breach, and the not keeping of the
Law be debts (as in truth they be), then (as Paul
writeth to Philemon concerning Oneſimus) let vs (in
all humilitie of heart by the hand of faith) ſet both
on Christs ſcore.
            
            And thus much for the matter of our iuſtification,
by which we are made righteous. The manner
how or by what meanes it is applied, followeth,
and that is faith,
               Rom. 4. 3. and faith onely: for we are iustified
by faith onely,
               Heb. 11. 6.
               as by an instrumentall cauſe; for faith
laieth hold on the obiect matter of our iuſtification,
Christ and his obedience;Rom. 5. 1. 10. and ſo vniting the beleeuer
to him, hee is iuſtified, though not by his
owne inherent and actuall righteouſneſſe. So that
God the Father accepteth of this ſatisfaction, as if
we in our owne perſons had, both for holineſſe of
nature, and perfection of obedience, abſolutely anſwered
and fulfilled the Lawes iuſtice.
            And from this that I haue ſaid, we may gather
theſe concluſions.
            
               Firſt, that None was euer perſonally righteous, but
Christ onely.
            For if his Father would marke what was done amiſſe,
yet he was, and is, and euer ſhall be able to abide
it: for he was holy for nature, and perfect for
life.
            Againe,Rom. 3. 9. hence it will follow, that all men ſtand in
neede of Chriſts merits; and all cauſe of boaſting is totally

excluded from mankind: yea (whatſoeuer Papiſts
babble) the bleſſed Virgin her ſelfe. So that
the perſon for whom light is ſowne, is hee that by
faith applieth Chriſt and his obedience (being offered
by the Father) to himſelfe in particular.
            And thirdly, we may from this ſafely conclude,
that
            
               They who haue no faith cannot be iustified, and conſequently
ſaued.
            
            For wee muſt of neceſſitie haue faith to apply
Chriſt as an inſtrument;Rom. 13. vlt. for faith is as a hand to
receiue, and put on the righteouſneſſe and merits
of the ſecond Adam.
               Hab. 2. 4. We are ſaid to liue by faith:
that is, in beleeuing in the Lord of life. They therefore
that haue no faith,Epheſ 2. 1. are dead in treſpaſſes and
ſinnes. Adam had life in himſelfe at the creation:
now we haue it out of our ſelues from Chriſt at our
iuſtification.
            
               And laſt of all we may collect, that the obiect of
faith and matter of iustification is not within vs, but
without vs; and that we ſtand in need of the ſame, elſe
no ſaluation; whence theſe three Corollaries follow.
            
            
               Firſt, that ſinnes before conuerſion cannot hinder
mans perfect iuſtification. Let this bee well obeſerued.
            
            Secondly, that good workes after our effectuall vocation
doe not further our iustification before the Lord,
they will helpe to aſſure vs, that our faith is ſound;
and iuſtifie vs in the eyes of the world, but no other
waies.
            And laſtly from this I alſo conclude, that They

are in a great errour, who hold the bare act of faith
without the application of Christ and his obedience to
iustifie. We are ſaid to liue by our hands, yet wee
vnderſtand, that it is meant by that we get by labor
and trauell; for no man eates his fingers: ſo wee
may truly be ſaid to be iuſtified and ſaued through
faith; but wee muſt know, that it is by what faith
reſteth on, and applieth to the perſon, and no otherwiſe;
this is the plaine meaning.
            And now I come to the ſecond branch of my
text, and ioy]. Some expound the firſt part by the
ſecond, and ſay, that by light is meant ioy; and by
iuſt, vpright in heart. But I rather vnderſtand, that
ſanctification is meant in this clauſe: for many are
apt to ſay, they haue faith, yet want holineſſe; therefore
the ſpirit would take away that falſe cauill.
            Againe, good and righteous perſons call the
ſoundneſſe of their faith ſometimes into queſtion,
doubting of the truth of their ſpirituall condition;
therefore to remoue that ſcruple, and to comfort
and ſettle their wauering minds, the Prophet annexeth
as a helpe this other clauſe, wherein is comprehended
ſanctification. And vſually in the holy
Booke, theſe two are coupled together, and they
may not be put aſunder, 1. Cor. 6. 11.
            Now for the interpretation of the words: ſome
reade ioy, others gladneſſe; the difference of theſe
two I take to be this: Ioy is in the heart, ſecretly
hidden: and gladneſſe may be ſeene in the face, or
by ſome outward ſigne diſcerned: for where one
Euangeliſt writeth, Reioyce and bee glad; another
ſaith, Reioyce and leape. Feare and ioy are internall,

but trembling and gladneſſe externall: See Mat. 5.
12. Luk. 6. 23. Pſal. 2. 11. Matth. 28. 8.
            
               Vpright] Seemes to be a Metaphor tooke from
a pillar, or thing that ſtandeth (as wee ſay) bolt vpright,
not inclining more one way than another;
or ſome reade it Right or Streight of heart; that is,
in whoſe thoughts, intentions and conuerſations is
no guile, like Nathanaël, or Ezekiah; and heart is
added, to ſhew the true roote of ſinceritie, as alſo
to condemne outward hypocriſie: for ſome, like
the old Phariſies, are iuſt outwardly, but inwardly
full of rottennes; the heart is not vpright, what
ſhew ſoeuer they make of holineſſe and righteouſnes:
or it may be annexed for the comfort of the
iuſt, that though they faile ſometimes in outward
act, yet it falleth foorth contrary to the intent and
former purpoſe of their heart: for the moſt faithfull
hath his failings, whatſoeuer his reſolutions
haue been to the contrary.
            
               And now in few other words, thus may we plainly
reſolue theſe. What if the faithfull be afflicted?
ouerwhelmed with the waues of ſorrow? compaſſed about
with great and manifold euils? drowned in the
depth of depths? and well neere ſwallowed vp of ouermuch
heauineſſe? ſhall they not heare of glad tidings?
will not ioy breake out as light in the morning? and all
teares be wiped from their eyes? yes, this is an eternall
truth, that, All ſuch as are iuſtified by faith in Chriſt;
ſanctified (hauing hearts without guile) by the word
and ſpirit; though they ſow in teares, plow in paine, and
all their crop ſeeme to be blaſted; yet there be great bleſſings
appointed by God for them; which (though for a

ſeaſon they be couered, and hidden like corne in the furrowes)
they ſhall one day reape and receiue in earth and
heauen, according to the ſure promiſe of the Lord.
            Thus to our power hauing pickt out the true
meaning, wee come to gather ſome profitable inſtructions;
and out of the word ſowen, we may firſt
obſerue, that
            
               
                  Doct. 1 The righteous mans harueſt in ſecret and hidden.
            
               It lieth like the corne couered in the ground;
Their life is hid;Col. 3. 3.
               and, it is not manifeſt what they ſhall
be:1. Ioh. 3. 2. No eye hath ſeene, or eare heard, neither hath it
entred into the heart of man,1. Cor. 2. 9. what the Lord hath laid
vp for them that loue him. Name what you can, and
it will be a myſterie, a ſecret thing, that belongs to
the vpright in heart.
            
            
               
                  Reaſon 1
               Firſt, is not the decree of God a hidden thing? a
depth vnſearchable? and able to make a man aſtonied?
               Rom. 11. 33.
               Did not Paul crie out, Oh the deepneſſe of the
riches both of the wiſedome and counſell of God! how
vnſearchable are his iudgements, and his waies paſt finding
out?
            
               
                  Reaſon 2
               And is not the incarnation of Chriſt a ſecret too?
               what more to be admired,
               1. Tim. 3. vlt.
               than, That God ſhould
become man,1. Pet. 1. 12. and be manifeſted in the fleſh? The very
Angels deſired to peepe into this myſterie. This is one
of the Lords wonderfull workes,
               Iſai 7. 14. The way of a virgin with a man.
            
               
                  Reaſon 3 Againe, the conuerſion and regeneration of a
ſinner a admirable; its a noble, yet a ſecret work:
Nicodemus a great Doctor could not ſee into it.Ioh. 3. 4.
And if naturall births be ſo ſtrange, what ſhall wee
iudge of this?
            
               
               
                  Reaſon 4
               Moreouer, Peace of conſcience and ioy in the holie
Ghoſt,2. Cor. 1. 22.
               is no open matter; None knoweth it, but hee
that hath it.2. Tim. 2. 19.
               So is the earneſt of the Spirit, and true
ſeale of ſaluation; the power, life and ſweetnes of the
word,2. Cor. 2. 14. The remiſsion of pardon for ſinne, with Certaintie
of ſaluation. 1. Pet. 1. 8.
            
               
                  Reaſon 5 And in the fifth place, the harueſt is ſecret, if we
conſider where it is growing. One cloſe is, The ſecret
purpoſe of God;
               Rom. 11. 34. 
               and who can vnderſtand it?
               2. Pet. 3. 16. A ſecond
is his word,
               2 Cor. 4. 4. and how hardly is that to be ſearched into?ler. 17. 9. A third is a mans owne heart: and is not
that both ſecret and deceitfull?
            
            And laſt of all, the very principall part of the
harueſt is hid with Chriſt in heauen;
               1. Ioh. 3. 2. 
               and when hee
appeares, it will appeare what it ſhall be.
            
            
               
                  Vſe 1 And is the Righteous mans harueſt ſecret and hidden
Then the prophane muſt learne not to ſpeake
euill of their waies; as though, of all time it were
the worſt ſpent time that is ſpent in the ſeruice of
God.2. Pet. 2. 12. Why ſhouldeſt thou report baſely of what
thou art ignorant of? Doeſt thou know what delight
is in reading, praying, hearing, ſinging and
meditating, that art dead, and neuer couldſt awake
to goe to worke?1. Cor. 2. 11. Canſt thou ſee into the heart of
another and tell of his treaſure?2. Cor. 12. 4. When waſt thou
in the third heauē, to take view of the great things
that there be by God prouided for his ſeruants againſt
the great day of Reaping?Math. 7. 1 Therefore indge
not, leſt thou be iudged: vnderſtand the truth, and
then ſpeake: for its wiſdome to conceale any thing
we know not, as it commendable to ſpeake the
truth of a knowne good matter.
            
               
Thou art to learne that Gods children are a hidden
people, and haue hidden comforts, ſuch as the
world knowes not of.
               Ioh. 4. 32. Sometime you ſhall haue a
man commended on this manner (when peraduenture
his ſuite is not of the coſtlieſt) Oh Sir, as
meane a man as he ſeemeth, there is few ſuch in the pariſh,
he is an vnknowne man, there is no end of his good.
This may truly be ſaid of all the faithfull (though
they ſhould goe in ſheep skinnes, camels haire, and
fare meanly euery day) that there be but too few
ſuch in the pariſh, they are vnknowne men, and (of
a truth) there is no end of their good: for are they
not called Gods ſtored or hidden ones?
               Math. 13. 44.
               Pſal. 83. 4. Is
not their kingdome a treaſure hid in the field? How
much is that goodneſſe,
               Pſal. 31. 19.
               O Lord, thou haſt laid vp for
them that truſt in thee? Dauid admired, or deſired,
(as one doubtfull) to be reſolued.
            
               
                  Vſe 2 And the righteous here are alſo to be admoniſhed,
that they doe not regard the cenſures of ſuch
as are blinded by the God of this world. What if
they,Exod. 5. 2. like Pharaoh, crye out, Who is the Lord, that we
ſhould ſerue him?
               Mal. 3. 14.
               and is there any profit in ſeruing the
Almightie? Why? they cannot iudge of thy eſtate,1. Cor. 2. 14.
               they perceiue not the things of the ſpirit of God,
but count them fooliſhneſſe: They thinke that Gaine
is godlineſſe, and are out of the way. How can a blind
man vnderſtand and iudge of colours? and are not
great and ſecret things too high for a foole?
               Prou. 17. 7. Say therfore
with the Apoſtle,1. Cor. 4. 3.
               I paſſe not for ſuch mens iudgements:
               Luk. 23. 34. or rather pray with thy Sauiour; Father, forgiue
them, for they know not what they doe: crye out
in compaſſion with Stephen;
               Acts. 7. vlt.
               Lord, lay not this ſinne

vnto their charge: Is it to be expected, that ſuch as
counted Chriſt to be without forme,
               Iſai. 52. 14. reputed him a
wine bibber, Iohn to haue a diuell,
               Mat. 11. 18. 19. and the chiefe ſeruants
of the Goſpel (filled with the ſpirit) to be drunk
with new wine,
               Acts. 2. 13.
               and out of their wits; ſhould iudge
and eſteeme charitably of thee and thy proceedings?
Neuer expect this; for it is a thing impoſſible:
Nature cannot goe beyond it ſelfe, and naturall
men cannot diſcerne of things that are ſpirituall.
            
               
                  Vſe 3 And is this Harueſt hidden? Then it may be a
comfort to the vpright in heart,1. Theſ. 1. 6. when they thinke
their owne ſtate to bee miſerable.2. Cor. 6. 9. What if afflictions
compaſſe thee like a garment?1. Pet. 4. 12. the fiery triall
ſeeme to burne thee?Pſal. 77. 7. &51. 12. 13. wicked men riſe vp in
armes againſt thee? or Satan ſhoote his ſharpe
ſhafts to wound thee? Suppoſe the Father ſeeme
to frowne vpon thee, Chriſt to reiect thee, and the
fellowſhip of the Spirit to be departed from thee?
Yet muſt thou hope ſtil; for thine harueſt is ſecret,
and often blaſted in thine owne eye. Was not Dauid
himſelfe ſometime as one reiected? Did he not
crie, Lord reſtore me to the ioy of thy ſaluation? Iob
was in a great ſtraite, when he ſet downe this peremptorie
ſentence,Iob. 14. vlt
               While mans fleſh is vpon him hee
ſhall be ſorrowfull, and ſo long as his ſpirit is within him
it ſhall mourne. And haue not the deareſt of Gods
Saints been ſtrangely (for a time) perplexed? Aſſure
thy ſelfe, that No new thing is befallen thee, or
ſtrange matter come vnto thee; 
                  1. Cor. 10. 13. but ſuch as are incident
to the Lords beloued ones. He that readeth Dauids
Pſalmes, would imagine the man to be mad

that penned them, if he had not ſome experience
of ſpirituall deſertions. What is liker to good
graine than graſſe, at the firſt ſprouting or ſhooting
vp of both? and what doth more reſemble
faith than infidelitie, eſpecially at the firſt inſtant
of a mans conuerſion? Yong Conuerts (to ſpeake
with reuerence) are not vnlike ſome of your London
Cockneyes; tell them when they come into
the Countrey, that wheate is wheate, hauing but
couered the earth, and not growne vp to a blade
and eare, they will not credit you, for they haue no
experience in matters of that nature; they haue
bought it onely (winnowed) in the market, and
therefore imagine ſo to finde it growing: but the
skilfull husbandman knoweth full well, that the
corne in his cloſe will be as good wheate at harueſt,
as any that is ſold in all their Citie: So hee
that is not an old diſciple, and hath not skill in
this kinde of husbandrie (becauſe hee findeth not
faith, and hope, and loue perfect at the firſt breaking
vp of the field of his ſoule by the plow of the
word) feareth that hee hath no grace at all: but a
grounded Chriſtian knoweth the contrary. Learn
then this leſſon, that after plowing, comes ſowing;
after ſowing, the ſeede lies vnder the clots; after,
ſpringeth to a blade, eare, and laſt of all, a ful corne:
and theſe degrees are to be expected in this ſpirituall
harueſt alſo.
            I haue knowne others troubled, becauſe they
cannot diſtinctly tell the time of their conuerſion:
Why? doe not ſome women conceiue, and know
it not for a ſeaſon? yet before long they can eaſily

diſcerne it. And in like ſort may the new birth be
wrought, and yet ſome while the perſon be ignorant
of the ſame:Ioh. 3. 8.
               For as the ſpirit bloweth where and
when, ſo, how he liſteth. Thou muſt trie it by the effects.
If therfore the daily courſe of finne be ſtaied;1. Ioh. 3. 9.
the breaſts of thy vnderſtanding and heart,Pſal. 119. 11. with
the ſincere milke of the word, be filled, and thou
trauell in minde and wil, that good works may be
produced:Rom. 7. vlt. thou art borne of God, and one of his
adopted children.
            
               
                  Vſe 4 And is this harueſt ſecret and hidden? Then let
the righteous neuer reſt content with any meaſure
of ſpirituall crop they haue attained to: for
they haue but like Ruth participated of the gleanings.
The very chiefe of the harueſt is gathered into
heauen, and there they ſhall haue it: the vpright
are in the wildernes, and haue but taſted of
the good things of the world to come: yea, this
doctrine ſhould cauſe all of vs to threſh out the
word, to breake our hard hearts, to ſow apace both
the ſeeds of good works, and the rich and precious
graine of prayer. Oh that wee did but conceiue
aright, how theſe ſeeds will fructifie; and the full
ſheaues that we ſhall reape, either in life or death,
or at the laſt day! Truly not one of theſe cornes
ſhall miſcarry, but all take roote, ſpring, and bring
foorth fruite in great abundance. I ſay then, be not
wearie in this courſe of husbandry; iudge not, that
The harueſt is paſt,
               2. Tim. 2. 18. but ſcatter this ſeed euery where,
and crie aloud,2. Cor. 5. 6. that the great day of reaping may
come, and the principall time of gathering: yea it
ſhould moue thee to wiſh to be looſed, and to deſire

Christs comming to iudgement, and then it will appeare
what thou ſhalt be: for whatſoeuer good thing any man
hath done,
               Epheſ. 6. 8.
               that ſame ſhall bee receiue of the Lord, whether
he be bond or free.
            
            It cannot be denied, but that, as in the daies of
Elias, the children of God in this world, like the
corne, couered with chaffe, may be hidden and not
diſcerned; but at that day Chriſt ſhall ſingle them
out, call them by name, and reward them according
to their workes.Matth. 10. vlt. Euery good intention of the
heart, each ſentence powdred with ſalt, the ſtill
prayers that haue been powred out in the pooreſt
corner of a cottage, and euery good action done
in ſecret, ſhall come to light, and haue his bleſſing;
and then the difference will be diſcerned between
the righteous and the wicked, between him that
ſerued God, and him that ſerued him not. Mal. 3. vlt.
Goe on therefore, and be not deiected: For the
husbandman muſt firſt ſow, that he may reape the fruit;
and hee that ſoweth liberally,
               2. Tim. 2. 6.
               ſhall reape alſo liberally.
2. Cor. 9. 6.
            And now wee come to obſerue a ſecond point,
the which we gather out of the conſequent part of
the firſt propoſition, which is, that
            
               
                  Doct. 2 The righteous are the reapers of Gods greateſt benefits.
            
               Light and gladneſſe bee ſowen for them only,
and for none other: Balaam ſaw this full well, therfore
he deſired to dye the death of the righteous,Numb. 23. 10. and
that his laſt end might be like vnto his. Dauid crieth
out,
               
                  
                     •
                  ſal. 37. 37. Marke the vpright man, and behold the iuſt, for
the end of that man ſhall be peace: yea, the righteous

ſhall be had in euerlaſting remembrance:Pſal. 112. 6.
               and, ſuch ſhal
want no manner of thing:Prou. 10. 7. for their memorie ſhall bee
bleſſed here on the earth,Prou. 21. 21. and their names for euer engrauen
in heauen. But with the wicked it ſhall not
be ſo:
               ler. 17. 13.
               for their fame ſhall rot, their names ſhall be written
in earth, their hopes make them aſhamed, and at the
laſt day,Pſal. 1. vlt. their image ſhall be deſpiſed: They ſhall be as
chaffe before the winde, and ſhall not be able to ſtand in
the preſence of the Lord: but bee depriued of the
kingdome of heauen, and throwne downe into the
nethermoſt hell. We deny not, but that they may
flouriſh for a time,
               Pſal. 37. 35. ſpread themſelues like the greene
bay tree and bigge Cedars; ſend out their children as
ſheepe,Iob. 21. 7. place them on the higheſt hils, play vpon the tabret
and harpe; ſpend many daies in carnall pleaſures,
yet for all this, in a moment they ſhall deſcend into the
pit. This ſhall be the portion of vniust and wicked
men, but the contrary to the righteous. And it
alſo ſtandeth with good reaſon.
            
            
               
                  Reaſon 1 For firſt, the iuſt are vnited to Chriſt their huſband
and head;Epheſ. 5. 30.
               they are bone of his bone, and fleſh of
his fleſh: therefore they ſhall partake (in truth,
though not in degree) of all his priuiledges. And
from this vnion, wee are ſaid to be heires of God.
Gal. 4. heires annexed with Chriſt. Rom. 8. heires of
grace. 1. Pet. 3. heires of the kingdome. Iam. 2. 5. heires of
eternall life. Tit. 3. yea, coheires with Chriſt of all
things preſent or to come: For the righteous are
Chriſts, and Chriſt is Gods. 1. Cor. 3. 21. 22. 23. And as
they that are thus grafted into the ſecond Adam
ſhall be partakers of all his goods; ſo the vniuſt,
not being in him, ſhall taſte of all the heauy iudgements

of God the Father. He that is not a branch
of this Vine, ſhall be cut off, wither, dye, and ſuffer the
vengeance of eternall fire. Iude 7.
            
               
                  Reaſon 2 Againe, they haue right to all the promiſes, and
none but they, Heb. 11. 1. 2. Many may ſay, that They
are Abrahams ſeed,
               Mal 3. 9. haue true title to heauen, and
boaſt much that They are free:
               Ioh. 8. 33. but they that ſo
thinke, may deceiue their own ſoules, and be farre
from the kingdome of heauen. For Godlines, only,
hath the promiſes of this life,
               Ioh. 8. 36.
               and the life to come.
1. Tim. 4. 8. And if the Sonne make man free, then is he
free indeed. But (alas!) the wicked, vniuſt and prophane
haue no promiſe to inherit heauen; all the
threats in Gods booke are denounced againſt
them:Pſal. 32. 10. For, Many ſorrowes ſhall be to the wicked, and
they that doe commit ſinne ſhall not be vnpuniſhed. And
the Apoſtle is round in this thing: Be not (ſaith he)
deceiued: for the vnrighteous ſhall not inherit the
kingdome of God. 1. Cor. 6. 9.
            
               
                  Reaſon 3 A third reaſon is this, that as the righteous haue
(only) true title to the promiſes; ſo they only haue
faith to applie them: ſay that wicked men had
(which they haue not) right to the promiſe of life,
yet they haue no faith to applie it to themſelues in
particular: whatſoeuer ſuch men bragge and boaſt
of,2. Theſ. 3. 2. yet All men haue not faith: and he that beleeueth
not is condemned already.
               Mark 16. 
                     •
                  6. Many in their fond imaginations,
thinke,2. Sam. 21. 20. that like the Giant of Gath, they
haue vpon the hand of their faith ſixe fingers; yet
(alas) when they come in the day of death, or time
of triall to feed on the promiſe, to put on the Lord
Ieſus Chriſt,
               Iudg. 1. 5. 6. they, like Adonibezek, will lacke their

thumbes, and dye for want of feeding on the food
and true bread of eternall life. Now the righteous
haue not only the precious promiſes,
               2. Pet. 1. 1. 4. but alſo precious
faith, the which two being vnited, carry the whole
man into the garner of God, and large field of the
kingdome of glory:Epheſ. 2. 8.
               for me are ſaued by faith. And
as the ſickle is to the hand of the reaper, ſo is faith
to the ſoule of the righteous and true beleeuer.
            
               
                  Reaſon 4 And laſt of all, hee that is a reaper of theſe fauours,
must fit himſelfe for the kingdome of heauen,Gal. 4. 30.
and that the Lord of glory may come in. He muſt
caſt out the bondwoman, and her ſonne, Satan and all
the ſeeds of ſinne;1. Cor. 5. 7. purge himſelfe of the old leauen;
cleanſe the inſide of the cup and platter of his ſoule;
and this will none but the righteous doe: vngodly
men lodge their Lord in the Inne, they caſt him
into a cratch, ſuffer him to knocke, yet permit him
not to enter and ſuppe with them. They will not
dreſſe and ſweepe the floore of their ſoules, caſt out
the rotten goundſell in the barnes of their hearts,
and emptie themſelues of that rubbiſh that ſhutteth
the doore, dammeth vp the roome, and ſhouldreth
out this heauenly ricke, this harueſt of the
Lord: But the righteous, they ſweepe the houſe,
make way for the harueſt,Pſal. 24. 7. open the doore, pluck vp
the euerlaſting gates, and giue the King of glory, good,
great and royall entertainment;Reu. 3. 20. ſo that he will ſup
with them, they with him, and partake of all his
fatlings.
            
               
                  Vſe 1 And ſeeing the point thus by reaſon and Scripture
confirmed, let vs come to make application.
            And here in the firſt place we may ſee the vanity

of our prophane and vngodly perſons; who crie
out (as the people in former times) if wee preach
this doctrine (that Only the righteous reap theſe great
fauours) you take too much vpon you, Moſes and
Aaron; for all the congregation is holy. Thus they
in this cleere light of the Goſpell, ſay (what? in their
hearts, with the foole? No: in publique, and ſeeke to
defend it) that All ſhall be heires of Gods greateſt
benefits; not one ſhall periſh. And wee ſay too,
that if they be righteous (and for number as the
duſt of the earth, or ſtarres in heauen) that they ſhal
all inherit the kingdom of God and of glorie: but
if they be proud, vniuſt, deceitful, and want vpright
hearts (were they as the ſand on the ſea ſhore, drops
in the huge Ocean, graines on the ground, or fiſhes
in the water, for multitude) that ſo liuing, and ſo
dying, they muſt reape nothing but wrath, vengeance,
and the largeſt fields of Gods higheſt diſpleaſure
euery mothers ſonne: Darkneſſ, trembling, terror,
and the ſting of the ſecond death ſhal be the ſheafe
of their field, the corne of their barne, and the beſt
graine that ſhall be preſerued for the garner of
their ſoules; for they were neuer vnited to Chriſt,
haue any right to the promiſes, truth of faith in
their hearts, neither would open the gates of their
ſoules, that the King of glorie might come in, and
finde fauourable acceptation: And yet for all this,
in the land of vprightnes, they will doe wickedly.
What ſhal I ſay? or where ſhal I begin? and when
make an end? Haue wee not the biting vſurie; the
curſed couetouſneſſe; the deuouring oppreſſion;
the deſtroying extortion; the ſhop of dearth, darknes

and deceit the vnequall weight, mixt ware,
and counterfeit ſtuffe? And, as ſure as the word of
God is true, and holy and iuſt, that vpon whom
theſe foule ſinnes ſhall be found, hee ſhall dye the
death. I know that this is a hard poſition to ſettle
in their minds, yet he that denieth this for a truth,
muſt turne Atheiſt, gainſay that there is a reſurrection,
a iudgement to come, and a iuſt Iudge that
reuengeth all wrong. Pſal. 50. 21. 2. Pet. 3. 3. 4.
            
               
                  Vſe 2 And in the ſecond place, here is a world of comfort
to the vpright in heart.
               Gal. 6. 9. For whatſoeuer the
Lord hath ſowne in earth or heauen (if thou faint
not) thou ſhalt reape in due time. In earth thou ſhalt
haue food and raiment fit and conuenient, and, if
need be, in great abundance. Let the waters ſwell,
the ſea rore, the earth tremble, the winde blow,
and the floods come, yet thou ſhalt eſcape all danger.
Let the Sunne be darke, the Moone turned
into blood, the Starres fall, the heauens burne, and
the elements melt with heate; yet iuſt Lot ſhall be
deliuered; Noah eſcape drowning; for righteouſnes
is written in thy forehead, and the deſtroyer
ſhall not deſtroy thee. What if thou ſow in teares,
plow vp thy ground in a time of mourning, yet
thou ſhalt reape with ioy, and by the hand of the
Angell,Iob. 5. 26. be carried, like a rick of come, in due time,
into the garner of God:1. Theſ. 5. 24.
               For faithfull is he that hath
promiſed, and will ſurely doe it. Hee hath ſowen, and
his ſonnes ſhall reape; though the harueſt be long
in comming, the crop ſhall be the bigger, the better.
Therefore in the middeſt of all thy ſorrowes,
let this meditation comfort thy ſoule, that the

righteous and vpright in heart (of which number
thou art) ſhall be the reapers of Gods greateſt benefits.
            
               
                  Vſe 3 And ſeeing this is thus: Let no man ſay, that It
is in vaine to ſerue the Lord; and that Godlineſſe
is not gainfull; for it is profitable euery manner of
way. Iob ſerues not God for nought; neither doth
righteouſnes preuent riches. The fooles prouerbe
is, that He that vſeth plaine dealing ſhall die a beggar:
I ſay no: and adde more, that hee that doth
not vſe it, ſhall dye, like Iudas, a very beaſt; and
iudge, whether is the better? I can tell you, that
when the heauy ſentence ſhall viſit vs that did Ezekiah,
               Iſai. 38. 1.
               Thou muſt dye, & not liue; then will the worth
of a well led life be a matter of moment, a thing
much ſet by, ſeene into: and this tidings ſhal come,
and will not tarry;Heb. 10 38. and then ſhall the iuſt liue by his
faith, haue boldnes of ſpirit, and reape that riches,
the great husband in heauen had ſowne and prepared
from the beginning for the vpright. Then ſhall
he haue all teares wiped from his eyes, reſt from his
labours,Iob. 33. 28. and his life ſhall ſee the euerlaſting light;
yea he ſhall reape fulnes of ioy, freedome from all
bondage,Pſal. 16. vlt.
               and pleaſures for euermore.
            
            
               
                  Vſe 4 And in the laſt place, ſeeing the righteous are
the only reapers of the Lords greateſt bleſſings; it
muſt be a ſtrong motiue to moue vs to be ſuch. We
would all be ſet at libertie, both ſpirituall and corporall;
enjoy all the bleſſings that the great Seedſman
of the earth and heauen hath prouided; why then,
ſtriue to be vpright in heart. Noah was a righteous
Preacher, Lot was iuſt, Paul had a good conſcience,

Ezekiah walked before the Lord with an vpright
heart; and theſe were freed from many dangers on
earth, died at the laſt with honour, and now are
reapers of that vnſpeakable light in the kingdome
of heauen. But becauſe many boaſt of their owne
righteouſnes: crie, Stand apart, I am more holy than
thou, yet are not of this number: we will giue ſome
true trials and notes of vpright and iuſt men.
            
               Notes of an vpright man.
                Firſt, an vpright man lookes backward and forward,
wipes off the ſcore both with man and the
Lord. If hee haue wronged any by forged cauillation
with Zacheus, if he be of abilitie, then he maketh
full reſtitution: if hee be not, yet will he make
confeſſion to the partie; (if conuenient) craue pardon,
with a reſolution, that if euer the Lord enable
him, he will reſtore to the vttermoſt farthing; and
will not faile, in the meane time, to inuocate the
Lord, that he, who by him hath been iniured, may
ſome way or other gaine more, through his bountie,
than by his wickednes he hath been depriued
of. This is a true note of one vpright in heart: for
reſtitution is of abſolute neceſſitie to righteouſnes;
at the leaſt in reſolution and will, where wealth to
reſtore is wanting. And Iudas in this, went beyond
many, and will riſe vp in iudgement againſt many;
for he (ſo will not they) made reſtitution.
            
                And for time to come, hee will doe to his brother
as he would be done vnto; alwaies endeuouring
to keepe a good conſcience with euery perſon,
in euery action. Wee haue ſome that turne
to their former courſes, when as they haue acknowledged
their ſinne, and made their neighbour ſatisfaction,

as the theefe, that (when the ſore is worne
out of his hand, and the print of the burning iron)
falls to filching: but an honeſt heart will ſteale no
more, neither willingly wrong any man, either
outwardly in action, ſpeech; or inwardly by cogitation,
reſolution: for he holds, that the leaſt motion
of the will, whereby his brother is wronged,
is a ſinne, and to be abandoned. And (marke this)
he will proportion his almes according to his abilitie,
and the poore mans neceſſitie: For the righteous
meaſureth all his affaires by iudgement.
            
            Thus much of his carriage towards man: now
follow trials or ſignes of his iuſtice towards God.
            
                Firſt, hee will truly confeſſe, that it is the Lords
mercie, hee was not long agone, for his ſinnes, conſumed.
            
                Againe, he mourneth and weepeth, that he hath
offended ſo good a God, ſo mercifull a Father.
            
                Thirdly, he only relies vpon the meere mercie
of God, and ſole merits of Chriſt Ieſus for remiſſion
and iuſtification; hee hateth mans merits as he loueth
the Lords mercie.
            
                Beſides, hee taketh no action in hand, but he ſeeketh
good ground for it out of Gods booke; hee
doth not, like a careleſſe Carpenter, worke at an
aduentrue without his Rule; but like a boy that
would ſpeake true Latin, who firſt lookes at the
precept, then ſpeaketh: ſo hee hath firſt an eye to
the word, and then to his worke.
            
                Furthermore, hee endeuoureth to bring the
whole man to the ſubiection of Gods law; as all
the vnderſtanding, all the affection, all the will; he

would haue the corrupt part of ſerue God, as well
as the regenerate. And this is only to be found in
the righteous, and in none other: for hee would
giue all his members, and all of all his members, as
ſo many weapons to ſerue the Lord in righteouſneſſe.
            
                And finally, in all matters of triall hee will appeale
to God, and make him chiefe Iudge of all
things: for hee knoweth that the Lord is iuſt, and
loueth not iniquitie, neither will peruert iudgement.
And this is the cauſe, why good men haue
ſo longed, that Chriſt would come to iudge the
earth: for then they ſhal haue their faithfulnes diſcouered,
ratified, rewarded.
            If thou finde theſe things in thee, thou art one
that ſhall reape all good fruits in the land of righteouſnes:
but if not, the weeds of Gods wrath in
the land of wickednes.
            And this ſhall ſuffice for the firſt propoſition:
the ſecond ſucceedeth to be handled in its order,
whence we collect, that
            
               
                  Doct. 3 The vpright man ſhall be the only merry man.
            Nay, he is already the ioyfull man: Few thinke
ſo, but it is ſo. This doctrine may be confirmed by
the ſeuerall actions done by the righteous, being
in diuers conditions, and of contrary vocations,
functions. Was not the King glad when the people
ſaid vnto him,Pſal. 122. 1.
               Come, let vs goe vp to the houſe of
God?
               Neh. 8. 12. Did not the people goe home and make great
mirth that they vnderſtood the word that was taught
them?
               Acts 2. 46. Are the Chriſtians ſaid to continue with one
accord in the Temple,
               and 16. 25.
               and to eate their meate together

with gladneſſe and ſinglenes of heart. The Apoſtles
ſung Pſalmes in priſon:
               1. Theſ. 1. 6. The Theſſalonians receiued
the word with great ioy in affliction. Did not ſome returne
home reioycing,
               Acts. 5 41. that they were counted worthie
to ſuffer for the Name of Chriſt?
               Iob. 5. 22.
               Iob ſaith, The righteous
ſhall laugh at death.
               Acts 7. 55. And Stephen had boldnes
at his departure: And thete is neuer an action in
Chriſtianitie, but as euery flower hath his ſmell, ſo
it hath, and yeeldeth comfort and conſolation: for
all her waies are waies of pleaſure,
               Prou. 3. 17.
               and all her paths proſperitie.
Paul prayed and gaue thankes with great
reioycing;
               Phil. 14. and wonderfull is that ioy which the vpright
haue and doe feele, in theſe priuate and hidden
duties: for then the Lord reueileth himſelfe
moſt cleerely, anſwereth the poore petitioner familiarly;
yea God, like man, giueth his greateſt
gifts to his deareſt children in priuate: for hee vpbraideth
no mans perſon. And how haue the vpright
been rauiſhed in minde, with the meditation
of the glorie of God and his wonderfull workes?Pſal. 19. 1.
Surely as a man beholding the Sunne with a corporall
eye, in his brightnes, dazeleth, turneth back
his face, and cannot endure it; ſo may the vpright
man with the eye of his faith ſee ſuch excellencie
in the Sonne of righteouſnes, that for the time, he
may be aſtonied, varie the obiect, and ſay, I haue
enough.
            
            Theſe things be ſecret, yet moſt certaine; and
the reaſons be as cleere as the noone day.
            
               
                  Reaſon 1 For firſt, his ſinne is pardoned: And is not a pardon
to a poore condemned perſon, a thing that
yeeldeth great ioy, vnſpeakable comfort? When a

caſtaway heareth but of ſuch a matter, how will his
dead heart reioyce, his cold ſpirits dilate them.
themſelues, and his ſorrowfull ſoule gather conſolation?
From this ground, Chriſt, vnto the man
that was ſicke of the palſie,Math. 9. 2. ſaid, Be of good comfort,
thy ſinnes are forgiuen thee. Remiſſion of ſinne is the
mother of great mirth; and this the vpright man
is aſſured of. Pſal. 32. 2.
            
               
                  Reaſon 2 Againe, he is clothed with the righteous robes
of Chriſt, and adorned with all the ſauing graces
that are peculiar to the Lords people: and is not
this a matter of mirth, great moment? Shall a man
reioyce and march cheerefully, in being garniſhed
with the ornaments of nature; and be dead in the
neſt, when hee is wrapped in this pure and white
linnen? What ſaith the Church in this reſpect, I
will greatly reioyce in the Lord,
               Iſai. 61. 10.
               and my ſoule ſhall be
glad in my God: Why? for he hath clothed me with
the garments of ſaluation, and couered me with the robe
of righteouſnes; he hath decked me like a bridegroome,
and as a bride tireth her ſelfe with her iewels; this is
the garment of true gladneſſe.
            
            
               
                  Reaſon 3 And furthermore, hath not the vpright man a
good conſcience?Prou. 15. 15. Is not this a continuall feaſt? No
colour ſo pleaſand to the eye, wine to the pallate, or
any obiect to the outward ſenſe, as this is to the inner
man, the reaſonable ſoule. Oh that men did
but know what muſicke this doth make! what ioy
it carrieth to the right owner of it! then would
they neuer doubt of the truth of this doctrine: but
they doe not, they cannot; for they be ſtrangers
from it, it from them.
            
               
               
                  Reaſon 4
Beſides all this; They be aſſured of reſt at their
death,Rom. 8. 1. peace in heauen; the reſurrection of the body,
and eternall ſaluation.Pſal. 16. 9. This made Dauids heart
glad, and his fleſh reſt in hope. This comforted iuſt
Iob in all his troubles, that he ſhould liue and riſe
againe: the beleeuing Iewes in the expectation of
this,Iob. 19. 26. had ioy vnſpeakable glorious: Paul went on
cheerefully in the aſſurance of the ſame. And (beloued)
let the world think what they will or can, here
is the true roote and fountaine, out of which all
ſound ioy and mirth ſpringeth, floweth.
            
               
                  Vſe 1 And is not here iuſtly confuted, that opinion of
many in our daies, who thinke that Godlines is the
damper of all mirth, and cauſe of continuall ſorrow?
Oh (ſay ſuch) become ſo ſtrict, ſo preciſe? then
farewell ioy and all true comfort; for it bringeth nothing
but melancholy and vexation of ſpirit. This is
the Diuels old ſhift to make men vnwilling to take
the path to heauen, and ſee into the conſolations of
a Chriſtian courſe. I remember that the Spies
who came backe from Canaan, commended the
countrey, but ſaid they ſaw great Giants and fenced
Cities, to diſhearten thoſe which ſhould enter:
and ſo doth Satan Gods Saints and ſeruants
at this day. And when all is done, that can be done,
the vpright man ſhall be the only merry man: for
his yoke is eaſie, and his burthen light. Me thinkes
this might confirme the poynt, and conuince any
perſon that thinketh otherwiſe. Why do not men
caſt off this courſe, if there be no ioy in it, and take
another? If wee ſhould ſee a man that hath great
varietie of ſuites, ſtill weare one and the ſame, lay

the reſt by him, would wee not affirme, that hee is
much affected with that he weareth? If a man haue
diuers walkes in or about his Orchard, yet is alwaies
found to be in one, & no other; wil it not be
concluded that his delight in that exceedeth? So
the children of God ſtill weare one ſuite, keep one
path; pleaſure or profit doth not alter them; then
may wee not abſolutely conclude, that they finde
mirth in running the waies of Gods commands;
pleaſure in his precepts, and ioy in putting on the
robes of righteouſnes?
            
               
                  Obiection. 
                But the common obiection is: None more ſad
to ſee to, none leſſe chearefull to behold, than ſuch
as ſeeme to be moſt religious, vpright-hearted.
            
               
                  Anſwer. 
                Why? haue we not already heard, that their harueſt
is ſecret, hidden?  For as in laughter, the heart
               may be ſorrowfull; ſo vnder a ſad countenance, the
heart may be merry. And as the wicked haue many
a ſecret ſting, the righteous feele not; ſo haue
the vpright hidden comforts, that the wicked
know not.
            
                And it is the nature and very propertie of great
things, in ſtead of laughter in the face, to cauſe
great ioy in the heart. Let a man finde a rich Iewel
or bagge of ſiluer in the ſtreete, will he not goe away
with a compoſed and ſetled countenance, whē
as another that ſtoopes at a trifle will fall a ſmiling?
Haſt thou not ſeene one that drinkes ſtrong
wine, wipe his mouth, ſtroke the breaſt, and neuer
change the former looke; and yet (peraduenture)
another that drinkes but water, will ſmile, laugh
and ſeeme a merry man? The one doth warme and

glad the heart, the other only force a fained kinde
of laughter. And ſeldome haſt thou ſeene a man
(outwardly) merry in the fruition of great matters:
neither doe wee reade of Chriſt, that hee (and who
euer had greater cauſe?) in all his life time laughed.
The wine of the grape and water of life, will
glad the ſoule, and worke (inwardly) a depth of cō
               fort;
though it alwaies breake not foorth and be
conſpicuous in the beholders: ſo the things of this
world may make a man outwardly merry; but this
mirth is not ſound, conſtant, and will but end 
                  〈◊〉
               
mourning.
            
                Wee muſt conſider, that 
                  〈…〉
                the mindes motion, 
                  〈…〉
               
diuerſitie of effects in mans our 
                  〈◊〉
                
               
                  •
               iſpoſition.
Let the infant in the mothers arme, caſt its eyes on
ſome bugbeare, will it not fall a crying? yet let it
looke the bearer in the face, then, anone, it will
laugh, reioyce, and fall to ſmiling: ſo when the vpright
man conſidereth the many and ſtrong corruptions
that be in him; the greatnes and number
of ſinnes that haue proceeded from him; the long
time and extraordinary meanes of grace that hath
been abuſed by him; he cannot but be troubled
in heart, and hang downe the head: but on the
contrary, when hee calleth to minde, that God accepts
the weak and ſincere endeuour for the deed;
how Chriſt is his perfection; and that the Spirit
will one day cleane diſſolue & root out the curſed
worke of Satan, and finiſh the good work of grace
he hath begun in him: then he gathereth comfort,
plucketh vp his heart, and is a right merry man.
            
               
               
He hath his daies wherein he is a man of ſorrow;
as, at his firſt conuerſion, when the ſoule is trauelling
of the New-birth, with many a ſigh and deepe
groane: againe in ſome deſertion, violent tentation,
or time of Gods fiery triall and probation.
And finally, when the walls of Ieruſalem lie waſte;
the ſepulchres of his Fathers be ruinated▪ and the
courſe of Religion infringed, corrupted; then his
ſighes are many, and his heart is heauy. Neh. 
               
                  •
               . 3.
            But what for all this? Is not the doctrine ſound?
Yes: for ioy ſhall breake foorth in the morning,
peace will come▪ and thy bitter teares ſhall be as a
freſh and coole 
                  〈◊〉
                to a wearie and thirſtie tra
               
                  •
               eller,
to comfo
                  ••
                
               
                  〈◊〉
                ouer-tyred ſpirit. And I
dare ſet downe this peremptorie concluſion, that,
In the greateſt 
                     〈◊〉
                   the vpright man is the ſubject of

                     〈◊〉
                   mirth, the only merry man: for the cauſe of
his ioy is alwaies great and conſtant, though the
effects be not proportionable.
            
               
                  Vſe 2 Againe, this doctrine may ſerue to trie if our
ioy be ſound, and our mirth ſuch as is of moment:
doth it ſpring from the vprightnes of thy heart?
and art thou righteous in all thy courſes? why then
thou art the merry man indeed, elſe not: Wicked
men may laugh, but (alas!) they haue little cauſe:
The bread of deceit may make ſome perſons pleaſant
for the preſent; but death will be in the pot;
their ſweete morſels muſt be vomited vp againe,
and become as grauell in their mouthes. Let ſuch
reioyce, but woe to them, for they ſhall one day
waile and weepe; their 
                     •
                  ghter ſhall be turned into
mourning, their wine to wormewood. And who would

not wonder (but that their hearts are ſeared) that
they haue any figure or ſhew of mirth and gladnes
at all? But we will omit them, and commiſerate
them, ſeeing their ioy is not ſound: and ſudden ſorrow
ſhall ſurely follow.
            
               
                  Vſe 3 And if the vpright man be the only merry man
here on earth among his enemies, and ſingeth his
Hebrew ſongs, with delight, in a ſtrange land: Then
what joy ſhall he haue in heauen, in the preſence
of the Lord, and communion of all the bleſſed
Saints and Angels? Can the Apprentice reioyce
in his bondage, and not in his freedome? Shall the
captiue ſing in his ſhackels? what will he do when
the priſon doore is opened, and hee at libertie? If
Dauid could dance before the Arke, how will hee
leape before the Lambe? Shall Peter cry out, It is
good to be here, (being but in the transfiguration)?
Oh! what will hee ſay, when and where hee is not
deceiued? Is it poſſible for an Hebrew to ſing and
play in Babylon? and not be rauiſhed with ioy in
the houſe of Bethel? will ſtrangers doe thus from
home? what then will they doe in the heauen of
heauens? And how ſhould this carry the minds of
the vpright to thinke of their latter end, to deſire
the comming of the Lord, and reſtauration of all
things? Truly this, if it were felt in part, taſted
here below, and ſeriouſly thought vpon, it would
fill the heart with ioy vnutterable glorious; make
our Pauls long to be looſed, and Iohns to crie, Come
Lord Ieſus, come quickly. The little experience that
we haue, what ioy is in an vpright heart here, muſt
make vs wonder at that which ſhall be in heauen

hereafter. A cluſter of grapes, brought from Canaan,
proued that there was a very good land, wine
pleaſant, and in abundance.
            
               
                  Vſe 4 And this, in the laſt place, ſhould be a ſtrong
load-ſtone and motiue to cauſe vs to caſt off ſinne,
and to be righteous and religious. We all would
faine be merry and haue glad hearts; why this is
the only way, and there is not another: let vs then
take Dauids counſell, and taſte how good the Lord is;
drinke of this water, though it be brackiſh on the
top, like the ſalt ſea, yet it will proue ſweeter in the
bottome: Men are in this thing (as the prouerb is)
worſe feared, than hurt. Children caſt away the new
coate, becauſe at the firſt it pincheth them; but after
two or three daies wearing, they would pine
and pule, if it ſhould be tooke from them.
            Sinners are like the ſluggard; when the winde
bloweth in at the creuiſes of the walls & windows,
the curtaines drawne about him, and he wrapped
in the warme rags of his bedding; Oh how loth he
is to peepe out, leaue his pillow, and to put on his
cold apparell: yet when hee hath leaped foorth of
his bed, and clothed himſelfe with his old attire;
he would not for a piece of ſiluer, be in his former
place and patches he was caſt into, and folded in:
So an vnrighteous perſon hee findeth warmth in
the old rags of ſinne, is vnwilling to put off the reliques
of his father Adam, yet if once hee had but
done it, and clothed himſelfe with the righteous
robes of Chriſt Ieſus, he would not for a world be in
his former condition of clothing. And name the
worſt & hardeſt thing in religion; yet it will bring

ioy to the doer: yea, they that mourne (in the very
act) ſhall haue (or in the euent) great comfort; and
the greater ſorrow, the more ſolace.
            
               
                  Example. 
               
               Peters ſinne cauſed Peters weeping; but his weeping
did procure matter of mirth: Zacheus in reſtoring
had more comfort than in deceiuing. But
men will not trie and waſh in this poole of Siloam;
Iordan is not regarded of the leprous Naamans and
Syrians of our daies.
            I haue obſerued that when boyes goe to bathe,
they feele with a finger, touch with a toe; and if it
be cold, at the firſt they ſhrinke, draw back, put on
their apparell, and vow they will not waſh till weather
and water be warmer; when as one of more
experience and better reſolution leapeth in, and after
he hath ſwom one or two bouts, feeleth no part
ſo cold as that which is cut of the riuer: So fearefull
and irreſolute perſons come to this poole of
Repentance; but either they thinke its hard, cold
and painfull, or that the time to come will be better
and fitter, and ſo the ſunne of their life ſets, they
neither waſh at all, nor find out this hidden cōfort.
            But let me entreate thee to make triall of this
matter; mourne for thy ſinne; reſtore the wrongs
done by deceit; get faith in Chriſt; labour for an
honeſt heart; and then if thou finde not the doctrine
true, caſt off righteouſnes, goe to thy old
courſe, count me a falſe prophet, and curſe me
when thou dieſt.
            FINIS.
            Soli ſapienti Deo gloria.
            
         
      
   