
      
         
            
            
            THE ESSAYES OF
APRENTISE, IN THE
DIVINE ART OF
POESIE.
            Imprinted at Edinbrugh, by Thomas
Vautroullier.
1584.
            CVM PRIVILEGIO
REGALI.
         
         
            
            THE CATALOGVE OF THE
workis heirin conteined.
            THe tvvelf Sonnets of Inuocations to the Goddis.
            The Vranie or heauenly Muse translated.
            The Metaphoricall Inuentioun of a Tragedie, callit
Phoenix.
            A Paraphrasticall translatioun out of the Poëte Lucane.
            A treatise of the airt of Scottis Poësie.
            The CIIII. Psalme of Dauid, translated out of
Tremellius.
            A Poeme of Tyme.
         
         
            
            SONNET.
            IF Martiall deeds, and practise of the pen
            Haue wonne to auncient Grece a worthie fame.
            If Battels bold, and Bookes of learned men
            Haue magnified the mightie Romain name:
            Then place this Prince, who well deserues the same:
            Since he is one of Mars and Pallas race:
            For both the Godds in him haue sett in frame
            Their vertewes both, which both, he doth embrace.
            O Macedon, adornde with heauenly grace,
            O Romain stout, decorde with learned skill,
            The Monarks all to thee shall quite their place:
            Thy endles fame shall all the world fulfill.
            And after thee, none worthier shalbe seene,
            To sway the Svvord, and gaine the Laurell greene.
            T. H.
         
         
            
            SONNET.
            THE glorious Grekis in stately style do blaise
            The lawde, the conqurour gaue their Homer olde:
            The verses Caesar song in Maroes praise,
            The Romanis in remembrance depe haue rolde.
            Ye Thespian Nymphes, that suppe the Nectar colde,
            That from Parnassis forked topp doth fall,
            What Alexander or Augustus bolde,
            May sound his fame, whose vertewes pass them all?
            O Phoebus, for thy help, heir might I call,
            And on Minerue, and Maias learned sonne:
            But since I know, none was, none is, nor shall,
            Can rightly ring the fame that he hath wonne,
            Then stay your trauels, lay your pennis adowne,
            For Caesars works, shall iustly Caesar crowne.
            R. H.
         
         
            
            SONNET.
            The mightie Father of the Muses nyne
            Who mounted thame vpon Parnassus hill,
            Where Phoebus faire amidd these Sisters syne
            With learned toung satt teaching euer still,
            Of late yon God declared his woundrous will,
            That Vranie should teach this Prince most rare:
            Syne she informed her scholler with such skill,
            None could with him in Poesie compaire.
            Lo, heir the fructis, Nymphe, of thy foster faire,
            Lo heir (ô noble Ioue) thy will is done,
            Her charge compleit, as deid doth now declaire.
            This work will witnesse, she obeyed the sone.
            O Phoebus then reioyce with glauncing glore,
            Since that a King doth all thy court decore.
            M. VV.
         
         
            
            SONNET.
            WHen as my minde exemed was from caire,
            Among the Nymphis my self I did repose:
            Where I gaue eare to one, who did prepaire
            Her sugred voice this sequell to disclose.
            Conveine your selfs (ô sisters) doe not lose
            This passing tyme which hasteth fast away:
            And yow who wrytes in stately verse and prose,
            This glorious Kings immortall gloire display.
            Tell how he doeth in tender year is essay
            Aboue his age with skill our arts to blaise.
            Tell how he doeth with gratitude repay
            The crowne he wan for his deserued praise.
            Tell how of Ioue, of Mars, but more of God
            
            The gloire and grace he hath proclaimed abrod.
            M. W. F.
         
         
            
            SONNET.
            CAN goldin Titan shyning bright at morne
            For light of Torchis, cast ane greater shaw?
            Can Thunder reard the heicher for a horne?
            Craks Cannons louder, thoght ane Cok sould craw?
            Can our weake breath help Boreas for to blaw?
            Can Candill lowe giue fyre a greater heit?
            Can quhytest Svvans more quhyter mak the Sn
                  •
               vv?
            Can Virgins teares augment the Vinters weit?
            Helps pyping Pan Apollos Musique sweit?
            Can Fountanis small the Ocean sea incresse?
            No, they augment the greater nocht a quheit:
            Bot they them selues appears to grow the lesse.
            So (worthy Prince) thy works sall mak the knawin.
            Ours helps not thyne: we steynȝie bot our awin.
            A. M.
         
         
            
            De huius Libri Auctore, Herculis
Rolloci coniectura.
            QVisquis es, entheus hic exit quo Auctore libellus,
            (Nam liber Auctorem conticet ipse suum)
            Dum quonam ingenio meditor, genioque subactus,
            Maiora humanis viribus istacanas:
            Teque adeo quisis expendo: aut Diuus es, inquam,
            Aut a Diuum aliquis sorte secundus homo.
            Nil sed habet simile aut Diuis, aut terra secundum:
            Quanquam illis Reges proximus ornat honos.
            Aut opus hoc igitur humano semine nati
            Nullius, aut hoc sic Regis oportet opus.
         
         
            
            ACROSTICHON.
            
               
                  I Nsigne Auctoris vetuit praefigere nomen
               
                  A uctorus cuncta pectus vacuum ambitione.
               
                  C uius praeclaras laudes, heroica facta,
               
                  O mnigenas
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   animi dotes, & pectora verè
               
                  B elligera, exornat coelestis gratia Musae.
               
                  V era ista omnino est virtus, virtute
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   maior
               
                  S ublimis regnat generoso inpectore Christus.
               
                  S cottia fortunata nimis, bona situa nosses
               
                  EX imij vatis, plectrum qui pollice docto
               
                  T emperat, & Musas regalem inducit in aulam:.
               
                  V icturus post fata diu: Nam fama superstes
               
                  S emper erit, semper florebit gloria vatis.
            
            Pa. Ad. Ep. Sanct.
         
         
            
            EIVSDEM AD LECTOREM
            EPIGRAMMA.
            SI quaeras quis sit tam compti carminis auctor,
            Auctorem audebis Musa neg are tuum?
            Ille quidem vetuit, cuite parere necesse est:
            Quis tantum in Diuas obtinet imperium?
            Cui parent Musae, Phoebus quo vate superbit,
            Et capiti demit laurea serta suo.
            Cui lauri, & sceptri primi debentur honores,
            Cui multa cingit laude tyara caput.
            Quo duce spes certaest diuisis orbe Britannis,
            Haud diuisa iterum regna futura duo.
            Progenies Regum, Regnorum
                  
                     
                  
                  que
                vnicus haeres,
            Scilicet obscurus delituisse potest!
         
         
            
            
            
            ANE QVADRAIN OF
ALEXANDRIN VERSE.
            IMmortall Gods, sen I with pen and Poets airt
            So willingly hes servde you, though my skill be small,
            I pray then euerie one of you to help his pairt,
            In graunting this my sute, which after follow shall.
         
      
      
         
            
               
               SONNET. 1.
               
                  FIRST Ioue, as greatest God aboue the rest,
               Graunt thou to me a pairt of my desyre:
               That when in verse of thee I wryte my best,
               This onely thing I earnestly requyre,
               That thou my veine Poetique so inspyre,
               As they may suirlie think, all that it reid,
               When I descryue thy might and thundring fyre,
               That they do see thy self in verie deid
               From heauen thy greatest Thunders for to leid,
               And syne vpon the Gyants heads to fall:
               Or cumming to thy Semele with speid
               In Thunders least, at her request and call:
               Or throwing Phaethon downe from heauen to eard,
               With threatning thunders, making mōstrous reard.
            
            
               
               SONNET. 2.
               
                  APollo nixt, assist me in a parte,
               Sen vnto Ioue thou second art in might,
               That when I do descryue thy shyning Carte,
               The Readers may esteme it in their sight.
               And graunt me als, thou worlds ô onely light,
               That when I lyke for subiect to deuyse
               To wryte, how as before thy countenaunce bright
               The yeares do stand, with seasons dowble twyse,
               That so I may descryue the verie guyse
               Thus by thy help, of yeares wherein we liue:
               As Readers syne may say, heir surely lyes,
               Of seasons fowre, the glasse and picture viue.
               Grant als, that so I may my verses warpe,
               As thou may play them syne vpon thy Harpe.
            
            
               
               SONNET. 3.
               AND first, ô Phoebus, when I do descriue
               The Springtyme sproutar of the herbes and flowris,
               Whome with in rank none of the foure do striue,
               But nearest thee do stande all tymes and howris:
               Graunt Readers may esteme, they sie the showris,
               Whose balmie dropps so softlie dois distell,
               Which watrie cloudds in mesure suche downe powris,
               As makis the herbis, and verie earth to smell
               With sauours sweit, fra tyme that onis thy sell
               The vapouris softlie sowkis with smyling cheare,
               VVhilks syne in cloudds are keiped closs and well,
               VVhill vehement Winter come in tyme of yeare.
               Graunt, when I lyke the Springtyme to displaye,
               That Readers think they sie the Spring alwaye.
            
            
               
               SONNET. 4.
               AND graunt I may so viuely put in verse
               The Sommer, when I lyke theirof to treat:
               As when in writ I do theirof reherse,
               Let Readers think they fele the burning heat,
               And graithly see the earth, for lacke of weit,
               With withering drouth and Sunne so gaigged all,
               As for the grasse on feild, the dust in streit
               Doth ryse and flee aloft, long or it fall.
               Yea, let them think, they heare the song and call,
               Which Floras wingde musicians maks to sound.
               And that to taste, and smell, beleue they shall
               Delicious fruictis, whilks in that tyme abound.
               And shortly, all their senses so bereaued,
               As eyes and earis, and all may be deceaued.
            
            
               
               SONNET. 5.
               OR when I lyke my pen for to imploy
               Of fertile Harvest in the description trew:
               Let Readers think, they instantly conuoy
               The busie shearers for to reap their dew,
               By cutting rypest cornes with hookes anew:
               Which cornes their heauy heads did dounward bow,
               Els seking earth againe, from whence they grew,
               And vnto Ceres do their seruice vow.
               Let Readers also surely think and trow,
               They see the painfull Vigneron pull the grapes:
               First tramping them, and after pressing now
               The grenest clusters gathered into heapes.
               Let then the Harvest so viue to them appeare,
               As if they saw both cornes and clustersneare.
            
            
               
               SONNET. 6.
               BVT let them think, in verie deid they feill,
               When as I do the VVinters stormes vnfolde,
               The bitter frosts, which waters dois congeill
               In VVinter season, by a pearsing colde.
               And that they heare the whiddering Boreas bolde,
               With hiddeous hurling, rolling Rocks from hie.
               Or let them think, they see god Saturne olde,
               Whose hoarie haire owercouering earth, maks flie
               The lytle bird's in flocks, fra tyme they see
               The earth and all with stormes of snow owercled:
               Yea let them think, they heare the birds that die,
               Make piteous mone, that Saturnes hairis are spred.
               
                  Apollo, graunt thir foirsaid suitis of myne,
               All fyue I say, that thou may crowne me syne.
            
            
               
               SONNET. 7.
               AND when I do descriue the Oceans force,
               Graunt syne, ô Neptune, god of seas profound,
               That readars think on leebord, and on dworce,
               And how the Seas owerflowed this massiue round:
               Yea, let them think, they heare a stormy sound,
               Which threatnis wind, and darknes come at hand:
               And water in their shipps syne to abound,
               By weltring waues, lyke hyest towres on land.
               Then let them thinke their shipp now low on sand,
               Now climmes & skippes to top of rageing seas,
               Now downe to hell, when shippmen may not stand,
               But lifts their hands to pray thee for some eas.
               Syne let them think thy Trident doth it calme,
               Which maks it cleare and smothe lyke glas or alme.
            
            
               
               SONNET. 8.
               AND graunt the lyke when as the swimming sort
               Of all thy subiects skaled I list declare:
               As Triton monster with a manly port,
               Who drownd the Troyan trumpetour most raire:
               As Marmaids wyse, who wepis in wether faire:
               And marvelous Monkis, I meane Monkis of the see.
               Bot what of monsters, when I looke and staire
               On wounderous heapes of subiectis seruing the?
               As whailes so huge, and Sea eylis rare, that be
               Myle longs, in crawling cruikis of sixtie pace:
               And Daulphins, Seahorse, Selchs with oxin ee,
               And Mersvvynis, Pertrikis als of fishes race.
               In short, no fowle doth flie, nor beast doth go,
               But thow hast fishes lyke to them and mo.
            
            
               
               SONNET. 9.
               O Dreidfull Pluto, brother thrid to Ioue,
               
               With Proserpin, thy wife, the quene of hell:
               My sute to yow is, when I like to loaue
               The ioyes that do in Elise field excell:
               Or when I like great Tragedies to tell:
               Or flyte, or murne my fate: or wryte with feare
               The plagues ye do send furth with Dirae fell.
               Let Readers think, that both they see and heare
               
                  Alecto, threatning Turnus sister deare:
               And heare Celaenos wings, with Harpyes all:
               And see dog Cerberus rage with hiddeous beare,
               And all that did Aeneas once befall.
               When as he past throw all those dongeons dim,
               The foresaid feilds syne visited by him.
            
            
               
               SONNET. 10.
               O Furious Mars, thow warlyke souldiour bold,
               And hardy Pallas, goddess stout and graue:
               Let Reidars think, when combats manyfold
               I do descriue, they see two champions braue,
               With armies huge approching to resaue
               Thy will, with cloudds of dust into the air.
               Syne Phifers, Drūmes, and Trumpets cleir do craue
               The pelmell chok with larum loude alwhair,
               Then nothing hard but gunnis, and ratling fair
               Of speares, and clincking swords with glaunce so cleir,
               As if they foght in skyes, then wrangles thair
               Men killd, vnkilld, whill Parcas breath reteir.
               There lyes the venquisht wailing sore his chaunce:
               Here lyes the victor, rewing els the daunce.
            
            
               
               SONNET. 11.
               AND at your handis I earnestly do craue,
               O facound Mercure, with the Muses nyne,
               That for conducting guyde I may you haue,
               Aswell vnto my pen, as my Ingyne.
               Let Readers think, thy eloquence deuyne
               O Mercure, in my Poems doth appeare:
               And that Parnassis flowing fountaine fyne
               Into my works doth shyne lyke cristall cleare.
               O Muses, let them think that they do heare
               Your voyces all into my verse resound.
               And that your vertewis singuler and seir
               May wholly all in them be also found.
               Of all that may the perfyte Poems make,
               I pray you let my verses haue no lake.
            
            
               
               SONNET. 12.
               IN short, you all forenamed gods I pray
               For to concur with one accord and will,
               That all my works may perfyte be alway:
               Which if ye doe, then sweare I for to fill
               My works immortall with your praises still:
               I shall your names eternall euer sing,
               I shall tread downe the grasse on Parnass hill
               By making with your names the world to ring:
               I shall your names from all obliuion bring.
               I lofty Virgill shall to life restoir,
               My subiects all shalbe of heauenly thing,
               How to delate the gods immortals gloir.
               Essay me once, and if ye find me swerue,
               Then thinke, I do not graces such deserue.
               FINIS.
            
         
         
            
            
            THE VRANIE
translated.
            
               
               
               To the fauorable
Reader.
               
                  HAuing oft reuolued, and red ouer (fauorable
Reader) the booke and Poems
of the deuine and Illuster Poete,
Salust du Bartas, I was moued by the
oft reading & perusing of them, with
a restles and lofty desire, to preas to attaine
to the like vertue. But s
                     •
                  n (alas)
God, by nature hathe refused me the like lofty and
quick ingyne, and that my dull Muse, age, and Fortune,
had refused me the lyke skill and learning, I was constrained
to haue refuge to the secound, which was, to doe
what lay in me, to set forth his praise, sen I could not merite
the lyke my self. Which I thought, I could not do so
well, as by publishing some worke of his, to this yle of
Brittain (swarming full of quick ingynes,) aswell as they
ar made manifest already to France. But knowing my self
to vnskilfull and grosse, to trāslate any of his heauenly &
learned works, I almost left it of, and was ashamed of that
opinion also. Whill at the last, preferring foolehardines
and a good intention, to an vtter dispaire and sleuth,
I resolued vnaduysedly to assay the translating in my language
of the easiest and shortest of all his difficile, and

prolixed Poems: to wit, the Vranie or heauenlye Muse,
which, albeit it be not well translated, yet hope I, ye will
excuse me (fauorable Reader) sen I neither ordained it,
nor auowes it for a iust translation: but onely set it forth,
to the end, that, albeit the Prouerb saith, that foolehardines
proceeds of ignoraunce, yet some quick sprited man
of this yle, borne vnder the same, or as happie a Planet, as
Du Bartas was, might by the reading of it, bee moued to
translate it well, and best, where I haue bothe euill, and
worst broyled it.
               For that cause, I haue put in, the French on the one side
of the leif, and my blocking on the other: noght thereby
to giue proofe of my iust translating, but by the contrair,
to let appeare more plainly to the foresaid reader, wherin
I haue erred, to the effect, that with lesse difficulty he may
escape those snares wherin I haue fallen. I must also desire
you to bear with it, albeit it be replete with innumerable
and intolerable faultes: sic as, Ryming in tearmes, and
dyuers others, whilkis ar forbidden in my owne treatise
of the Art of Poësie, in the hinder end of this booke, I
must, I say, praye you for to appardone mee, for three
causes. First, because that translations are limitat, and
restraind in somethings, more then free inuentions are,
Therefore reasoun would, that it had more libertie in
others. Secoundlie, because I made noght my treatise
of that intention, that eyther I, or any others behoued
astricktly to follow it: but that onely it should shew
the perfection of Poësie, whereunto fewe or none can

attaine. Thirdlye, because, that (as I shewe alreadye)
I avow it not for a iust translation. Besydes that
I haue but ten feete in my lyne, where he hath twelue,
and yet translates him lyne by lyne. Thus not doubting,
fauorable Reader, but you will accept my
intention and trauellis in good parte,
(sen I requyre no farder,) I
bid you faire well.
            
            
               
               L'VRANIE, OV MVSE
CELESTE.
               
                  IE n'estoy point encor en l' Auril de mon aage,
               Qu'vn desir d'affranchir mon renom du trespas,
               Chagrin, me faisoit perdre & repos, & repas,
               Par le braue proiet de maint sçauant ouurage.
               Mais comme vn pelerin, qui sur le tard, rencontre
               Vn fourchu carrefour, douteux, s'arreste court:
               Et d'esprit, non des pieds, de çà de là discourt,
               Par les diuers chemins, que la Lune luy monstre.
               Parmi tant de sentiers qui, fleuris, sevont rendre
               Sur le mont, où Phoebus guerdonne les beaux vers
               De l'honneur immortel des lauriers tout-iour verds,
               le demeuroy confus, ne sçachant lequel prendre.
               Tantost i'entreprenoy d'orner la Grecque Scene
               D'vn vestement Francois. Tantost dvn vers plus haut,
               Hardi, i'ensanglantoy le François eschafaut
               Des Tyrans d'Ilion, de Thebes, de Mycene.
               Ie consacroy tantost à l'Aonide bande
               L'Histoire des Francois: & ma saincte fureur
               Desmentant à bon droit la trop commune erreur,
               Faisoit le Mein Gaulois, non la Seine Alemande.
               Tantost ie desseignoy dvne plume flateuse
               Le los non merité des Rois & grands Seigneurs:
               
                  
Et, pour me voir bien tost riche d'or, & d honneurs,
               D'vn coeur bas ie rendoy mercenaire ma Muse.
               Et tandis ie vouloy chanter le fils volage
               De la molle Cypris, & le mal doux-amer,
               Que les plus beaux esprits souffrent pour trop aimer,
               Discours, où me poussoit ma nature, & mon aage.
               Or tandis qu'inconstant ie ne me puis resoudre,
               De çà, de là poussé d vn vent ambitieux,
               Vne sainte beauté se presente à mes yeux,
               Fille, comme ie croy, du grand Dieu lance-foudre.
               Sa face est angelique, angelique son geste,
               Son discours tout diuin, & tout parfait son corps:
               Et sa bouche à neuf-voix imite en ses accords
               Le son harmonieux de la dance celeste.
               Son chef est honoré d'vne riche couronne
               Faite à sept plis, glissans d vn diuers mouuement,
               Sur chacun de ses plis se tourne obliquement
               Ie ne sçay quel rondeau, qui sur nos chefs raionne.
               Le premier est de plomb, & d'estain le deuxiesme,
               Le troisiesme d acier, le quart d or iaunissant,
               Le quint est composé d electre pallissant,
               Le suyuant de Mercure, & d argent le septiesme.
               Son corps est affublé d vne mante azurée,
               Semée haut & bas d vn million de feux,
               Qui d vn bel art sans art distinctement confus,
               Decorent de leurs rais ceste beauté sacrée.
               Icy luit le grand Char, icy flambe la Lyre,
               Icy la Poussiniere, icy les clairs Bessons,
               
                  
Icy le Trebuschet, icy les deux Poissons,
               Et mille autres brandon
                     •
                   que ie ne puis descrire.
               Ie suis [dit elle alors] ceste docte VRANIE,
               
               Qui sur les gonds astrez transporte les humains,
               Faisant voir á leurs yeux, & toucher á leurs mains,
               Ce que la Cour celeste & contemple & manie.
               Ie quinte-essence lame: & fay que le Poete
               Se surmontant soy mesme, enfonce vn haut discours,
               Qui, diuin, par l oreille attire les plus sourds,
               Anime les rochers, & les fleuues arreste.
               Agreable est le sonde mes doctes germaines:
               Mais leur gosier, qui peut terre & ciel enchanter,
               Ne me cede pas moins en l art de bien chanter,
               Qu'au Rossignol l'Oison, les Pies aux Syrenes.
               Pren moy donques pour guide: esleue au ciel ton aisle
               Saluste, chante moy du Tout-puissant l honneur,
               Et remontant le luth du Iessean sonneur,
               Courageux, brosse apres la couronne eternelle.
               Ie ne puis d vn oeil sec, voir mes soeurs maquerelles,
               Des amoreuz François, dont les mignards escrits
               Sont pleins de feints souspirs, de feints pleurs, de feints cris,
               D'impudiques discours, & de vaines querelles.
               Ie ne puis d vn oeil sec voir que l on mette en vente,
               Nos diuines chansons: & que d vn flateur vers,
               Pour gaigner la faueur des Princes plus peruers,
               Vn Commode, vn Neron, vn Caligule on vante.
               Mais, sur tout, ie ne puis sans souspirs & sans larmes
               Voir les vers employez contre l autheur des vers:
               
                  
Ie ne puis voir battu le Roy de l'vniuers
               De ses propres soldats, & de ses propres armes.
               L'homme a les yeux sillez de nuits Cimmeriennes,
               Et s'il a quelque bien, tant soit peu precieux,
               Par differentes mains il l a receu des cieux:
               Mais Dieu seul nous apprend les chansons Delphiennes.
               Tout art s'apprend par art: la seule Poesie
               Est vn pur don celeste & nul ne peut gouster
               Le miel, que nous faisons de Pinde degoutter
               S'il n'a d'vn sacré feu la poitrine saisie.
               De ceste source vient, que maints grands personnages
               Consommez en sçauoir, votre en prose diserts,
               Se trauaillent en vain á composer des vers:
               Et qu'vn ieune apprenti fait de plus beaux ouurages.
               De làvient que iadis le chantre Meonide,
               Combien que mendiant, & sans maistre, & sans yeux,
               A vaincu par ses vers les nouueaux, & les vieux,
               Chantant si bien Vlysse, & le preux Aeacide.
               De là vient qu'vn Nason ne peut parler en prose,
               De là vient que Dauid mes chants si tost aprit,
               De pasteur fait Poëte, & que maint ieune esprit
               Ne sçachant point nostre art, suyuant nostre art compose.
               Recherche nuict & iour les ondes Castalides:
               Regrimpe nuict & iour contre le roc Besson:
               Sois disciple d'Homere, & du sainct nourrisson
               D'Ande, l'heureux seiour des vierges Pierides.
               Lis tant que tu voudras, volume apres volume,
               Les liures de Pergame, & de la grande cité,
               
                  
Qui du nom d' Alexandre a son nom emprunté:
               Exerce incessamment & ta langue, & ta plume.
               Ioin tant que tu voudras pour vn carme bien faire
               L'obscure nuict au iour, & le iour à la nuict,
               Si ne pourras tu point cueillir vn digne fruit
               D'vn si fascheux trauail, si Pallas t'est contraire.
               Car du tout hors de l homme il fault que l homme sorte,
               Sil veut faire des vers qui facent teste aux ans:
               Il fault qu entre nos mains il sequestre ses sens:
               Il fault qu vn saint ecstase au plus haut ciell emporte.
               D autant que tout ainsi que la fureur humaine
               Rend l homme moins qu humain: la diuine fureur
               Rend l homme plus grand qu home: & d vne saincte erreur
               Sur le ciel porte-feux à son gré le promeine.
               Cest d vn si sacré lieu que les diuins poëtes
               Nous apportent ça bas de si doctes propos,
               Et des vers non suiets au pouuoir d Atropos,
               Truchemens de Nature, & du Ciel interpretes.
               Les vrais Poëtes sont tels que la cornemuse,
               Qui pleine de vent sonne, & vuide perd le son:
               Car leur fureur durant, dure aussi leur chanson:
               Et si la fureur cesse, aussi cesse leur Muse.
               Puis dōques que les vers ont au ciel pris naissance,
               Esprits vrayment diuins, aurez vous bien le coeur
               De prononcer vn vers & profane, & moqueur
               Contre cil, qui conduit des cieux astrez la danse?
               Serez vous tant ingrats, que de rendre vos plumes
               Ministres de la chair, & serues de peché?
               
                  
Tout-iour donques sera vostre style empesché
               A remplir, men songers, de songes vos volumes?
               Ferez vous, ô trōpeurs, tout-iour d'vn diable vn Ange?
               Fendrez vous tout-iour l'air de vos amoureux cris?
               Hé! n'orra on iamais dans vos doctes escrits
               Retentir haut & clair du grand Dieu la louange?
               Ne vous suffit il pas de sentir dans vostre ame
               Le Cyprien brandon, sans que plus effrontez
               Qu'vne Lays publique, encor vous euentez
               Par le monde abuse vostre impudique flāme?
               Ne vous suffit il pas de croupir en delices,
               Sans que vous corrompiez, par vos nombres charmeurs,
               Du lecteur indiscret les peu-constantes moeurs,
               Luy faisant embrasser pour les vertus les vices?
               Les tons, nombres, & chants, dont se fait l'harmonie,
               Qui rend le vers si beau, ont sur nous tel pouuoir,
               Que les plus durs Catons ils peuuent esmouuoir,
               Agitant nos esprits d'vne douce manie.
               Ainsi que le cachet dedans la cire forme
               Presque vn autre cachet, le Poete scauant,
               Va si bien dans nos coeurs ses passions grauant,
               Que presque l'auditeur en l'auteur se transforme.
               Car la force des vers, qui secrettement glisse,
               Par des secrets conduits, dans nos entendemens,
               Y empreint tous les bons & mauuais mouuemens,
               Qui sont representez par vn docte artifice.
               Et c'est pourquoy Platon hors de sa Republique
               Chassoit les escriuains, qui souloient par leurs vers
               
                  
Rendre meschans les bons, plus peruers les peruers,
               Sapans par leurs beaux mots l'honnesteté publique.
               Nō ceux qui dans leurs chāts marioient les beaux termes
               Auec les beaux suiets: ore entonnans le los
               Du iuste foudroyeur: ore d'vn saint propos,
               Seruans aux desuoyez & de guides & d'Hermes.
               Profanes escriuains, vostre impudique rime,
               Est cause, que l'on met nos chantres mieux-disans
               Au rang des basteleurs, des boufons, des plaisans:
               Et qu encore moins qu'eux le peuple les estime.
               Vous faites de Clion vne Thais impure:
               D'Heloicon vn bordeau: vous faites impudens,
               Par vos lascifs discours, que les peres prudens
               Deffendent à leurs fils des carmes la lecture.
               Mais si foulans aux pieds la deité volage,
               Qui blece de ces traits vos idolatres coeurs,
               Vous vouliez employer vos plus sainctes fureurs
               A faire voir en France vn sacré-sainct ouurage.
               Chacun vous priseroit, comme estans secretaires,
               Et ministres sacrez du Roy del vniuers.
               Chacun reuereroit comme oracles vos vers:
               Et les grands commettroient en vos mains leurs affaires.
               La liaison des vers fut iadis inuentee
               Seulement pour traitter les mysteres sacrez
               Auec plus de respect: & de long temps apres
               Par les carmes ne fut autre chose chantee.
               Ainsi mon grand Dauid sur la corde tremblante
               De son luth tout-diuin ne sonne rien que Dieu.
               
                  
Ainsi le conducteur de l'exercite Hebrieu,
               Sauué des rouges flots, le los du grand Dieu chante.
               Ainsi Iudith, Delbore, au milieu des gens d'armes,
               Ainsi Iob, Ieremie, accablez de douleurs,
               D vn carme bigarré de cent mille couleurs
               Descriuoient saintement leurs ioyes & leurs larmes.
               Voyla pour quoy Satan, qui fin se transfigure
               En Ange de clarté pour nous ensorceler,
               Ses prestres & ses dieux faisort iadis parler,
               Non d vne libre language, ains par nombre, & mesure.
               Ainsi, sous Apollon la folle Phoemonoe
               En hexametres vers ses oracles chantoit:
               Et, par douteux propos, cauteleuse affrontoit
               Non le Grec seulement, ains l'lbere, & l'Eoe.
               Ainsi l antique voix en Dodone adorée,
               Aesculape, & Ammon en vers prophetizoient,
               Les Sibylles en vers le futur predisoient,
               Et les prestres prioient en oraison nombrée.
               Ainsi Line, Hesiode, & celuy dont la lyre
               Oreil
                     •
                  oit, comme on dit, les rocs, & les forests,
               Oserent autre fois les plus diuins secrets
               De leur profond sçauoir en doctes vers es crire.
               Vouz qui tant desirez vos fronts de laurier ceindre,
               Où pourriez vous trouuer vn champ plus spacieux,
               Que le los de celuy qui tient le frein des cieux,
               Qui fait trembler les monts, qui fait l'Erebe craindre?
               Ce suiet est de vray la Corne d abondance,
               C'est vn grand magazin riche en discours faconds,
               
                  
C'est vn grand Ocean, qui n'a riue, ny fonds,
               Vn surjon immortel de diuine eloquence.
               L'humble suiet ne peut qu humble discours produire:
               Mais le graue suiet de soymesme produit
               Graues & masles mots: de soymesmes il luit,
               Et fait le sainct honneur de son chantre reluire.
               Or donc si vous veulez apres vos cendres viure,
               N'imitez Erostrat, qui pour viure, brusla
               Le temple Ephesien: ou celuy qui moula,
               Pour estendre son nom, vn cruel veau de cuiure.
               Ne vueillez employer vostre rare artifice
               A chanter la Cyprine, & son fils emplumé:
               Car il vaut beaucoup mieux n'estre point renommé,
               Que se voir renommé pour raison de son vice.
               Vierges sont les neuf soeurs, qui dancent sur Parnasse,
               Vierge vostre Pallas: & vierge ce beau corps
               Qu'vn fleuue vit changer sur les humides bords,
               En l'arbre tout-iour vert, qui vos cheueux enlace.
               Consacrez moy plustost ceste rare eloquence
               A chanter hautement les miracles compris
               Dans le sacré fueillet: & de vos beaux esprits
               Versez là, mes amis, toute la quinte-essence.
               Que Christ, comme Homme-Dieu, soit la croupe iumelle
               Sur qui vous sommeillez. Que pour cheual ailé
               L'Esprit du Trois-fois grand, d vn blanc pigeon voilé,
               Vous face ruisseter vne source immortelle.
               Tout ouurage excellent la memoire eternize
               De ceux qui tant soit peu trauaillent apres luy:
               
                  
                  Le Mausolee a fait viure iusqu auiourd huy
               Timothee, Bryace, & Scope, & Artemise.
               Hiram seroit sans nom, sans la sainte assistance
               Qu il fit au bastiment du temple d' Israël.
               Et sans l'Arche de Dieu l Hebrieu Beseleel
               Seroit enseueli sous eternel silence.
               Et puis que la beauté de ces rare souurages
               Fait viure apres la mort tous ceux qui les ont faits,
               Combien qu'auec le temps les plus seurs soient deffaits
               Par rauines, par feux, par guerres, par orages.
               Pensez, ie vous suppli, combien sera plus belle
               La louange, qu heureux, ça bas vous acquerrez,
               Lors que dans vos saints vers DIEV seul vous chanterez
               Puis qu vn nom immortel vient de chose immortelle.
               Ie sçay que vous direz que les antiques fables
               Sont l'ame de vos chants, que ces contes diuers,
               L'vn de l autre naissans, peuuent rendre vos vers
               Beaucoup plus que l'histoire au vulgaire admirables.
               Mais où peut on trouuer choses plus merueilleuses
               Que celles de la Foy? hé! quel autre argument
               Auec plus de tesmoins nostre raison desment,
               Qui rabat plus l'orgueil des ames curieuses?
               I'aymeroy mieux chanter la tour Assyrienne,
               Que les trois monts Gregeois l'vn dessus l' autre entez
               Pour dethrosner du cielles dieux espouuantez:
               Et l'onde de Noé, que la Deucalienne.
               I'aymeroy mieux chanter le changement subite
               Du Monarque d' Assur, que de l' Arcadien,
               
                  
Et le viure second du saint Bethanien,
               Que le recolement des membres d' Hippolite.
               
                  L'vn de plaire au lecteur tant seulement se mesle,
               Et l'autre seulement tasche de profiter:
               Mais seul celuy là peut le laurier meriter,
               Qui, sage, le profit auec le plaisir mesle.
               Les plus beaux promenoirs sont pres de la marine,
               Et le nager plus seur pres des riuages verds:
               Et le sage Escriuain n'esloigne dans ses vers
               Le sçauoir du plaisir, le ieu de la doctrine.
               Vous tiendrez donc ce rang en chantant choses telles:
               Car enseignans autruy, vous mesmes apprendrez
               La reigle de bien viure: & bien-heureux, rendrez
               Autant que leurs suiéts, vos chansons immortelles.
               Laissez moy donc à part ces fables surannées:
               Mes amis, laissez moy cest insolent Archer,
               Qui les coeurs otieux peut seulement brescher,
               Et plus ne soyent par vous les Muses profanées.
               Mais las! en vain ie crie, en vain, las! ie m enroue:
               Car l vn, pour ne se voir conuaincu par mon chant,
               Va, comme vn fin aspic, son oreille bouchant:
               L'autre Epicurien, de mes discours se ioue.
               
                  L'autre pour quelque temps se range en mon eschole,
               Mais le monde enchanteur soudain le me soustrait,
               Et ce discours sacré, qui les seuls bons attrait,
               Entre par vne aureille, & par lautre s'envolle.
               Las! ie n en voy pas vn qui ses deux yeux dessille
               Du bandeau de Venus, & d vn profane fiel
               
                  
De ses carmes dorez ne corrompe le miel:
               Bien que de bons esprits nostre France fourmille.
               Mais toy, mon cher mignon, que la Neufuaine saincte
               Qui de Pegase boit le surjon perennel,
               Fit le sacré sonneur du 
                     •
                  os de l' Eternel,
               Mesme auant que de toy ta mere fust enceinte:
               Bien que cest argument semble vne maigre lande,
               Que les meilleurs esprits ont en friche laisé,
               Ne sois pour l auenir de ce trauail lassé:
               Car plus la gloire est rare, & tant plus elle est grande.
               
                  SALVSTE, ne perds coeur si tu vois que l Enuie
               Aille abbayant, maligne, apres ton los naissant:
               Ne crain que sous ses pieds elle aille tapissant
               Les vers que tu feras, comme indignes de vie.
               Ce monstre blece-honneur ressemble la Mastine,
               Qui iappe contre ceux qui sont nouueau venus,
               Par donnant toutes fois à ceux qui sont congnus,
               Curtoise enuers ceux cy, enuers ceux là mutine.
               Ce monstre semble encor vne fameuse nue,
               Que le naissant Vulcan presse de toutes pars,
               Pour, noire, l estouffer de ses ondeux brouillars:
               Mais où plus ce f
                     •
                  u croist, plus elle diminue.
               Sui donc (mon cher souci) ce chemin non froyable
               Que par ceux, que le ciel, liberal, veut benir,
               Et ie iure qu en brief ie te feray tenir
               Entre les bons esprits quelque rang honorable.
               Cest par ce beau discours que la Muse celeste
               Tenant vne couronne en sa pucelle main,
               
                  
Attire à soy mon coeur d vn transport plus qu'humain,
               Tant bien à ses doux mots elle adiouste vn doux geste.
               Depuis, ce seul amour dans mes veines bouillonne:
               Depuis, ce seul vent soufle és toiles de ma nef:
               Bien-heureux si ie puis non poser sur mon chef,
               Ains du doigt seulement toucher ceste couronne.
               FINIS.
            
            
               
               THE VRANIE, OR HEAVENLY
MVSE.
               SCarce was I yet in springtyme of my years,
               When greening great for fame aboue my pears
               Did make me lose my wonted chere and rest,
               Essaying learned works with curious brest.
               But as the Pilgrim, who for lack of light,
               Cumd on the parting of two wayes at night,
               He stayes assone, and in his mynde doeth cast,
               What way to take while Moonlight yet doth last.
               So I amongst the paths vpon that hill,
               Where Phoebus crowns all verses euer still
               Of endles praise, with Laurers always grene,
               Did stay confusde, in doubt what way to mene.
               I whyles eslaide the Grece in Frenche to praise,
               Whyles in that toung I gaue a lusty glaise
               For to descryue the Troian Kings of olde,
               And them that Thebes and Mycens crowns did holde.
               And whiles I had the storye of Fraunce elected,
               Which to the Muses I should haue directed:
               My holy furie with consent of nane,
               Made frenche the Mein, and nowyse dutche the Sein.
               
               Whiles thought I to set foorth with flattring pen:
               The praise vntrewe of Kings and noble men,
               
                  
And that I might both goldeard honours haue,
               With courage basle I made my Muse a slaue.
               And whyles I thought to sing the fickle boy
               Of Cypris soft, and loues to-swete anoy,
               To lofty sprits that are therewith made blynd,
               To which discours my nature and age inclynd.
               But whill I was in doubt what way to go,
               With wind ambitious tossed to and fro:
               A holy beuty did to mee appeare,
               The Thundrers daughter seeming as she weare.
               Her porte was Angellike with Angels face,
               With comely shape and toung of heauenly grace:
               Her nynevoced mouth resembled into sound
               The daunce harmonious making heauen resound.
               Her head was honorde with a costly crown,
               Seuinfolde and round, to dyuers motions boun:
               On euery folde I know not what doth glance,
               Aboue our heads into a circuler dance.
               The first it is of Lead,The seuin Planets. of Tin the nixt,
               The third of Stele, the fourth of Golde vnmixt,
               The fyfth is made of pale Electre light,
               The sixt of Mercure, seuint of Siluer bright.
               Her corps is couured with an Asure gowne,Firmamēt
               
               Where thousand fires ar sowne both vp and downe:Fixed Starres.
               
               Whilks with an arte, but arte, confusde in order.
               Dois with their beames decore thereof the border.
               Heir shynes the Charlewain, there the Harp giues light,
               And heir the Seamans starres, and there Twinnis bright,
               
                  
And heir the Ballance, there the Fishes twaine,
               With thousand other fyres, that pas my braine.
               I am said she, that learned VRANIE,
               That to the Starres transports humanitie,
               And maks men see and twiche with hands and ene
               It that the heauenly court contempling bene.
               I quint-essence the Poets soule so well,
               While he in high discours excede him sell,
               Who by the eare the deafest doeth allure,
               Reuiues the rocks, and stayes the floods for sure.
               The tone is pleasaunt of my *Nyne Muses. sisters deir:
               Yet though their throts make heauen and earth admire,
               They yeld to me no lesse in singing well,
               Then Pye to Syraine, goose to Nightingell.
               Take me for guyde, lyft vp to heauen thy wing
               O Salust, Gods immortals honour sing:
               And bending higher Dauids Lute in tone,
               With courage seke yon endles crowne aboue.
               I no wais can, vnwet my cheekes, beholde
               My sisters made by Frenchemen macquerels olde,
               Whose mignarde writts, but faynd lamenting vaine,
               And fayned teares and shameles tales retaine.
               But weping neither can I see them spyte
               Our heauenly verse, when they do nothing wryte,
               But Princes flattry that ar tyrants rather
               Then Nero, Commode, or Caligule ather.
               But specially but sobbes I neuer shall
               Se verse bestowde gainst him made verses all,
               
                  
I can not see his proper soldiers ding
               With his owne armes him that of all is King.
               Mans eyes are blinded with Cimmerien night:
               And haue he any good, beit neuer so light,
               From heauen, by mediat moyens, he it reaches,
               Bot only God the Delphiens songs vs teaches.
               All art is learned by art, this art alone
               It is a heauenly gift: no flesh nor bone
               Can preif the honnie we from Pinde distill,
               Except with holy fyre his breest we fill.
               From that spring flowes, that men of speciall chose,
               Consumde in learning, and perfyte in prose,
               For to make verse in vane dois trauell take,
               When as a prentise-fairer works will make.
               That made that Homer, who a songster bene,
               Albeit a begger, lacking master, and ene,
               Exceded in his verse both new and olde,
               In singing Vliss and Achilles bolde.
               That made that Naso noght could speak but verse,
               That Dauid made my songs so sone reherse,
               Of pastor Poët made. yea yongmen whyles
               Vnknowing our art, yet by our art compyles.
               Seke night and day Castalias waltring waas,
               Climme day and night the twinrocks of Parnaas:
               
               Be Homers skoller,Virgill and his, was borne in Ande,
               
               The happie dwelling place of all our bande.
               How oft thou lykes reid ouer booke efter booke,
               The bookes of Troy, and of that towne which tooke
               
                  
Her name from Alexander Monark then,Alexādria
               
               Exerce but cease thy toung and eke thy pen.
               Yea, if to make good verse thou hes sic cure,
               Iovne night to day, and day to night obscure,
               Yet shall thou not the worthy frute reape so
               Of all thy paines, if Pallas be thy fo.
               For man from man must wholly parted be,
               If with his age, his verse do well agree.
               Amongst our hands, he must his witts resing,
               A holy trance to highest heauen him bring.
               For euen as humane fury maks the man,
               Les then the man: So heauenly fury can
               Make man pas man, and wander in holy mist,
               Vpon the fyrie heauen to walk at list.
               Within that place the heauenly Poets sought
               Their learning, syne to vs heare downe it brought,
               With verse that ought to Atropos no dewe,
               Dame Naturs trunchmen, heauens interprets trewe.
               For Poets right are lyke the pype alway,
               Who full doth sound, and empty stayes to play:
               Euen so their fury lasting, lasts their tone,
               Their fury ceast, their Muse doth stay aslone.
               Sen verse did then in heauen first bud and blume,
               If ye be heauenly, how dar ve presume
               A verse prophane, and mocking for to sing
               Gainst him that leads of starrie heauens the ring?
               Will ye then so ingrately make your pen,
               A slaue to sinne, and serue but fleshly men?
               
                  
Shall still your brains be busied then to fill
               With dreames, ô dreamers, euery booke and bill?
               Shall Satan still be God for your behoue?
               Still will ye riue the aire with cryes of loue?
               And shall there neuer into your works appeare,
               The praise of God, resounding loud and cleare?
               Suffisis it noght ye feele into your hairt
               The Ciprian torche, vnles more malapairt
               Then Lais commoun quean, ye blow abrod
               But shame, athort the world, your shameles god?
               Abusers, staikes it not to lurk in lust,
               Without ye smit with charming nombers iust
               The fickle maners of the reader slight,
               In making him embrace, for day, the night?
               The harmony of nomber tone and song,
               That makes the verse so fair, it is so strong
               Ouer vs, as hardest Catos it will moue,
               With spreits aflought, and sweete transported loue.
               For as into the wax the seals imprent
               Is lyke a seale, right so the Poet gent,
               Doeth graue so viue in vs his passions strange,
               As maks the reader, halfe in author change.
               For verses force is sic, that softly slydes
               Throw secret poris, and in our sences bydes,
               As makes them haue both good and euill imprented,
               Which by the learned works is represented.
               And therefore Platos common wealth did pack
               None of these Poets, who by verse did make
               
                  
The goodmen euill, and the wicked worse,
               Whose pleasaunt words betraied the publick corse.
               Not those that in their songs good tearmes alwaise
               Ioynd with fair Thems: whyles thūdring out the praise
               Of God, iust Thundrer: whyles with holy speache,
               Lyke Hermes did the way to strayers teache.
               Your shameles rymes, are cause, ô Scrybes prophane,
               That in the lyke opinion we remaine
               With Iuglers, buffons, and that foolish seames:
               Yea les then them, the people of vs esteames.
               For Clio ye put Thais vyle in vre,
               For Helicon a bordell. Ye procure
               By your lasciuious speache, that fathers sage
               Defends verse reading, to their yonger age.
               But lightleing *Cupide yon fleing godhead slight,
               Who in Idolatrous breasts his darts hath pight.
               If that ye would imploy your holy traunce,
               To make a holy hallowde worke in Fraunce:
               Then euery one wolde worthy scribes you call,
               And holy seruants to the King of all.
               Echone your verse for oracles wolde take,
               And great men of their counsell wolde you make.
               The verses knitting was found out and try it,
               For singing only holy mysteries by it
               With greater grace. And efter that, were pend
               Longtyme no verse, but for that only end.
               Euen so my Dauid on the trembling strings
               Of heauenly harps, Gods only praise he sings.
               
                  
Euen so the leader of the Hebrevv hoste,
               Gods praise did sing vpon the Redsea coste.
               So Iudith and Delbor in the soldiers throngs,
               So Iob and Ieremie, preast with woes and wrongs,
               Did right descryue their ioyes, their woes and torts,
               In variant verse of hundreth thousand sorts.
               And therefore crafty Sathan, who can seame
               An Angell of light, to witch vs in our dreame,
               He causde his gods and preests of olde to speake
               By nomber and measure, which they durst not breake.
               So fond Phoemonoë ynder Apollos wing,
               Her oracles Hexameter did sing:
               With doubtsum talk she craftely begylde,
               Not only Grece, but Spaine and Indes she sylde.
               That olde voce serude in Dodon, spak in verse,
               So Aesculap did, and so did Ammon fearse,
               So Sybills tolde in verse, what was to come:
               The Pre
                     •
                  sts did pray by nombers, all and some.
               So Hesiod, Line and he *Orpheus whose Lute they say,
               Made rocks and forrests come to heare him play,
               Durst well their heauenly secrets all discloes,
               In learned verse, that softly slydes and goes.
               O ye that wolde your browes with Laurel bind,
               What larger feild I pray you can you find,
               Then is his praise, who brydles heauens most cleare,
               Maks mountaines tremble, and howest hells to feare?
               That is a horne of plenty well repleat:
               That is a storehouse riche, a learning seat.
               
                  
An Ocean hudge, both lacking shore and ground,
               Of heauenly eloquence a spring profound.
               From subiects base, a base discours dois spring,
               A lofty subiect of it selfe doeth bring
               Graue words and weghtie, of it selfe diuine,
               And makes the authors holy honour shine.
               If ye wolde after ashes liue, bewaire,
               To do lyke Erostrat, who brunt the faire
               
                  Ephesian temple, or him, to win a name,
               *Ferill
                        ••
                     
                   Who built of brasse, the crewell Calfe vntame.
               Let not your art so rare then be defylde,
               In singing Venus and her fethred chylde:
               For better it is without renowme to be,
               Then be renowmde for vyle iniquitie.
               Those nyne are Maides, that daunce vpon Parnaas?
               
               Learnd Pallas is a Virgin pure, lyke as
               *Daphne That fair, whome waters changed on wattry banks
               Into *Laurell that trestill grene, your hair that hanks.
               Then consecrat that eloquence most rair,
               To sing the lofty miracles and fair
               Of holy Scripture: and of your good ingyne,
               Poure out, my frends, there your fift essence fyne.
               Let Christ both God and man your Twinrock be,
               Whome on ye slepe: for that *Pegasus hors who did fle,
               Speak of that *Holy ghost. thryse great spreit, whose dow most white
               Mote make your spring flow euer with delyte.
               All excellent worke beare record euer shall,
               Of trauellers in it, though their paines be small.
               
                  
The Mausole tombe the names did eternise
               Of Scope, Timotheus, Briace and Artemise.
               
               But Hirams holy help, it war vnknowne
               What he in building Izraels Temple had showne,
               Without Gods Ark Beseleel Iewe had bene
               In euerlasting silence buried clene.
               Then, since the bewty of those works most rare
               Hath after death made liue all them that ware
               Their builders: though them selues with tyme be failde,
               By spoils, by fyres, by warres, and tempests quailde.
               I pray you think, how mekle fairer shall
               Your happie name heir downe be, when as all
               Your holy verse, great God alone shall sing,
               Since praise immortall commes of endles thing.
               I know that ye will say, the auncient rables
               Decores your songs, and that *Metamorphosis those dyuers fables,
               Ilk bred of other, doeth your verses mak
               More loued then storyes by the vulgar pack.
               But where can there more wondrous things be found,
               Then those of faith? ô fooles, what other ground,
               With witnes mo, our reasons quyte improues,
               Beats doun our pryde, that curious questions moues?
               I had farr rather Babell tower forthsett,
               Then the *Offa, Pindus, and Olympus thre Grecian hilles on others plett,
               To pull doun gods afraide, and in my moode,
               Sing Noë s rather then Deucalions floode.
               I had far rather sing the suddaine change
               Of Assurs monark,Nabuchadnezer. then of Arcas strange.
               
                  
Of the *Lazarus 
                  Bethaniens holy second liuing,
               Then Hippolitts with members glewde reuiuing.
               To please the Reader is the ones whole cair,
               The vther for to proffite mair and mair:
               But only he of Laurell is conding,
               Who wysely can with proffit, pleasure ming.
               The fairest walking on the Sea coast bene,
               And suirest swimming where the braes are grene:
               So, wyse is he, who in his verse can haue
               Skill mixt with pleasure, sports with doctrine graue.
               In singing kepe this order showen you heir,
               Then ye your self, in teaching men shall leir
               The rule of liuing well, and happely shall
               Your songs make, as your thems immortall all.
               No more into those oweryere lies delyte,
               My friends, cast of that insolent archer quyte,
               Who only may the ydle harts surpryse:
               Prophane no more the Muses with yon cryes.
               But oh! in vaine, with crying am I horce:
               For lo, where one, noght caring my songs force,
               Goes lyke a crafty snaik, and stoppes his eare:
               The other godles, mocks and will not heare.
               Ane other at my schoole abydes a space,
               While charming world withdrawe him frō that place:
               So that discours, that maks good men reiose,
               At one eare enters, and at the other goes.
               Alas, I se not one vnvaill his ene
               From Venus vaill and gal prophane, that bene
               
                  
To golden honnied verse, the only harme,
               Although our France with lofty sprits doth swarme.
               But thou my deir one, whome the holy Nyne,
               
               Who yearly drinks Pegasis fountaine fyne,
               The great gods holy songster had receiued,
               Yea, euen before thy mother the conceiued.
               Albeit this subiect seame a barren ground,
               With quickest spreits left ley, as they it found,
               Irk not for that heirefter of thy paine,
               Thy glore by rairnes greater shall remaine.
               O Salust, lose not heart, though pale Inuye
               Bark at thy praise increasing to the skye,
               Feare not that she tread vnder foote thy verse,
               As if they were vnworthie to reherse.
               This monster honnors-hurt i lyke the urr,
               That barks at strangers comming to the durr,
               But sparing alwaies those are to him known,
               To them most gentle, to the others throwin.
               This monster als is lyke a rauing cloude,
               Which threatnes alwayis kendling Vulcan loude.
               To smore and drowne him, with her powring raine,
               Yet force of fyre repellis her power againe.
               Then follow furth, my sonne, that way vnfeard,
               Of them whom in fre heauens gift hath appeard.
               And heare I sweare, thou shortly shall resaue
               Some noble rank among good spreits and graue.
               This heauenly Muse by such discourses fair,
               Who in her Virgin hand a riche crowne bair:
               
                  
So drew to her my heart, so farr transported,
               And with swete grace, so swetely she exhorted:
               As since that loue into my braines did brew,
               And since that only wind my shipsailles blew,
               I thought me blest, if I might only clame
               To touche that crown, though not to weare the same.
               FINIS.
            
         
         
            
               
               
               ANE METAPHORICALL
INVENTION OF A TRAGEDIE
CALLED PHOENIX.
            
            
               
               A Colomne of 18 lynes seruing for a Preface
to the Tragedie ensuyng.
               
                  
                     syllables 1 Elf 
                     syllables 1
               
               
                  
                     syllables 2 Echo 
                     syllables 2
               
               
                  
                     syllables 3 help, that both 
                     syllables 3
               
               
                  
                     syllables 4 together we,
                     syllables 4
               
               
                  
                     syllables 5 Since cause there be, may 
                     syllables 5
               
               
                  
                     syllables 6 now lament with tearis, My 
                     syllables 6
               
               
                  
                     syllables 7 murnefull yearis. Ye furies als 
                     syllables 7
               
               
                  
                     syllables 8 with him, Euen Pluto grim, who duells 
                     syllables 8
               
               
                  
                     syllables 9 in dark, that he, Since cheif we se him 
                     syllables 9
               
               




                  
                     syllables 10 to you all that bearis The style men fearis of 
                     syllables 10
               
               
                  
                     syllables 11 Dirae, I request, Eche greizlie ghest that dwells 
                     syllables 11
               
               
                  
                     syllables 12 beneth the see, With all yon thre, whose hairs are snaiks 
                     syllables 12
               
               
                  
                     syllables 12 full blew, And all your crew, assist me in thir twa:
                     syllables 12
               
               
                  
                     syllables 11 Repeit and sha my Tragedie full neir, The 
                     syllables 11
               
               
                  
                     syllables 10 chance fell heir▪ then secundlie is best, Deuills 
                     syllables 10
               
               
                  
                     syllables 9 void of rest▪ ye moue all that it reid,
                     syllables 9
               
               
                  
                     syllables 8 With me in deid lyke dolour them 
                     syllables 8
               
               
                  
                     syllables 7 to griv', I then will liv' in 
                     syllables 7
               
               
                  
                     syllables 6 lesser greif therebj. Kyth 
                     syllables 6
               
               






                  
                     syllables 5 heir and try your force 
                     syllables 5
               
               
                  
                     syllables 4 ay bent and quick,
                     syllables 4
               
               
                  
                     syllables 3 Excell in 
                     syllables 3
               
               
                  
                     syllables 2 sik like 
                     syllables 2
               
               
                  
                     syllables 1 ill,
                     syllables 1
               
               and murne with
               me. From Delphos syne
               Apollo cum with speid: Whose
               
shining light my cairs will dim in deid.
            
            
               
               The expansion of the
former Colomne.
               Elf Echo help, that both together w E
               (S ince cause there be) may now lamēt with teari S
               M y murnefull yearis. Ye furies als with hi M
               E uen Pluto grim, who dwels in dark, that h E
               S ince cheif we se him to you all that beari S
               T he style men fearis of Dirae: I reques T
               E che greizlie ghest, that dwells beneth the S E
               With all yon thre, whose hairis ar snaiks full ble W
               A nd all your crew, assist me in thir tw A
               R epeit and sha my Tragedie full nei R
               T he chance fell heir. Then secoundlie is bes T
               D euils void of rest, ye moue all that it rei D
               W ith me, indeid, lyke dolour thame to gri V
               I then will liv', in lesser greif therebi I
               K ythe heir and trie, your force ay bent and quic K
               E xcell in sik lyke ill, and murne with m E
               From Delphos syne Apollo cum with speid,
               VVhose shining light my cairs wil dim in deid.
            
            
               
               
               PHOENIX.
               
                  THE dyuers falls, that Fortune geuis to men,
                  By turning ouer her quheill to their annoy,
                  When I do heare thē grudge, although they ken
                  That old blind Dame, delytes to let the ioy
                  Of all, suche is her vse, which dois conuoy
                  Her quheill by gess: not looking to the right,
                  Bot still turnis vp that pairt quhilk is too light.
               
               
                  Thus quhen I hard so many did complaine,
                  Some for the losse of worldly wealth and geir,
                  Some death of frends, quho can not come againe,
                  Some losse of health, which vnto all is deir,
                  Some losse of fame, which still with it dois beir
                  Ane greif to them, who mereits it indeid:
                  Yet for all thir appearis there some remeid.
               
               
                  For as to geir, lyke chance as made you want it,
                  Restore you may the same againe or mair.
                  For death of frends, although the same (I grant it)
                  Can noght returne, yet men are not so rair,
                  Bot ye may get the lyke. For seiknes sair
                  Your health may come: or to ane better place
                  Ye must. For fame, good deids will mend disgrace.
               
               
                  
                  Then, fra I saw (as I already told)
                  How men complaind for things whilk might amend,
                  How Dauid Lindsay did complaine of old
                  His Papingo, her death, and sudden end,
                  Ane common foule, whose kinde be all is kend.
                  All these hes moved me presently to tell
                  Ane Tragedie, in griefs thir to excell.
               
               
                  For I complaine not of sic common cace,
                  Which diuersly by diuers means dois fall:
                  But I lament my Phoenix rare, whose race,
                  Whose kynde, whose kin, whose ofspring, they be all
                  In her alone, whome I the Phoenix call.
                  That fowle which only one at onis did liue,
                  Not liues, alas! though I her praise reviue.
               
               
                  In Arabie cald Foelix was she bredd
                  This foule, excelling Iris farr in hew.
                  Whose body whole, with purpour was owercledd,
                  Whose taill of coulour was celestiall blew,
                  With skarlat pennis that through it mixed grew:
                  Her craig was like the yallowe burnisht gold,
                  And she her self thre hundreth yeare was old.
               
               
                  
                  She might haue liued as long againe and mair,
                  If fortune had not stayde dame Naturs will:
                  Six hundreth yeares and fourtie was her scair,
                  Which Nature ordained her for to fulfill.
                  Her natiue soile she hanted euer still,
                  Except to Egypt whiles she tooke her course,
                  Wherethrough great Nylus down runs frō his sourse.
               
               
                  Like as ane hors, when he is barded haile,
                  An fethered pannach set vpon his heid,
                  Will make him seame more braue: Or to assaile
                  The enemie, he that the troups dois leid,
                  Ane pannache on his healme will set in deid:
                  Euen so, had Nature, to decore her face,
                  Giuen her ane tap, for to augment her grace.
               
               
                  In quantitie, she dois resemble neare
                  Vnto the foule of mightie Iove, by name
                  The Aegle calld: oft in the time of yeare,
                  She vsde to soir, and flie through diuers realme,
                  Out through the Azure skyes, whill she did shame
                  The Sunne himself, her coulour was so bright,
                  Till he abashit beholding such a light.
               
               
                  
                  Thus whill she vsde to scum the skyes about,
                  At last she chanced to sore out ower the see
                  Calld Mare Rubrum: yet her course held out
                  Whill that she past whole Asie Syne to flie
                  To Europe small she did resolue. To drie
                  Her voyage out, at last she came in end
                  Into this land, ane stranger heir vnkend.
               
               
                  Ilk man did maruell at her forme most rare.
                  The winter came, and storms cled all the feild:
                  Which storms, the land of fruit and corne made bare,
                  Then did she flie into an house for beild,
                  VVhich from the storms might saue her as an sheild.
                  There, in that house she first began to tame,
                  I came, syne tooke her furth out of the same.
               
               
                  Fra I her gat, yet none could gess what sort
                  Of foule she was, nor from what countrey cum:
                  Nor I my self: except that be her port,
                  And glistring hewes I knew that she was sum
                  Rare stranger foule, which oft had vsde to scum
                  Through diuers lands, delyting in her flight;
                  VVhich made vs see, so strange and rare a sight.
               
               
                  
                  Whill at the last, I chanced to call to minde
                  How that her nature, did resemble neir
                  To that of Phoenix which I red. Her kinde,
                  Her hewe, her shape, did mak it plaine appeir,
                  She was the same, which now was lighted heir.
                  This made me to esteme of her the more,
                  Her name and rarenes did her so decore.
               
               
                  Thus being tamed, and throughly weill acquent.
                  She toke delyte (as she was wount before)
                  VVhat tyme that Titan with his beames vpsprent,
                  To take her flight, amongs the skyes to soire.
                  Then came to her of fowlis, a woundrous store
                  Of diuers kinds, some simple fowlis, some ill
                  And rauening fowlis, whilks simple onis did kill.
               
               
                  And euen as they do swarme about their king
                  The hunnie Bees, that works into the hyue:
                  VVhen he delyts furth of the skepps to spring,
                  Then all the leaue will follow him belyue,
                  Syne to be nixt him bisselie they striue:
                  So, all thir fowlis did follow her with beir,
                  For loue of her, fowlis reuening did no deir.
               
               
                  
                  Such was the loue, and reuerence they her bure,
                  Ilk day whill euen, ay whill they shedd at night.
                  Fra time it darkned, I was euer sure
                  Of her returne, remaining whill the light,
                  And Phoebus rysing with his garland bright.
                  Such was her trueth, fra time that she was tame,
                  She, who in brightnes Titans self did shame.
               
               
                  By vse of this, and hanting it, at last
                  She made the soules, fra time that I went out,
                  Aboue my head to flie, and follow fast
                  Her, who was chief and leader of the rout.
                  When it grew lait, she made them flie, but doubt,
                  Or feare, euen in the closse with her of will,
                  Syne she her self, perkt in my chalmer still.
               
               
                  When as the countreys round about did heare
                  Of this her byding in this countrey cold,
                  Which not but hills, and darknes ay dois beare,
                  (And for this cause was Scotia calld of old,)
                  Her lyking here, when it was to them told,
                  And how she greind not to go backe againe:
                  The loue they bure her, turnd into disdaine.
               
               
                  
                  Lo, here the fruicts, whilks of Inuy dois breid,
                  To harme them all, who vertue dois imbrace.
                  Lo, here the fruicts, from her whilks dois proceid,
                  To harme them all, that be in better cace
                  Then others be. So followed they the trace
                  Of proud Inuy, thir countrey is lying neir,
                  That such a foule, should lyke to tary heir.
               
               
                  Whill Fortoun at the last, not onely moued
                  
                     Inuy to this, which could her not content,
                  Whill that Inuy, did sease some foules that loued
                  Her anis as semed: but yet their ill intent
                  Kythed, when they saw all other foules still bent
                  To follow her, misknowing them at all.
                  This made them worke her vndeserued fall.
               
               
                  Thir were the rau
                        •
                     ning fowls, whome of I spak
                  Before, the whilks (as I already shew)
                  Was wount into her presence to hald bak
                  Their crueltie, from simple ones, that flew
                  With her, ay whill Inuy all feare withdrew.
                  Thir ware, the Rauin, the Stainchell, & the Gled,
                  
                  With others kynds, whome in this malice bred.
               
               
                  
                  Fra Malice thus was rooted be Inuy,
                  
                  In them as sone the awin effects did shaw.
                  VVhich made them syne, vpon ane day, to spy
                  And wait till that, as she was wount, she flaw
                  Athort the skyes, syne did they neir her draw,
                  Among the other fowlis of dyuers kynds,
                  Although they ware farr dissonant in mynds.
               
               
                  For where as they ware wount her to obey,
                  Their mynde farr contrair then did plaine appeare.
                  For then they made her as a commoun prey
                  To them, of whome she looked for no deare,
                  They strake at her so bitterly, whill feare
                  Stayde other fowlis to preis for to defend her
                  From thir ingrate, whilks now had clene miskend her.
               
               
                  When she could find none other saue refuge
                  From these their bitter straiks, she fled at last
                  To me (as if she wolde wishe me to iudge
                  The wrong they did her) yet they followed fast
                  Till she be
                        •
                     uix my leggs her selfe did cast.
                  For sauing her from these, which her opprest,
                  Whose hote pursute, her suffred not to rest.
               
               
                  
                  Bot yet at all that servd not for remeid,
                  For noghttheles, they spaird her not a haire.
                  In stede of her, yea whyles they made to bleid
                  My leggs: (so grew their malice mair and mair)
                  Which made her both to rage and to dispair,
                  First, that but cause they did her such dishort:
                  Nixt, that she laked help in any sort.
               
               
                  Then hauing tane ane dry and wethered stra,
                  In deip dispair, and in ane lofty rage
                  She sprang vp heigh, outfl
                        •
                     ing euery fa:
                  Syne to Panchaia came, to change her age
                  Vpon Apollos altar, to asswage
                  With outward fyre her inward raging fyre:
                  Which then was all her cheif and whole desyre.
               
               
                  Then being carefull, the event to know
                  Of her, who homeward had returnde againe
                  Where she was bred, where storms dois neuer blow,
                  Nor bitter blasts, nor winter snows, nor raine,
                  But sommer still: that countray doeth so staine
                  All realmes in fairnes. There in haste I sent,
                  Of her to know they slew and event.
               
               
                  
                  The messinger went there into sic haste,
                  As could permit the farrnes of the way,
                  By crossing ower sa mony countreys waste
                  Or he come there. Syne with a lytle stay
                  Into that land, drew homeward euery day:
                  In his returne, lyke diligence he shew
                  As in his going there, through realmes anew.
               
               
                  Fra he returnd, then sone without delay
                  I speared at him, (the certeantie to try)
                  What word of Phoenix which was flowen away?
                  And if through all the lands he could her spy,
                  Where through he went, I bad him not deny,
                  But tell the trueth, yea whither good or ill
                  Was come of her, to wit it was my will.
               
               
                  He tolde me then, how she flew bak againe,
                  Where fra she came▪ and als he did receit,
                  How in Panchaia toun, she did remaine
                  On Phoebus altar, there for to compleit
                  With Thus and Myrrh, and other odours sweit
                  Of flowers of dyuers kyndes, and of Incens
                  
                  Her nest With that he left me in suspens.
               
               
                  
                  Till that I charged him no wayes for to spair,
                  Bot presently to tell me out the rest.
                  He tauld me then, How Titans garland thair
                  Inflamde be heate, reflexing on her nest,
                  The withered stra, which when she was opprest
                  Heir be you fowlis, she bure ay whill she came
                  There, syne aboue her nest she laid the same.
               
               
                  And syne he tolde, how she had such desyre
                  To burne her self, as she sat downe therein.
                  Syne how the Sunne the withered stra did fyre,
                  Which brunt her nest, her fethers, bones, and skin
                  All turnd in ash. Whose end dois now begin
                  My woes: her death maks lyfe to greif in me.
                  She, whome I rew my eyes did euer see.
               
               
                  O deuills of darknes, contraire vnto light,
                  In Phoebus fowle, how could ye get such place,
                  Since ye are hated ay be Phoebus bright?
                  For still is sene his light dois darknes chace.
                  But yet ye went into that fowle, whose grace,
                  As Phoebus fowle, yet ward the Sunne him sell.
                  Her light his staind, whome in all light dois dwell.
               
               
                  
                  And thou (ô Phoenix) why was thow so moued
                  Thow foule of light, be enemies to thee,
                  For to forget thy heauenly hewes, whilkis loued
                  Were baith by men and fowlis that did them see?
                  And syne in hewe of ashe that they sould bee
                  Conuerted all: and that thy goodly shape
                  In Chaos sould, and noght the fyre escape?
               
               
                  And thow (ô reuthles Death) sould thow deuore
                  Her? who not only passed by all mens mynde
                  All other fowlis in hew, and shape, but more
                  In rarenes (sen there was none of her kynde
                  But she alone) whome with thy stounds thow pynde:
                  And at the last, hath perced her through the hart,
                  But reuth or pitie, with thy mortall dart.
               
               
                  Yet worst of all, she liued not half her age.
                  Why stayde thou Tyme at least, which all dois teare
                  To worke with her? O what a cruell rage,
                  To cut her off, before her threid did weare!
                  VVherein all Planets keeps their course, that yeare
                  It was not by the half yet worne away,
                  VVhich sould with her haue ended on a day.
               
               
                  
                  Then fra thir newis, in sorrows soped haill,
                  Had made vs both a while to holde our peace,
                  Then he began and said, Pairt of my taill
                  Is yet vntolde, Lo here one of her race,
                  Ane worme bred of her ashe: Though she, alace,
                  (Said he) be brunt, this lacks but plumes and breath
                  To be lyke her, new gendred by her death.
               
               
                  L'envoy.
                  
                     
                        Apollo then, who brunt with thy reflex
                     Thine onely fowle, through loue that thou her bure,
                     Although thy fowle, (whose name doeth end in X)
                     Thy burning heat on nowayes could indure,
                     But brunt thereby: Yet will I the procure,
                     Late foe to Phoenix, now her freind to be:
                     Reuiuing her by that which made her die.
                  
                  
                     Draw farr from heir, mount heigh vp through the air,
                     To gar thy heat and beames be law and neir.
                     That in this countrey, which is colde and bair,
                     Thy glistring beames als ardent may appeir
                     As they were oft in Arabie: so heir
                     Let them be now, to mak ane Phoenix new
                     Euen of this worme of Phoenix ashe which grew.
                  
                  
                     
                     This if thow dois, as sure I hope thou shall,
                     My tragedie a comike end will haue:
                     Thy work thou hath begun, to end it all.
                     Els made ane worme, to make her out the laue.
                     This Epitaphe, then beis on Phoenix graue.
                     Here lyeth, vvhome too euen be her death and end
                     Apollo hath a longer lyfe her send.
                  
                  FINIS.
               
            
         
         
            
            A PARAPHRASTICALL
TRANSLATION OVT OF
THE POETE LVCANE▪
            
            
            
            LVCANVS LIB.
QVINTO.
            
               
                  CAesaris an cursus vestrae sentire putatis
                  Damnum posse fugae? Veluti si cuncta minentur
                  Flumina, quos miscent pelago, subducere fontes:
                  Non magis ablatis vnquam decreverit aequor,
                  Quam nunc crescit aquis. An vos momenta putatis
                  Vlla dedisse mihi?
               
            
            
               If all the floods amongst them wold conclude
               To stay their course from running in the see:
               And by that means wold thinke for to delude
               The Ocean, who sould impaired be,
               As they supposde, beleuing if that he
               Did lack their floods, he should decresse him sell:
               Yet if we like the veritie to wye,
               It pairs him nothing: as I shall you tell.
            
            
               For out of him they are augmented all,
               And most part creat, as ye shall persaue:
               For when the Sunne doth souk the vapours small
               Forth of the seas, whilks them conteine and haue,
               A part in winde, in wete and raine the laue
               He render dois: which doth augment their strands.
               Of Neptuns woll a coate syne they him weaue,
               By hurling to him fast out ower the lands.
            
            
               
               When all is done, do to him what they can
               None can persaue that they do swell him mair.
               I put the case then that they neuer ran:
               Yet not theless that could him nowise pair:
               VVhat needs he then to count it, or to cair,
               Except their folies wold the more be shawin?
               Sen though they stay, it harmes him not a hair,
               what gain they, thogh they had their course withdrawē?
            
            
               So euen siclike: Though subiects do coniure
               For to rebell against their Prince and King:
               By leauing him although they hope to smure
               That grace, wherewith God maks him for to ring,
               Though by his gifts he shaw him selfe bening,
               To help their need, and make them thereby gaine:
               Yet lack of them no harme to him doth bring,
               VVhen they to rewe their folie shalbe faine.
            
            
               L'enuoy.
               
                  Then Floods runne on your wounted course of olde,
                  Which God by Nature dewly hes prouyded:
                  For though ye stay, as I before haue tolde,
                  And cast in doubt which God hath els decyded:
                  To be conioynde, by you to be deuyded:
                  To kythe your spite, & do the Depe no skaith:
                  Farre better were in others ilk confyded,
                  Ye Floods, thou Depe, whilks were your dewties baith.
               
               FINIS.
            
         
         
            
               
               ANE SCHORT
TREATISE,
CONTEINING SOME REVLIS
and cautelis to be obseruit and
eschewit in Scottis
Poesie.
            
            
               
               A QVADRAIN OF ALEXANDRIN
VERSE, DECLARING TO QVHOME THE
Authour hes directit his labour.
               To ignorants obdurde, quhair vvilfull errour lyis,
               Nor ȝit to curious folks, quhilks carping dois deiect thee,
               Nor ȝit to learned men, quha thinks thame onelie vvyis,
               Bot to the docile bairns of knavvledge I direct thee.
            
            
               
               THE PREFACE TO
the Reader.
               THE cause why (docile Reader) I haue not dedicat
this short treatise to any particular personis, (as cō
                  mounly
workis vsis to be) is, that I esteme all thais
quha hes already some beginning of knawledge,
with ane earnest desyre to atteyne to farther, alyke meit
for the reading of this worke, or any vther, quhilk may
help thame to the atteining to thair foirsaid desyre. Bot
as to this work, quhilk is intitulit, The Reulis and cautelis
to be obseruit & eschevvit in Scottis Poesie, ȝe may maruell
paraventure, quhairfore I sould haue writtin in that
mater, sen sa mony learnit men, baith of auld and of late
hes already written thairof in dyuers and sindry languages:
I answer, That nochtwithstanding, I haue lykewayis
writtin of it, for twa caussis: The ane is, As for thē
that wrait of auld, lyke as the tyme is changeit sensyne, sa
is the ordour of Poesie changeit. For then they obseruit
not Flovving, nor eschewit not Ryming in termes,
besydes sindrie vther thingis, quhilk now we obserue, &
eschew, and dois weil in sa doing: because that now, quhē
the warld is waxit auld, we haue all their opinionis in
writ, quhilk were learned before our tyme, besydes our
awin ingynis, quhair as they then did it onelie be thair

awin ingynis, but help of any vther. Thairfore,
quhat I speik of Poesie now, I speik of it, as being
come to mannis age and perfectioun, quhair as then,
it was bot in the infancie and chyldheid. The vther
cause is, That as for thame that hes written in it of late,
there hes neuer ane of thame written in our language.
For albeit sindrie hes written of it in English, quhilk is
lykest to our language, ȝit we differ from thame in sindrie
reulis of Poesie, as ȝe will find be experience I haue
lykewayis omittit dyuers figures, quhilkis are necessare
to be vsit in verse, for twa causis. The ane is, because
they are vsit in all languages, and thairfore are spokin of
be Du Bellay, and sindrie vtheris, quha hes writtē in this
airt. Quhairfore gif I wrait of thame also, it sould seme
that I did bot repete that, quhilk thay haue written, and
ȝit not sa weil, as thay haue done already. The vther
cause is, that they are figures of Rhetorique and Dialectique,
quhilkis airtis I professe nocht, and thairfore will
apply to my selfe the counsale, quhilk Apelles gaue to
the shoomaker, quhē he said to him, seing him find falt
with the shankis of the Image of Venus, efter that he had
found falt with the pantoun, Ne sutor vltra crepidam.
               
               I will also wish ȝow (docile Reidar) that or ȝe cūmer
ȝow with reiding thir reulis, ȝe may find in ȝour self sie
a beginning of Nature, as ȝe may put in practise in ȝour
verse many of thir foirsaidis preceptis, or euer ȝe sie them
as they are heir set doun. For gif Nature be nocht the
cheif worker in this airt, Reulis wilbe bot a band to Nature,

and will mak ȝow within short space weary of the
haill airt: quhair as, gif Nature be cheif, and bent to it,
reulis will be ane help and staff to Nature. I will end
heir, lest my preface be langer nor my purpose and haill
mater following: wishing ȝow, docile Reidar, als gude
succes and great proffeit by reiding this short treatise, as
I tuke earnist and willing panis to blok it, as ȝe sie, for
ȝour cause. Fare weill.
               I Haue insert in the hinder end of this Treatise, maist
kyndis of versis quhilks are not cuttit or brokin, bot
alyke many feit in euerie lyne of the verse, and how they
are commounly namit, with my opinioun for quhat
subiectis ilk kynde of thir verse is meitest to be vsit.
               TO knaw the quantitie of ȝour lang or short fete in
they lynes, quhilk I haue put in the reule, quhilk
teachis ȝow to knaw quhat is Flovving, I haue markit
the lang fute with this mark,—and abone
the heid of the shorte fute, I
haue put this mark v.
               
            
            
               
               SONNET OF THE AVTHOVR
TO THE READER.
               SEn for ȝour saik I vvryte vpon ȝour airt,
               Apollo, Pan, and ȝe ô Musis nyne
               And thou, ô Mercure, for to help thy pairt
               
                  I do implore, sen thou be thy ingyne,
               Nixt efter Pan had found the quhissill, syne
               Thou did perfyte, that quhilk he bot espyit:
               And efter that made Argus for to tyne
               (quha kepit Io) all his vvindois by it.
               Concurre ȝe Gods, it can not be denyit:
               Sen in your airt of Poësie I vvryte.
               Auld birds to learne by teiching it is tryit:
               
                  Sic docens discam gif ȝe help to dyte.
               Then Reidar sie of nature thou haue pairt,
               Syne laikis thou nocht, bot heir to reid the airt.
            
            
               
               SONNET DECIFRING
THE PERFYTE POETE.
               ANe rype ingyne, ane quick and vvalkned vvitt,
               VVith sommair reasons, suddenlie applyit,
               For euery purpose vsing reasons fitt,
               VVith skilfulnes, vvhere learning may be spyit,
               With pithie vvordis, for to expres ȝovv by it
               His full intention in his proper leid,
               The puritie quhair of, vveill hes he tryit:
               With memorie to keip quhat he dois reid,
               With skilfulnes and figuris, quhilks proceid
               From Rhetorique, vvith euerlasting fame,
               With vthers vvoundring, preassing vvith all speid
               For to atteine to merite sic a name.
               All thir into the perfyte Poëte be.
               Goddis, grant I may obteine the Laurell trie.
            
            
               
               
               THE REVLIS AND CAVTELIS
TO BE OBSERVIT
and eschewit in Scottis
Poesie.
               
                  CAP. I.
                  
                     FIRST, ȝe sall keip iust cullouris,
quhair of the cautelis are thir.
                  That ȝe ryme nocht twyse in
ane syllabe. As for exemple, that ȝe
make not proue and reproue ryme together,
nor houe for houeing on hors
bak, and behoue.
                  
                  That ȝe ryme ay to the hinmest lang syllabe, (with accent)
in the lyne, suppose it be not the hinmest syllabe in
the lyne, as bakbyte ȝovv, & out flyte ȝovv, It rymes in
byte & flyte, because of the lenth of the syllabe, & accent
being there, and not in ȝovv, howbeit it be the hinmest
syllabe of ather of the lynis. Or question and digestion,
It rymes in ques & ges, albeit they be bot the antepenult
syllabis, and vther twa behind ilkane of thame.
                  Ȝe aucht alwayis to note, That as in thir foirsaidis, or
the lyke wordis, it rymes in the hinmest lang syllabe in
the lyne, althoucht there be vther short syllabis behind
it, Sa is the hinmest lang syllabe the hinmest fute, suppose
there be vther short syllabis behind it, quhilkis are
eatin vp in the pronounceing, and na wayis comptit as
fete.
                  
                     
Ȝe man be war likewayis (except necessitie compell
yow) with Ryming in Termis, quhilk is to say, that your
first or hinmest word in the lyne, exceid not twa or thre
syllabis at the maist, vsing thrie als seindill as ye can. The
cause quhairfore ȝe sall not place a long word first in the
lyne, is, that all lang words hes ane syllabe in them sa verie
lang, as the lenth thair of eatis vp in the pronouncing
euin the vther syllabes, quhilks ar placit lang in the same
word, and thairfore spillis the flowing of that lyne. As
for exēple, in this word, Arabia, the second syllabe (ra) is
sa lang, that it eatis vp in the prononcing [a] quhilk is the
hinmest syllabe of the same word. Quhilk [a] althocht
it be in a lang place, ȝit it kythis not sa, because of the
great lenth of the preceding syllabe (ra). As to the cause
quhy ȝe sall not put a lang word hinmest in the lyne, It
is, because, that the lenth of the secound syllabe (ra) eating
vp the lenth of the vther lang syllabe, [a] makis it to serue
bot as a tayle vnto it, together with the short syllabe preceding.
And because this tayle nather seruis for cullour
nor fute, as I spak before, it man be thairfore repetit in
the nixt lyne ryming vnto it, as it is set doune in the first:
quhilk makis, that ȝe will scarcely get many wordis to
ryme vnto it, ȝea, nane at all will ȝe finde to ryme to sindrie
vther langer wordis. Thairfore cheifly be warre
of inserting sic lang wordis hinmest in the lyne, for the
cause quhilk I last allegit. Besydis that nather first nor
last in the lyne, it keipis na Flovving. The reulis & cautelis
quhairof are thir, as followis.
               
               
                  
                  CHAP. II.
                  FIRST, ȝe man vnderstād that all syllabis are deuydit
in thrie kindes: That is, some schort, some lang,
and some indifferent. Be indifferent I meane, thay
quhilk are ather lang or short, according as ȝe place
thame.
                  The forme of placeing syllabes in verse, is this. That
ȝour first syllabe in the lyne be short, the second lang, the
thrid short, the fourt lang, the fyft short, the sixt lang, and
sa furth to the end of the lyne. Alwayis tak heid, that the
nomber of ȝour fete in euery lyne be euin, & nocht odde:
as four, six, aucht, or ten: & not thrie, fyue, seuin, or nyne,
except it be in broken verse, quhilkis are out of reul and
daylie inuentit be dyuers Poetis. Bot gif ȝe wald ask me
the reulis, quhairby to knaw euerie ane of thir thre foirsaidis
kyndis of syllabes, I answer, Ȝour eare man be the
onely iudge and discerner thairof. And to proue this, I
remit to the iudgement of the same, quhilk of thir twa
lynis following flowis best,

                        Ĭntō thĕ Seāthĕn Lūcĭfēr v̆psprāng.
                        Ĭn thē Seăthēn Lŭcīfĕr tō v̆psprāng.
                     
                  
                  I doubt not bot ȝour eare makkis ȝou easilie to persaue,
that the first lyne flowis weil, & the vther nathing
at all. The reasoun is, because the first lyne keips the reule
abone written, To wit, the first fute short, the secound
lang, and sa furth, as I shewe before: quhair as the vther is
direct contrair to the same. Bot specially tak heid, quhen

ȝour lyne is of fourtene, that ȝour Sectioun in aucht be a
lang monosyllabe, or 
                        •
                     llis the hinmest syllabe of a word
alwais being lang, as I said before. The cause quhy it mā
be ane of thir twa, is, for the Musique, because that quhen
ȝour lyne is ather of xiiij or xij fete, it wilbe drawin sa
lang in the singing, as ȝe man rest in the middes of it,
quhilk is the Sectioun: sa as, gif ȝour Sectioun be nocht
ather a monosyllabe, or ellis the hinmest syllabe of a
word as I said before, bot the first syllabe of a polysyllabe,
the Musique sall make ȝow sa to rest in the middes
of that word, as it sall cut the ane half of the word fra the
vther, and sa sall mak it seme twa different wordis, that
is bot ane. This aucht onely to be obseruit in thir foirsaid
lang lynis: for the shortnes of all shorter lynis, then
thir before mentionat, is the cause, that the Musique makis
na rest in the middes of thame, and thairfore thir obseruationis
seruis nocht for thame. Onely tak heid, that
the Sectioun in thame kythe something langer nor any
vther feit in that lyne, except the secound and the last, as I
haue said before.
                  Ȝe man tak heid lykewayis, that ȝour langest lynis
exceid nocht fourtene fete, and that ȝour shortest be
nocht within foure.
                  Remember also to mak a Sectioun in the middes of
euery lyne, quhether the lyne be lang or short. Be Sectioun
I mean, that gif ȝour lyne be of fourtene fete, ȝour
aucht fute, man not only be langer then the seuint, or vther
short fete, bot also langer nor any vther lang fete in

the same lyne, except the secound and the hinmest. Or
gif your lyne be of twelf fete, ȝour Sectioun to be in the
sext Or gif of ten, ȝour Sectioun to be in the sext also.
The cause quhy it is not in syue, is, because fyue is odde,
and euerie odde fute is s
                        •
                     ort. Or gif your lyne be of
aucht fete, ȝour Sectioun to be in the fourt. Gif of sex, in
the fourt also. Gif of four, ȝour Sectioun to be in twa.
                  Ȝe aucht likewise be war with oft composing ȝour
haill lynis of monosyllabis onely, (albeit our language
haue sa many, as we can nocht weill eschewe it) because
the maist pairt of thame are indifferent, and may be in
short or lang place, as ȝe like. Some wordis of dyuers
syllabis are likewayis indifferent, as

                        Thairfore, restore.
                        I thairfore, then.
                     
                  
                  In the first, thairfore, (thair) is short, and (fore) is lang:
In the vther, (thair) is lang, & (fore) is short, and ȝit baith
flowis alike weill. Bot thir indifferent wordis, composit
of dyuers syllabes, are rare, suppose in monosyllabes, cō
                     moun.
The cause then, quhy ane haill lyne aucht nocht
to be composit of monosyllabes only, is, that they being
for the maist pairt indifferent, nather the secound, hinmest,
nor Sectioun, will be langer nor the other lang fete
in the same lyne. Thairfore ȝe man place a word cō
                     posit
of dyuers syllabes, and not indifferent, ather in the
secound, hinmest, or Sectioun, or in all thrie.
                  
                     
Ȝe man also tak heid, that quhen thare fallis any short
syllabis efter the last lang syllabe in the lyne, that ȝe repeit
thame in the lyne quhilk rymis to the vther, evin
as ȝe set them downe in the first lyne: as for exempill, ȝe
man not say

                        Then feir nocht
                        Nor heir ocht.
                        Bot
                        Then feir nocht
                        Nor heir nocht.
                     
                  
                  Repeting the same, nocht, in baith the lynis: because
this syllabe, nocht, nather seruing for cullour not fute, is
bot a tayle to the lang fute preceding, and thairfore is repetit
lykewayis in the nixt lyne, quhilk rymes vnto it, euin
as it set doun in the first.
                  There is also a kynde of indifferent wordis, asweill
as of syllabis, albeit few in nomber. The nature quhairof
is, that gif ȝe place thame in the begynning of a lyne,
they are shorter be a fute, nor they are, gif ȝe place thame
hinmest in the lyne, as

                        Sen patience I man haue perforce.
                        I liue in hope vvith patience.
                     
                  
                  Ȝe se there are bot aucht fete in ather of baith thir
lynis aboue written. The cause quhair of is, that patience,
in the first lyne, in respect it is in the beginning
thairof, is bot of twa fete, and in the last lyne, of thrie, in

respect it is the hinmest word of that lyne. To knaw &
discerne thir kynde of wordis frō vtheris, ȝour eare man
be the onely iudge, as of all the vther parts of Flovving,
the verie twichestane quhairof is Musique.
                  I haue teachit ȝow now shortly the reulis of Ryming,
Fete, and Flovving. There restis yet to teache ȝow the
wordis, sentences, and phrasis necessair for a Poete to vse
in his verse, quhilk I haue set doun in reulis, as efter followis.
               
               
                  CHAP. III.
                  FIRST, that in quhatsumeuer ȝe put in verse, ȝe put in na
wordis, ather metri causa, or ȝit, for filling furth the
nomber of the fete, bot that they be all sa necessare, as ȝe
sould be constrainit to vse thame, in cace ȝe were speiking
the same purpose in prose. And thairfore that ȝour
wordis appeare to haue cum out willingly, and by nature,
and not to haue bene thrawin out constrainedly, be
compulsioun.
                  That ȝe eschew to insert in ȝour verse, a lang rable of
mennis names, or names of tounis, or sik vther names.
Because it is hard to mak many lang names all placit together,
to flow weill. Thairfore quhen that fallis out in
ȝour purpose, ȝe sall ather put bot twa or three of thame
in euerie lyne, mixing vther wordis amang thame, or
ellis specifie bot twa or thre of thame at all, saying (VVith
the laif of that race) or (VVith the rest in thay pairtis,) or
sic vther lyke wordis: as for exemple,

                        
                        Out through his cairt, quhair Eous vvas eik
                        VVith other thre, quhilk Phaëton had dravvin.
                     
                  
                  Ȝe sie thair is bot ane name there specifeit, to serue for
vther thrie of that sorte.
                  Ȝe man also take heid to frame ȝour wordis and sentencis
according to the mater: As in Flyting and Inuectiues,
ȝour wordis to be cuttit short, and hurland ouer
heuch. For thais quhilkis are cuttit short, I meane be sic
wordis as thir,

                        Iis neir cair
                        for
                        
                           I sall neuer cair, gif ȝour subiect
                     
were of loue, or tragedies. Because in thame ȝour words
man be drawin lang, quhilkis in Flyting man be short.
                  Ȝe man lykewayis tak heid, that ȝe waill ȝour wordis
according to the purpose: As, in ane heich and learnit
purpose, to vse heich, pithie, and learnit wordis.
                  Gif ȝour purpose be of loue, To vse commoun language,
with some passionate wordis.
                  Gif ȝour purpose be of tragicall materis, To vse lamentable
wordis, with some heich, as rauishit in admiratioun.
                  Gif ȝour purpose be of landwart effairis, To vse corruptit
and vplandis wordis.
                  And finally, quhatsumeuer be ȝour subiect, to vse vocabula
artis, quhairby ȝe may the mair viuelie represent
that persoun, quhais pairt ȝe paint out.
                  This is likewayis neidfull to be vsit in sentences, als

weill as in wordis. As gif ȝour subiect be heich and lear
nit, to vse learnit and infallible reasonis, prouin be necessities.
                  Gif ȝour subiect be of loue, To vse wilfull reasonis,
proceding rather from passioun, nor reasoun.
                  Gif ȝour subiect be of landwart effaris, To vse sklender
reasonis, mixt with grosse ignorance, nather keiping
forme nor ordour. And sa furth, euer framing ȝour reasonis,
according to the qualitie of ȝour subiect.
                  Let all ȝour verse be Literall, sa far as may be, quhatsumeuer
kynde they be of, bot speciallie Tumbling verse
for flyting. Be Literall I meane, that the maist pairt of
ȝour lyne, sall rynne vpon a letter, as this tumbling lyne
rynnis vpon F.
                  Fetching fude for to feid it fast furth of the Farie.
                  Ȝe man obserue that thir Tumbling verse flowis not
on that fassoun, as vtheris dois. For all vtheris keipis the
reule quhilk I gaue before, To wit, the first fute short the
secound lang, and sa furth. Quhair as thir hes twa short,
and ane lang throuch all the lyne, quhen they keip ordour:
albeit the maist pairt of thame be out of ordour, &
keipis na kynde nor reule of Flovving, & for that cause
are callit Tumbling verse: except the short lynis of aucht
in the hinder end of the verse, the quhilk flowis as vther
verses dois, as ȝe will find in the hinder end of this buke,
quhair I giue exemple of sindrie kyndis of versis.
               
               
                  
                  CHAP. IIII.
                  MARK also thrie speciall ornamentis to verse,
quhilkis are, Comparisons, Epithetis, and Prouerbis.
                  
                  As for Comparisons, take heid that they be sa proper
for the subiect, that nather they be ouer bas, gif ȝour subiect
be heich, for then sould ȝour subiect disgrace ȝour
Comparisoun, nather ȝour Comparisoun be heich quhen
ȝour subiect is basse, for then sall ȝour Comparisoun disgrace
ȝour subiect. Bot let sic a mutuall correspondence
and similitude be betwix thē, as it may appeare to be a
meit Comparisoun for sic a subiect, and sa sall they ilkane
decore vther.
                  As for Epithetis, It is to descryue brieflie, en passant,
the naturall of euerie thing ȝe speik of, be adding the proper
adiectiue vnto it, quhairof there are twa fassons.
The ane is, to descryue it, be making a corruptit worde,
composit of twa dyuers simple wordis, as
Apollogyde-Sunne
The vther fasson, is, be Circumlocution, as
Apollo reular of the Sunne.
                  
                  I esteme this last fassoun best, Because it expressis the
authouris meaning als weill as the vther, and ȝit makis
na corruptit wordis, as the vther dois.
                  
                     
As for the Prouerbis, they man be proper for the subiect,
to beautifie it, chosen in the same forme as the Comparisoun.
                  
               
               
                  CHAP. V.
                  IT is also meit, for the better decoratioun of the verse
to vse sumtyme the figure of Repetitioun, as

                        Quhylis ioy rang,
                        Quhylis noy rang. &c.
                     
                  
                  Ȝe sie this word quhylis is repetit heir. This forme
of repetitioun sometyme vsit, decoris the verse very mekle▪
ȝea quhen it cūmis to purpose, it will be cumly to
repete sic a word aucht or nyne tymes in a verse.
               
               
                  CHAP. VI.
                  ȜE man also be warre with composing ony thing
in the same maner, as hes bene ower oft vsit of before.
As in speciall, gif ȝe speik of loue, be warre ȝe
descryue ȝour Loues makdome, or her fairnes. And
siclyke that ȝe descryue not the morning, and rysing
of the Sunne, in the Preface of ȝour verse: for thir
thingis are sa oft and dyuerslie writtin vpon be Poëtis
already, that gif ȝe do the lyke, it will appeare, ȝe bot
imitate, and that it cummis not of ȝour awin Inuentioun,
quhilk is ane of the cheif properteis of ane Poete.

Thairfore gif ȝour subiect be to prayse ȝour Loue, ȝe sall
rather prayse hir vther qualiteis, nor her fairnes, or hir
shaip: or ellis ȝe sall speik some lytill thing of it, and syne
say, that ȝour wittis are sa smal, and ȝour vtterāce sa barren,
that ȝe can not discryue any part of hir worthelie: remitting
alwayis to the Reider, to iudge of hir, in respect
sho matches, or rather excellis Venus, or any woman,
quhome to it sall please ȝow to compaire her. Bot gif
ȝour subiect be sic, as ȝe man speik some thing of the
morning, or Sunne rysing, tak heid, that quhat name ȝe
giue to the Sunne, the Mone, or vther starris, the ane
tyme, gif ȝe happin to wryte thairof another tyme, to
change thair names. As gif ȝe call the Sunne Titan, at a
tyme, to call him Phoebus or Apollo the vther tyme, and
siclyke the Mone, and vther Planettis.
               
               
                  CHAP. VII.
                  BOT sen Inuention, is ane of the cheif vertewis in a
Poete, it is best that ȝe inuent ȝour awin subiect,
ȝour self, and not to compose of sene subiectis. Especially,
translating any thing out of vther language,
quhilk doing, ȝe not onely essay not ȝour awin ingyne
of Inuentioun, bot be the same meanes, ȝe are bound, as
to astaik, to follow that buikis phrasis, quhilk ȝe translate.
                  Ȝe man also be war of wryting any thing of materis
of cōmoun weill, or vther sic graue sene subiectis (except

Metaphorically, of manifest treuth opinly knawin, ȝit
nochtwithstanding vsing it very seindil) because nocht
onely ȝe essay nocht ȝour awin Inuentioun, as I spak before,
bot lykewayis they are to graue materis, for a Poet
to mell in. Bot because ȝe can not haue the Inuentioun
except it come of Nature, I remit it thairvnto, as the
cheif cause, not onely of Inuentioun, bot also of all theyther
pairtis of Poesie. For airt is onely bot ane help
and a remembraunce to Nature, as I shewe ȝow in the
Preface.
               
               
                  CHAP. VIII.
                  tuiching the kyndis of versis,
mentionat in the Preface.
                  FIrst, there is ryme quhilk seruis onely for lang historeis,
and ȝit are nocht verse. As for exemple,

                        In Maii vvhen that the blissefull Phoebus bricht,
                        The lamp of ioy, the heauens gemme of licht,
                        The goldin cairt, and the etheriall King,
                        With purpour face in Orient dois spring,
                        Maist angel-lyke ascending in his sphere,
                        And birds vvith all thair heauenlie voces cleare
                        Dois mak a svveit and heauinly harmony,
                        And fragrant flours dois spring vp lustely:
                        Into this season svveitest of delyte,
                        To vvalk I had a lusty appetyte.
                     
And sa furth.
                  
                     
¶For the descriptioun of Heroique actis, Martiall and
knichtly faittis of armes, vse this kynde of verse following,
call it Heroicall, As

                        Meik mundane mirrour, myrrie and modest,
                        Blyth, kynde, and courtes, comelie, clene, and chest,
                        To all exemple for thy honestie,
                        As richest rose, or rubie, by the rest,
                        VVith gracis graue, and gesture maist digest,
                        Ay to thy honnour alvvayis hauing eye.
                        Were fassons fliemade, they micht be found in the:
                        Of blissings all, be blyth, thovv hes the best,
                        With euerie berne belouit for to be.
                     
                  
                  ¶For any heich & graue subiectis, specially drawin out
of learnit authoruis, vse this kynde of verse following,
callit Ballat Royal, as

                        That nicht he ceist, and vvent to bed, bot greind
                        Ȝit fast for day, and thocht the nicht to lang:
                        At last Diana doun her head recleind,
                        Into the sea. Then Lucifer vpsprang,
                        Auror as post, vvhome sho did send amang
                        The Ieittie cludds, for to foretell ane hour,
                        Before sho stay her tears, quhilk Ouide sang
                        Fell for her loue, quhilk turnit in a flour.
                     
                  
                  ¶For tragicall materis, complaintis, or testamentis, vse

this kynde of verse following, callit Troilus verse, as

                        To thee Echo, and thovv to me agane,
                        In the desert, amangs the vvods and vvells,
                        Quhair destinie hes bound the to remane,
                        But company, vvithin the firths and fells,
                        Let vs complein, vvith vvofull ȝoutts and ȝells,
                        A shaft, a shotter, that our harts hes slane:
                        To thee Echo, and thovv to me agane.
                     
                  
                  ¶For flyting, or Inuectiues, vse this kynde of verse following,
callit Rouncefallis or Tumbling verse.
                  
                     In the hinder end of haruest vpon Alhallovv ene,
                     Quhen our gude nichtbors rydis (nou gif I reid richt)
                     Some bucklit on a benvvod, & some on a bene,
                     Ay trottand into troupes fra the tvvylicht:
                     Some sadland a sho ape, all grathed into grene:
                     Some hotcheand on a hemp stalk, hovand on a heicht.
                     The king of Fary vvith the Court of the Elf quene,
                     VVith many elrage Incubus rydand that nicht:

                           There ane elf on ane ape ane vnsell begat:
                           Besyde a pot baith auld and vvorne,
                           This bratshard in ane bus vvas borne:
                           They fand a monster on the morne,
                           VVar facit nor a Cat.
                        
                     
                  
                  ¶For compendious praysing of any bukes, or the authouris
thairof, or ony argumentis of vther historeis,
quhair sindrie sentences, and change of purposis are requyrit,

vse Sonet ver
                        •
                     e, of fourtene lynis, and ten fete in
euery lyne. The exemple quhairof, I neid nocht to shaw
ȝow, in respect I haue set doun twa in the beginning of
this treatise.
                  ¶In materis of loue, vse this kynde of verse, quhilk we
call Commoun verse, as

                        Quhais ansvver made thame nocht sa glaid
                        That they sould thus the victors be,
                        As euen the ansvver quhilk I haid
                        Did greatly ioy and confort me:
                        Quhen lo, this spak Apollo myne,
                        All that thou seikis, it sall be thyne.
                     
                  
                  ¶Lyke verse of ten fete, as this foirsaid is of aucht, ȝe may
vse lykewayis in loue materis: as also all kyndis of cuttit
and brokin verse, quhairof new formes are daylie inuentit
according to the Poetis pleasour, as

                        Quha vvald haue tyrde to heir that tone,
                        Quhilk birds corroborat ay abone
                        Throuch schouting of the Larkis?
                        They sprang sa heich into the skyes
                        Quhill Cupide vvalknis vvith the cryis
                        Of Naturis chapell Clarkis.
                        Then leauing all the Heauins aboue
                        He lichied on the eard.
                        
                           
Lo! hovv that lytill God of loue.
                        Before me then appeard,
                        So myld-lyke
                        VVith bovv thre quarters skant
                        And chyld-lyke
                        So moylie
                        He lukit lyke a Sant.
                        And coylie
                     
And sa furth.
                  ¶This onely kynde of brokin verse abone writtin, man
of necessitie, in thir last short fete, as so moylie and coylie,
haue bot twa fete and a tayle to ilkane of thame, as ȝe sie,
to gar the cullour and ryme be in the penult syllabe.
                  ¶Any of thir foirsaidis kyndes of ballatis of haill verse,
and not cuttit or brokin as this last is, gif ȝe lyke to put
ane owerword till ony of thame, as making the last lyne
of the first verse, to be the last lyne of euerie vther verse
in that ballat, will set weill for loue materis.
                  Bot besydis thir kyndes of brokin or cuttit verse, quhilks
ar inuentit daylie be Poetis, as I shewe before, there are
sindrie kyndes of haill verse, with all thair lynis alyke
lang, quhilk I haue heir omittit, and tane bot
onelie thir few kyndes abone specifeit
as the best, quhilk may be applyit
to ony kynde of
subiect,
bot rather to thir, quhairof
I haue spokin before.
               
            
         
         
            
            
            THE CIIII. PSALME,
TRANSLATED OVT OF
TREMELLIVS.
            
               
               
               O Lord inspyre my spreit and pen, to praise
               Thy Name, whose greatnes farr surpassis all:
               That syne, I may thy gloir and honour blaise,
               Which cleithis the ouer: about the lyke a wall
               The light remainis. O thow, whose charge and call
               Made Heauens lyke courtenis for to spred abreid,
               Who bowed the waters so, as serue they shall
               For cristall syilring ouer thy house to gleid.
            
            
               Who walks vpon the wings of restles winde,
               Who of the clouds his chariot made, euen he,
               Who in his presence still the spreits doeth find,
               Ay ready to fulfill ilk iust decrie
               Of his, whose seruants fyre and flammis they be.
               Who set the earth on her fundations sure,
               So as her brangling none shall euer see:
               Who at thy charge the deip vpon her bure.
            
            
               So, as the very tops of mountains hie
               Be fluidis were onis ouerflowed at thy command,
               Ay whill thy thundring voice sone made them flie
               Ower hiddeous hills and howes, till noght but sand
               Was left behind, syne with thy mightie hand
               Thow limits made vnto the roring deip.
               So shall she neuer droun againe the land,
               But brek her wawes on rockis, her mairch to keip.
            
            
               
               Thir are thy workis, who maid the strands to breid,
               Syne rinn among the hills from fountains cleir,
               Whairto wyld Asses oft dois rinn with speid,
               With vther beasts to drinke. Hard by we heir
               The chirping birds among the leaues, with beir
               To sing, whil all the rocks about rebounde.
               A woundrous worke, that thow, o Father deir,
               Maks throtts so small yeild furth so great a sounde!
            
            
               O thow who from thy palace oft letts fall
               (For to refresh the hills) thy blessed raine:
               Who with thy works mainteins the earth and all:
               Who maks to grow the herbs and grass to gaine.
               The herbs for foode to man, grass dois remaine
               For food to horse, and cattell of all kynde.
               Thow causest them not pull at it in vaine,
               But be thair foode. such is thy will and mynde.
            
            
               Who dois reioyse the hart of man with wyne,
               And who with oyle his face maks cleir and bright,
               And who with foode his stomack strengthnes syne,
               who nurishes the very treis aright.
               The Cedars evin of Liban tale and wight
               He planted hath, where birds do bigg their nest.
               He maid the Firr treis of a woundrous hight,
               Where Storks dois mak thair dwelling place, & rest.
            
            
               
               Thow made the barren hills, wylde goats refuge.
               Thow maid the rocks, a residence and rest
               For Alpin ratts, where they doe liue and ludge.
               Thow maid the Moone, her course, as thou thoght best.
               Thow maid the Sunne in tyme go to, that lest
               He still sould shyne, then night sould neuer come.
               But thow in ordour all things hes so drest,
               Some beasts for day, for night are also some.
            
            
               For Lyons young at night beginnis to raire,
               And from their denns to craue of God some pray:
               Then in the morning, gone is all their caire,
               And homeward to their caues rinnis fast, fra day
               Beginne to kythe, the Sunne dois so them fray.
               Then man gois furth, fra tyme the Sunne dois ryse,
               And whill the euening he remanis away
               At lesume labour, where his liuing lyes.
            
            
               How large and mightie are thy workis, ô Lord!
               And with what wisedome are they wrought, but faile.
               The earths great fulnes, of thy gifts recorde
               Dois beare: Heir of the Seas (which dyuers skaile
               Of fish contenis) dois witnes beare: Ilk saile
               Of dyuers ships vpon the swolling wawes
               Dois testifie, as dois the monstrous whaile,
               Who frayis all fishes with his ravening Iawes.
            
            
               
               All thir (ô Lord) yea all this woundrous heape
               Of liuing things, in seasoun craues their fill
               Of foode from thee. Thow giuing, Lord, they reape:
               Thy open hand with gude things fills them still
               When so thow list: but contrar, when thow will
               Withdraw thy face, then are they troubled sair,
               Their breath by thee receavd, sone dois them kill:
               Syne they returne into their ashes bair.
            
            
               But notwithstanding, Father deare, in cace
               Thow breath on them againe, then they reviue.
               In short, thow dois, ô Lord, renewe the face
               Of all the earth, and all that in it liue.
               Therefore immortall praise to him we giue:
               Let him reioyse into his works he maid,
               Whose looke and touche, so hills and earth do is greiue,
               As earth do is tremble, mountains reikis, afraid.
            
            
               To Iehoua I all my lyfe shall sing,
               To sound his Name I euer still shall cair:
               It shall be sweit my thinking on that King:
               In him I shall be glaid for euer mair:
               O let the wicked be into no whair
               In earth. O let the sinfull be destroyde.
               Blesse him my soule who name Iehoua bair:
               O blesse him now with notts that are enioyde.
               Hallelu-iah.
            
         
         
            
            
            
            ANE SCHORT POEME
OF TYME.
            
               AS I was pansing in a morning, aire,
               And could not sleip, nor nawayis take me rest,
               Furth for to walk, the morning was sa faire,
               Athort the feilds, it semed to me the best.
               The East was cleare, whereby belyue I gest
               That fytie Titan cumming was in sight,
               Obscuring chast Diana by his light.
            
            
               VVho by his rysing in the Azure skyes,
               Did dewlie helse all thame on earth do dwell.
               The balmie dew through birning drouth he dryis,
               VVhich made the soile to sauour sweit and smell,
               By dewe that on the night before downe fell,
               VVhich then was soukit by the Delphienns heit
               Vp in the aire: it was so light and weit.
            
            
               Whose hie ascending in his purpour Sphere
               Prouoked all from Morpheus to flee:
               As beasts to feid, and birds to sing with beir,
               Men to their labour, bissie as the Bee:
               Yet ydle men deuysing did I see,
               How for to dryue the tyme that did them irk,
               By sindrie pastymes, quhill that it grew mirk.
            
            
               
               Then woundred I to see them seik a wyle,
               So willing lie the precious tyme to tyne:
               And how they did them selfis so farr begyle,
               To fashe of tyme, which of it selfe is fyne.
               Fra tyme be past, to call it bakwart syne
               Is bot in vaine: therefore men sould be warr,
               To sleuth the tyme that flees fra them so farr.
            
            
               For what hath man bot tyme into this lyfe,
               Which giues him day is his God aright to knaw:
               Wherefore then sould we be at sic a stryfe,
               So spedelie our selfis for to withdraw
               Euin from the tyme, which is on nowayes slaw
               To flie from vs, suppose we fled it noght?
               More wyse we were, if we the tyme had soght.
            
            
               Bot sen that tyme is sic a precious thing,
               I wald we sould bestow it into that
               Which were most pleasour to our heauenly King.
               Flee ydilteth, which is the greatest lat.
               Bot sen that death to all is destinat,
               Let vs imploy that tyme that God hath send vs,
               In doing weill, that good men may commend vs.
            
            Haec quo
                  
                     
                  
                  que
                perficiat, quod perficit omnia, Tempus.
            FINIS.
         
      
      
         
            
            
            
            A TABLE OF SOME OBSCVRE
WORDIS WITH THEIR SIGnifications,
efter the ordour of
the Alphabet.
            
               
                  VVordis
                  Significations
                  Ammon
                  Iupiter Ammon.
                  Ande
                  A village besyde Mantua
where Virgill was borne.
                  Alexandria
                  A famous citie in Egypt,
where was the notable librarie gathered by Ptolomeus
Philadelphus.
                  
               
               
                  B
                  VVordis
                  Significations
                  
                     Bethaniens secound liuing was reuiued be Christ,
                  
                     Lazarus of Bethania, who reid Iohn II Chap.
               
               
                  C
                  VVordis
                  Significations
                  Castalia Parnassus.
                  A well at the fute of the hill
                  Celaeno
                  The cheif of the Harpyes, a
kynde of monsters with wingis and womens faces,
whome the Poets feynȝeis to represent theuis.
                  
                     
                     Cerberus
                  
                  The thrie headed porter of hell.
                  
                     Cimmerien night
                  Drevin from a kynd of people
in the East, called Cimmerij, who are great theuis,
and dwellis in dark caues, and therefore, sleeping in
sinne, is called Cimmerien night.
                  Circuler daunce
                  The round motionis of the
Planets, and of their heauens, applyed to seuin sindrie
metallis.
                  Clio
                  One of the Muses.
                  
                  Cypris
                  The dwelling place of Venus,
tearming continens pro contento.
                  
                  Cyprian torche
                  Lovis darte.
               
               
                  D
                  VVordis
                  Significations
                  Delphien Songs
                  Poems, and verses. drawen
from the Oracle of Apollo at Delphos.
                  
                  Dirae
                  Thre furies of hell, Alecto,
Megera, and Tesiphone.
                  
                  Dodon
                  A citie of the kingdome of
Epirus, besydes the which, there was a wood and a
Temple therein, consecrated to Iupiter.
                  
               
               
                  E
                  VVordis
                  Significations
                  Electre
                  A metal, fowre parts gold and fift part siluer.
                  Elise field
                  In Latin Campi Elisii, a ioy
full place in hell, where as the Poets feinȝeis all the

happie spreits do remaine.
                  Esculape
                  A mediciner, after made a god.
               
               
                  G
                  VVordis
                  Significations
                  Greatest thunders
                  
                     Iupiter (as the Poets feinȝeis)
had two thunders, whereof he sent the greatest
vpon the Gyants, who contemned him.
               
               
                  H
                  VVordis
                  Significations
                  Hermes
                  An Aegiptiā 
                     Philosopher
soone after the tyme of Moyses, confessed in his Dialogues
one onely God to be Creator of all things, and
graunted the errours of his forefathers, who brought
in the superstitious worshipping of Idoles.
                  Hippolyte
                  After his mēbers were
drawin in sunder by fowre horses, Esculapius at
Neptuns request, glewed them together, and reviued
him.
               
               
                  M
                  VVordis
                  Significations
                  Mausole tombe
                  One of the seauin miracles
which Artemise caused to be builded for her
husband by Timotheus, Briace, Scope, and sindrie other
workmen.
                  Mein
                  A riuer in Almanie.
                  
                  Sein
                  A riuer in Fraunce.
                  
               
            
            
               
The Authors meaning by these two riuers is, that the
originall of the Almanis came first out of Fraunce, cō
               trarie
to the vulgar opinion.
            
               
                  N
                  VVordis
                  Significations
                  Nyne voiced mouth
                  The nyne Muses,
whereof Vranie was one.
               
               
                  P
                  VVordis
                  Significations
                  Panchaia
                  A towne in the East,
wherein it is written, the Phoenix burnis her selfe vpon
Apollos altar.
                  Pinde or Pindus
                  A hill consecrate to
Apollo, and the Muses.
                  
                  Phoemonoe
                  A woman who pronounced
the Oracles of Apollo.
                  
               
               
                  S
                  VVordis
                  Significations
                  Seamans starres
                  The seauen starres.
                  Semele
                  Mother of Bacchus, who
being deceiued by Iuno, made Iupiter come to her in
his least thunder, which neuertheless consumde her.
                  Syrenes
                  Taken heir for littill
gray birdes of Canaria.
                  
               
               
                  T
                  VVordis
                  Significations
                  Thais
                  A common harlot of
Alexandria.
                  
                  
                     
Triton
                  A monster in the sea, shapin like
a man.
                  
                     Turnus sister,
                  Named Iuturna, a goddesse of the
water, who in the shape of her brothers waggonner
led his chariot through the fields, ay till Alecto appeared
vnto them in shape of an Howlet.
               

               
                  V
                  VVordis
                  Significations
                  Vranie.
                  The heauenly Muse.
               
            
            FINIS.
         
         
            
            
            Sonnet of the Authour.
            THE facound Greke, Demosthenes by name,
            His toung was ones into his youth so slow,
            As evin that airt,Rhetorique. which floorish made his fame,
            He scarce could name it for a tyme, ȝe know.
            So of small seidis the Liban Cedres grow:
            So of an Egg the Egle doeth proceid:
            From fountains small great Nilus flood doeth flow:
            Evin so of rawnis do mightie fishes bried.
            Therefore, good Reader, when as thow dois reid
            These my first fruictis, dispyse them not at all.
            Who watts, bot these may able be indeid
            Of fyner Poemis the beginning small.
            Then, rather loaue my meaning and my panis,
            Then lak my dull ingyne and blunted branis.
            FINIS.
         
         
            
            
            I HAVE INSERT FOR
THE FILLING OVT OF THIR
VACAND PAGEIS, THE VERIE
wordis of Plinius vpon the
Phoenix,
as followis.
            
               C. PLINII Nat. Hist. Lib. Decimi, Cap. 2.
De Phoenice.
               Aethiopes at
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   Indi, discolores maximè & inenarrabiles
ferunt aues, & ante omnes nobilem Arabia Phoenicē:
haud scio an fabulosè, vnum in toto orbe, nec visum mag
nopere. Aquilae narratur magnitudine, auri fulgore circa
colla, caetera purpureus, caeruleam roseis caudam pennis
distinguentibus, cristis faciem, capútque plumeo apice
cohonestante. Primus atque diligentisimus togatorum
de eo prodidit Manilius, Senator ille, maximis nobilis
doctrinis doctore nullo: neminem extitisle qui viderit
vescentē: sac
                     •
                  um in Arabia Soli esse, viuere annis DCLX.
senescenrem, casia thui isque surculis construere nidū, replere
odoribus, & superemori. Ex ossibus deinde & memedullis

eius nasci primo ceu vermiculum: inde fieri pullum:
principióque iust a funeri priori reddere, & totum
deferre nidum prope Panchaiam in Solis vrbem, & in
ara ibi deponere. Cum huius alitis vita magni conuersionem
anni fieri prodit idem Manilius, iterumque significationes
tempestatum & siderum easdem reuerti. Hoc
autem circa meridiem incipere, quo die signum Arietis
Sol intrauerit. Et fuisse eius conuersionis annum prodēte
se P. Licinio, M. Cornelio Consulibus. Cornelius Valerianus
Phoenicem deuolasse in Aegyptum tradit, Q.
Plautio, Sex. Papinio Coss. Allatus est & in vrbem
Claudij Principis Censura, anno vrbis DCCC, & in comitio
propositus, quod actis testatum est, sed quem falsum
esse nemo dubitaret.
            
            FINIS.
         
         
            
               I helped my self also in my Tragedie thairof, vvith
the Phoenix of Lactantius Firmianus, vvith
Gesnerus de Auibus, & dyuers vthers,
bot I haue onely insert thir foresaid
vvords of Plinius,
Because I follovv
him maist in my Tragedie.
            Farevveill.
            
         
      
   