
      
         
            
               
                  
                  An Apologie for the Oath of ALLEGIANCE. FIRST SET FOORTH WITHOVT a name: And now acknowledged by the Authour, the Right High and Mightie Prince, IAMES, by the Grace of GOD, King of Great Britaine, France and Ireland; Defender of the Faith, &c.
                  Together with a PREMONITION of his Maieſties, to all moſt Mightie Monarches, Kings, free Princes and States of Chriſtendome.
                  
                     
                        PSAL. 2. Verſ. 10.
                     
                     Et nunc Reges intelligite: Erudimini qui iudicatis terram.
                  
                  
                     
                        ROM. 14. Verſ. 13.
                     
                     Non ergo ampliùs inuicem indicemus. Sed hoc iudicate magis, ne penat
                           •
                        s offendiculum fratri, vel ſcandalum.
                  
                  ¶Imprinted at London by Robert Barker, Printer to the Kings moſt Excellent Maieſtie.
                  April. 8. ANNO 1609. Cum priuilegio Regali.
               
               
                  
                  
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                  TO THE MOST SACRED AND Inuincible Prince, RODOLPH the II. by GODS Clemencie Elect EMPEROVR of the ROMANES; KING OF GERMANIE, HƲNGARIE, BOHEME, DALMATIE, CROATIE, SCLAVONIE, &c.
                  
                     ARCH-DƲKE OF AVSTRIA, DVKE OF BVRGVNDIE, STIRIA, CARINTHIA, CARNIOLA, and WIRTEMBERG, &c. Earle of TYROLIS, &c.
                  
                     AND TO ALL OTHER RIGHT HIGH AND MIGHTY KINGS; AND RIGHT EXCELLENT Free PRINCES and STATES of Chriſtendome: Our louing BRETHREN, COVSINS, ALLIES, CONFEDERATES and FRIENDS:
                  IAMES, by the grace of GOD, King of GREAT BRITAINE, FRANCE and IRELAND; Profeſsor, Maintainer and DEFENDER OF THE True, Chriſtian, Catholique, and Apoſtolique FAITH, Profeſſed by the auncient and Primitiue Church, and ſealed with the blood of ſo many holy Biſhops and other faithfull crowned with the glory of Martyrdome;
                  
                     WISHETH euerlaſting felicitie in CHRIST our Sauiour.
                  
               
            
            
               
                  
                  
                     TO YOV, MOST SACRED AND INVINCIBLE EMPEROVR; RIGHT HIGH AND MIGHTIE KINGS; RIGHT EXCELLENT FREE PRINCES AND STATES, MY LOVING BRETHREN AND COVSINS.
                  To you, I ſay, as of right belongeth, doe I conſecrate and direct this Warning of mine, or rather Preamble to my reprinted Apologie for the Oath of Allegiance. For the cauſe is generall, and concerneth the Authoritie and Priuiledge of Kings in generall, and all ſupereminent Temporall powers. And if in whatſoeuer Societie, or Corporation of men, either in Corporations of Cities, or in the Corporation

of any mechanike craft or handie-worke, euery man is carefull to maintain the priuiledges of that Societie whereunto hee is ſworne; nay, they will rather cluster all in one, making it a common cauſe, expoſing themſelues to all ſorts of perill, then ſuffer the leaſt breach in their Liberties; If thoſe of the baſer ſort of people, I ſay, be ſo curious and zealous for the preſeruation of their common priuiledges and liberties, as if the meaneſt amongst them bee touched in any ſuch poynt, they thinke it concerneth them all: Then what ſhould we doe in ſuch a caſe, whom GOD hath placed in the higheſt thrones vpon earth, made his Lieutenants & Vice-gerents, and euen ſeated vs vpon his owne throne to execute his Iudgements? The conſideration heereof hath now moued me to expone a Caſe vnto you, which doeth not ſo neerely touch mee in my particular, as it doeth open a breach againſt our authoritie, (I ſpeake in the plurall of all Kings) and priuiledge in generall. And ſince not onely all rankes and ſorts of people in all Nations doe inuiolably obſerue this Maxime, but euen the Ciuill Law, by which the greateſt part of Christendome is gouerned, doeth giue them an intereſt,

                     qui fouent conſimilem cauſam; How much more then haue ye intereſt in this cauſe, not being ſimilis or par cauſa to yours, but eadem with yours? and indeed yee all fouetis, or at leaſt fouere debetis eandem cauſam mecum. And ſince this cauſe is common to vs all; both the ciuill Lawes and the municipall Lawes of all Nations, permits and warne them, that haue a common intereſt, to concurre in one for the defence of their common cauſe; yea, common ſence teacheth vs with the Poet, Ecquid
                     
                        Ad te pòſt paulò ventura pericula ſentis?
                        Nam tua res agitur, paries cùm proximus ardet.
                     
                  
                  Awake then while it is time, and ſuffer not, by your longer ſleepe, the ſtrings of your Authoritie to be cut in ſingulis, and one and one to your generall ruine, which by your vnited forces, would rather make a ſtrong rope for the enemie to hang himſelfe in, with Achitophel, then that hee ſhould euer be able to breake it. As for this Apologie of mine, it is true, that I thought good to ſet it firſt out without putting my name vnto it; but neuer ſo, as I thought to deny it, remembring well mine owne words, but taken out of the Scripture, in the beginning of the Preface to the

Reader, in my 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     , that nothing is ſo hid, which ſhall not bee opened, &c: promiſing there, which with GOD his grace I ſhall euer performe, neuer to doe that in ſecret, which I ſhall need to be aſhamed of, when it ſhall come to be proclaimed in publique.
                  In deed I thought it fit, for two respects, that this my Apologie ſhould firſt viſite the world without hauing my name written in the forehead thereof. Firſt becauſe of the matter, and next of the perſons that I medled with. The matter, it being a Treatiſe, which I was to write, containing reaſons & diſcourſes in Diuinity for the defence of the Oath of Allegiance, and refutation of the condemners therof; I thought it not comely for one of my place, to put my name to books concerning ſcholaſtick Diſputations; whoſe calling is to ſet forth Decrees in the Imparatiue moode: for I thinke my ſelfe as good a man as the Pope, by his reuerence, for whom theſe my Anſwerers make the like excuſe; for that his Breues are ſo ſummary without yeelding any reaſon vnto them. My next reaſon was the respect of the perſons whom with I meddled: Wherein, although I ſhortly anſwered the Popes Breues; yet the point.

I most laboured, being the refutation of Bellarmines Letter, I was neuer the man, I confeſse, that could thinke a Cardinall a meet match for a King: eſpecially, hauing many hundreth thouſands of my ſubiects of as good birth as he. As for his Church dignitie, his Cardinalſhip I meane, I know not how to ranke or value it, either by the warrant of God his word, or by the ordinance of Emperours or Kings; it being indeed onely a new Papall erection, tolerated by the ſleeping conniuence of our Predeceſſors (I meane ſtill by the plurall of Kings.) But notwithſtanding of this my forbearing to put my name vnto it, ſome Embaſſadours of ſome of you (my louing Brethren and Coſins) whome this cauſe did neereliest concerne, can witneſſe, that I made Preſents of ſome of thoſe bookes, at their firſt printing, vnto them, and that auowedly in my owne name. As alſo the Engliſh Paragraphiſt, or rather peruerſe Pamphleter Parſons, ſince all his deſciption muſt runne vpon a P. hath truely obſerued, that my Armes are affixed in the frontiſpice thereof, which vſeth not to bee in bookes of other mens doing; whereby his malice in pretending his ignorance, that he might pay me the

ſoundlier, is the more inexcuſable. But now that I find my ſparing to put my name vnto it hath not procured my ſparing by theſe anſwerers, who haue neither ſpared my Perſon directly in naming me, nor indirectly by railing vpon the Author of the Booke: it is now high time for me no longer to conceale nor diſauow my ſelfe, as if I were aſhamed of my owne deed. And therefore that yee may the better vnderſtand the nature of the cauſe, I will begin at the firſt ground thereof.
                  The neuer ynough wondered at and abhorred POVVDER-TREASON (though the repetition thereof grieueth, I know, the gentle hearted Ieſuite Parſons) this Treaſon, I ſay, being not onely intended againſt me and my Poſteritie, but euen againſt the whole houſe of Parliament, plotted only by Papiſts, and they onely led thereto by a preposterous zeal for the aduancement of their Religion; ſome of them continuing ſo obſtinate, that euen at their death they would not acknowledge their fault; but in their laſt words, immediatly before the expiring of their breath, refuſed to condemne themſelues & craue pardon for their deed, except the Romiſh Church ſhould

firſt condemne it; And ſoone after, it being diſcouered, that a great number of my Popiſh Subiects of all rankes and ſexes, both men and women, as well within as without the Countrey; had a confuſed notion and an obſcure knowledge, that ſome great thing was to be done in that Parliament for the weale of the Church; although, for ſecrecies cauſe, they were not acquainted with the particulars; certaine formes of prayer hauing likewiſe bin ſet down and vſed for the good ſucceſſe of that great errand; adding hereunto, that diuers times, and from diuers Prieſts, the Arch-traitors themſelues receiued the Sacrament for confirmation of their heart, and obſeruation of ſecrecie; Some of the principall Ieſuits likewiſe being found guiltie of the foreknowledge of the Treaſon it ſelfe; of which number ſome fled from their triall, others were apprehended (as holy Gamet himſelfe and Ouldcorne were) and iuſtly executed vpon their owne plaine confeſsion of their guilt: If this Treaſon now, clad with theſe circumſtances, did not miniſter a iuſt occaſion to that Parliament houſe, whom they thought to haue deſtroyed, couragiouſly and zealouſly at their next

ſitting downe, to vſe all meanes of trial, whether any more of that mind were yet left in the Countrey; I leaue it to you to iudge, whom God hath appoynted his highest Depute-Iudges vpon earth: And amongst other things for this purpoſe, This Oath of Allegiance, ſo vniuſtly impugned, was then deuiſed and enacted. And in caſe any ſharper Lawes were then made againſt the Papiſts that were not obedient to the former Lawes of the Countrey; if ye will conſider the time, place, and perſons, it will bee thought no wonder, ſeeing that occaſion did ſo iuſtly exaſperate them to make ſeuerer Lawes then otherwiſe they would haue done. The time, I ſay, being the very next ſitting downe of the Parliament, after the diſcouerie of that abominable Treaſon: the place beeing the ſame, where they ſhould all haue bene blowen vp, and ſo bringing it freſhly to their memorie againe: the perſons being thoſe very Parliament men whom they thought to haue deſtroyed. And yet ſo far hath both my heart and gouernment beene from any bitternes, as almoſt neuer one of thoſe ſharpe additions to the former Lawes haue euer yet beene put in execution.
                  
                     And that ye may yet know further for the more conuincing theſe Libellers of wilfull malice, who impudently affirme, That this Oath of Allegiance was deuiſed for deceiuing and intrapping of Papiſts in points of conſcience; The truth is, that the Lower houſe of Parliament at the firſt framing of this Oath, made it to containe, That the Pope had no power to excommunicate me; which I cauſed them to reforme; onely making it to conclude, That no excommunication of the Popes can warrant my Subiects to practiſe againſt my Perſon or State; denying the depoſition of Kings to be in the Popes lawfull power, as indeed I take any ſuch temporall violence to bee farre without the limits of ſuch a Spirituall cenſure as excommunication is. So carefull was I that nothing ſhould be contained in this Oath, except the profeſsion of natural Allegiance, & ciuill and temporall obedience, with a prom
                        •
                     ſe to reſist to all contrary vnciuill violence.
                  This Oath now grounded vpon ſo great and iuſt an occaſion, ſet forth in ſo reaſonable termes, and ordeined onely for making of a true diſtinction betweene Papiſts of quiet dispoſition, and in all other things good Subiects, and ſuch other

Papiſts as in their hearts maintained the like violent bloody Maximes, that the Powder-traitors did: This Oath, I ſay, being publiſhed and put in practiſe, bred ſuch euill blood in the Popes head and his Cleargie, as Breue after Breue commeth forth, vt vndam vnda ſequitur; prohibiting all Catholiques from taking the ſame, as a thing cleane contrary to the Catholicke faith; and that the taking thereof cannot ſtand with the ſaluation of their ſoules.
                  There commeth likewiſe a letter of Cardinall Bellarmines to Blackwell to the ſame purpoſe; but diſcourſing more at length vpon the ſayd Oath. Whereupon, after I had entred in conſideration of their vniuſt impugning that ſo iuſt and lawfull an Oath; and fearing that by their vntrue calumnies and Sophiſtrie the hearts of a number of the moſt ſimple and ignorant of my people ſhould be miſ-led, vnder that faire and deceitfull cloake of conſcience; I thought good to ſet foorth an Apologie for the ſaid Oath: wherin I proued, that as this Oath contained nothing but matter of ciuill and temporall Obedience, due by Subiects to their Soueraigne Prince: ſo this quarrelling therewith was nothing but a

late vſurpation of Popes (againſt the warrant of all Scriptures, ancient Counſels and Fathers) vpon the temporall power of Kings, where with onely my Apologie doth meddle. But the publiſhing of this Booke of mine hath brought ſuch two Anſwerers, or rather Raylers vpon me, as all the world may wonder at. For my Booke beeing firſt written in Engliſh, an Engliſh Oath beeing the ſubiect thereof, and the vſe of it properly belonging to my ſubiects of England; and immediatly thereafter being tranſlated into Latine, vpon a deſire that ſome had of further publiſhing it abroad it commeth home vnto me now anſwered in both the Languages. And, I thinke, if it had beene ſet forth in all the tongues that were at the confuſion of Babel, it would haue beene returned anſwered in them all againe. Thus may a man ſee how buſie a Biſhop the Deuill is, and how he omitteth no diligence for venting of his poiſoned wares. But herein their malice doth cleerely appeare, that they pay me ſo quickly with a double anſwere; and yet haue neuer anſwered their owne Arch-prieſt, who hath written a booke for the maintenāce of the ſame Oath, and of the temporall authoritie of

Kings, alledging a cloud of their owne Scoolemen againſt them.
                  As for the Engliſh Anſwerer, my vnnaturall and fugitiue Subiect; I will neither defile my pen, nor your ſacred eies or eares with the deſcribing of him, who aſhames, nay, abhorres not to rayle, nay, to rage and ſpewe forth blaſphemies againſt the late Queene of famous memorie. A Subiect to raile againſt his naturall Soueraigne by birth; A man to rayle againſt a Lady by ſexe; A holy man (in outward profeſsion) to inſult vpon the dead; nay, to take Radamanthus office ouer his head, and to ſit downe and play the Iudge in hell; And all his quarrell is, that either her Succeſſour, or any of her Seruants ſhould ſpeake honourably of her. Curſed be he that curſeth the Anointed of God: and deſtroyed mought he be with the deſtruction of Korah, that hath ſinned in the contradiction of Korah. Without mought ſuch dogs and ſwine be, caſt forth, I ſay, out of the ſpirituall Ieruſalem.
                  
                  As for my Latine Anſwerer, I haue nothing to ſay to his perſon; he is not my Subiect; he standeth or falleth vnto his owne Lord: But ſure I am, they two haue caſten lots vpon my Booke,

ſince they could not diuide it: the one of them, my fugitiue, to rayle vpon my late Predeceſſor, (but a rope is the fitteſt anſwere for ſuch an Hiſtorian;) the other, a ſtranger, thinketh he may be boldeſt both to pay my perſon and my booke, as indeed hee doth; which how iustly either in matter or maner, we are now to examine.
                  But firſt, who ſhould be the true Authour of this booke, I can but gueſſe. He calleth himſelfe Matthaeus Tortus, Cardinal Bellarmins Chaplain. A Being a proper word to expreſſe the true meaning of Tortus.
                      throwen Euangeliſt indeed, full of throward Diuinitie; an obſcure Authour, vtterly vnknowen to me, being yet little knowen to the world for any other of his works: and therefore muſt be a very desperate fellow in beginning his apprentiſage, not only to refute, but to raile vppon a King. But who will conſider the cariage of the whole booke, ſhall find that hee writeth with ſuch authoritie, or at the least tam elato ſtylo, ſo little ſparing either Kings in generall, or my perſon in particular; and with ſuch a greatneſse, P. 46. 
                     Habemus enim exemplaria Breuium illorum in manibus, and P. 63. 
                     Decernimus: as it ſhall appeare, or at leaſt be very probable, that it is the Maſters, and not the mans

labour; especially in one place, where he quarrelleth mee for casting vp his moralis certitudo and piè credi vnto him; hee there groſſely forgetting himſelfe, ſaith, malâ fide nobiſcum agit,
                     Pag. 69. thereby making this Authour to be one perſon with Bellarmine. But let it bee the worke of a Tortus indeed, and not of a perſonated Cardinall; yet muſt it be the Cardinals deede, ſince Maſter Tortus is the Cardinals man, and doeth it in his masters defence. The errand then being the Cardinals, and done by his owne man it cannot but be accounted as his owne deed; especially ſince the Engliſh Anſwerer doeth foure times promiſe, that Bellarmine, or one by his appointment, ſhall ſufficiently anſwere it.
                  And now to come to his matter and manner of Anſwere: Surely if there were no more but his vnmannerly manner, it is enough to diſgrace the whole matter thereof. For firſt, to ſhew his pride, in his Printers preface of the Po
                           •
                        itan edition of this elegans libellus, he muſt equall the Cardinals greatneſſe with mine in euery thing. For though he confeſseth this Maſter Tortus to bee an obſcure man; yet being the Cardinals Chaplaine, he is ſufficient enough forſooth to anſwere

an Engliſh booke, that lacketh the name of an Authour: as if a perſonated obſcure name for Auhour of a Cardinals booke, were a meet match for anſwering a Kings booke, that lacketh the name of an Authour; and a Cardinals Chaplaine to meete with the Deane of the Kings Chappell, whome Parſons with the Cardinall haue (as it ſeemeth) agreed vpon to intitle to bee the Authour of my Apologie. And not onely in the Preface, but alſo through the whole Booke doeth he keepe this comparatiue greatneſſe. He muſt bee as ſhort in his anſwere, as I am in my booke, he must refute all that I haue ſaid againſt the Popes ſecond Breue, with equall breuity, and vpon one page almost, as I haue done mine: and becauſe I haue ſet downe the ſubſtance of the Oath in 14. Articles in iuſt as many Articles muſt he ſet downe that Acte of Parliament of mine, wherein the Oath is contained: And yet, had hee contented himſelfe with his owne pride, by the demonstration of his owne greatneſſe, without further wronging of me, it had bene the more tol
                        •
                     rable. But what cauſe gaue I him to farce his whole booke with iniuries, both againſt my perſon and booke? For whereas in all my Apologie
                     
I haue neuer giuen him a foule word, and especially neuer gaue him the Lye: he by the contrary giueth me nine times the Lye in expreſſe termes, and ſeuen times chargeth mee with a falſhood, which phraſe is equiualent with a Lye. And as for all other words of reproch; as nugae, conuitia, temeritas, vanitas, impudentia, blaſphemiae, ſermonis barbaries, cum eadem foelicitate ſcribendi, cauillationes, applicatio inepta, fingere hiſtorias, audacia que in hominem ſanae mentis cadere non poteſt, vel ſenſu cō
                        muni caret, imperitia & leuitas, omnem omnino pudorem & conſcientiam exuiſſe, malâ fide nobiſcum agit vt lectoribus per fas & nefas imponat: of ſuch like reproches, I ſay, I doubt if there be a page in all his booke free, except where he idlely ſets down the Popes Breues and his owne Letter. And in caſe this might onely ſeeme to touch the vnknowen Authour of the booke, whom notwithſtanding he knew well enough, as I ſhew before; he ſpareth not my Perſon with my owne name:P. 47. ſometimes ſaying, that Pope Clement thought me to be inclined to their Religion: 
                     P. 98. ſometimes, that I was a Puritane in Scotland, and a perſecutor of Proteſtants.
                     
In one place he concludeth,P. 87. 
                     Quia Iacobus non eſt Catholicus, hoc ipſo Haereticus eſt. In another place,P. 98. 
                     Ex Chriſtiano Caluiniſtam fecerunt. In another place hee ſaith,Ibid. 
                     Ne
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         omnino verum eſt, Iacobum nunquam deſeruiſſe Religionem quam primò ſuſceperat. And in another place, after that hee hath compared and ranked me with Iulian the Apoſtate, he concludeth, Cum Catholicus non ſit,
                     P. 97. 
                     ne
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         Chriſtianus eſt. If this now be mannerly dealing with a King, I leaue it to you to iudge, who cannot but reſent ſuch indignities done to one of your quality.
                  And as for the matter of his booke, it well fits indeed the manner thereof: for he neuer anſwereth directly to the maine queſtion in my booke. For whereas my Apologie handleth onely two points, as I told you before; One, to proue that the Oath of Allegiance doeth onely meddle with the ciuil and temporal obedience, due by Subiects to their naturall Soueraignes; The other, that this late vſurpation of Popes ouer the temporall power of Princes, is againſt the rule of all Scriptures, ancient Councels and Fathers: hee neuer improoues the firſt, but by a falſe inference; that

the Oath denieth the Popes power of excommunication directly, ſince it denyeth his authoritie in depoſing of Kings. And for the ſecond point, he bringeth no proofe to the contrary, but, Paſce oues meas: and, Tibi dabo claues regni coelorum: and, That no Catholike euer doubted of it. So as I may truely ſay of him, that he either vnderſtandeth not, or at least will not ſeeme to vnderstand my Booke, in neuer directly anſwering the maine queſtion, as I haue already ſayd; and ſo may I iustly turne ouer vpon himſelfe that doome of ignorance, which in the beginning of his Booke he raſhly pronounceth vpon me, ſaying that I neither vnderſtand the Popes Breues, his Letter, nor the Oath it ſelfe; And as hee delighteth to repeat ouer and ouer, I know not how oft, and triumpheth in this wrong inference of his; That to deny the Popes power to depoſe Kings, 
                        〈◊〉
                      
                     
                        •
                     o deny the Popes Primacie, and his spirituall power of Excommunication: So doeth he, vpon that ground of Paſce oues meas, giue the Pope ſo ample a power ouer Kings, to throne or dethrone them at his pleaſure (and yet onely ſubiecting Christian Kings to that ſlauerie) as I doubt not but in your owne Honours yee will reſent

you of ſuch indignities; the rather ſince it concernes ſo many of you as profeſſe the Romiſh religion, farre more then me. For ſince hee accounteth me an heretike, & like Iulian the Apoſtate; I am conſequently extra caulam, and none of the Popes flocke, and ſo am in the caſe of Ethnicke Princes, ouer whom he confeſſeth the Pope hath no power. But yee are in the Popes folde; and you, that great Paſtour may leade as ſheepe to the ſlaughter, when it ſhall pleaſe him. And as the aſſes eares muſt be hornes, if the Lion list ſo to interpret it; ſo must ye be remoued as ſcabbed ſheepe from the flocke, if ſo be the Pope thinke you to be, though your skinne be indeed neuer ſo ſound.
                  Thus hath hee ſet ſuch a new goodly interpretation vpon the words of CHRIST, Paſce oues meas, as if it were as much to ſay, as depoſe Chriſtian Kings; and that Quodcun
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         ſolueris gaue the Pope power to dispenſe with all ſorts of Othes, Vowes, Penalties, Cenſurers & Lawes, euen with the naturall obedience of Subiects to their Souereigne Lords; much like to that new coined gloſſe that his brother Senten. Card. Baron, ſuper excom: Venet. 
                     Baronius made vpon the words in S. Peters viſion, Surge Petre,

occide & manduca; That is, (ſaid hee to the Pope) Goe kill and confound the Venetians.
                  
                  And becauſe I haue in my Booke (by citing a place in his controuerſies) diſcouered him to be a ſmall friend to Kings, hee is much commoued. For whereas in his ſaid Controuerſies, ſpeaking de Clericis,
                     Lib. de Cler. cap. 28.
                      hee is ſo bold as to affirme, that Church-men are exempted from the power of earthly Kings; and that they ought them no ſubiection euen in temporall matters, but onely virationis and in their owne diſcretion, for the preſeruation of peace and good order; becauſe, I ſay, citing this place of his in my Booke, I tell with admiration, that he freeth all Church-men from any ſubiection to Kings, euen thoſe that are their borne-Subiects: hee is angry with this phraſe, and ſayth it is an addition for breeding enuie vnto him, and raiſing of hatred againſt him. For ſaith hee, although Bellarmine affirmed generally, that Church-men were not ſubiect to earthly Kings; yet did he not inſert that particular clauſe [though they were borne and dwelling in their dominions] as if the words of Church-men and earthly Kings in generall imported not as much: for Layicks as well as

Church-men are ſubiect to none but to their naturall Soueraigne. And yet doeth he not ſticke to confeſse that he meant it, though it was not fit (he ſaith) to be expreſſed.
                  And thus quarrels hee me for reuealing his Printed ſecret. But whoſe hatred did he feare in this? was it not yours? Who haue interest, but KINGS, in the withdrawing of true Subiection from Kings? And when the greatest Monarchs amongſt you will remember, that almost the third part of your Subiects and of your Territories, is Church-men and Church-liuings; I hope, yee will then conſider and weigh, what a feather hee puls out of your wings, when he denudeth you of ſo many Subiects and their poſſeſsions, in the Popes fauour: nay, what bryers and thornes are left within the heart of your Dominions, when ſo populous and potent a partie ſhall haue their birth, education and liuelyhood in your Countries, and yet owe you no Subiection, nor acknowledge you for their SOVERAIGNES? So as where the Church-men of old were content with their tythe of euery mans goods; the Pope now will haue little leſſe then the third part of euery Kings Subiects and Dominions.
                     
And as in this place ſo throughout all the reſt of his booke, hee doeth nothing but amplifie the Popes power ouer Kings, and exaggerate my vnreaſonable rigour for preſsing this Oath; which he will needes haue to bee nothing but a renewed Oath of Supremacie in more ſubtill and craftie termes onely to robbe the Pope of his Primacie and ſpirituall power: making his temporall power and authoritie ouer Princes, to bee one of the chiefe ARTICLES of the Catholike faith.
                  But that it may the better appeare vnto you, that all my labour and intention in this errand, was onely to meddle with that due temporall Obedience which my Subiects owe vnto mee; and not to entrap nor inthrall their Conſciences, as he moſt falſly affirmes: Ye ſhall firſt ſee how farre other Godly and Christian Emperours and Kings were from acknowledging the Popes temporall Supremacie ouer them; nay, haue created, controlled and depoſed Popes: and next, what a number of my Predeceſſors in this Kingdome haue at al occaſions, euen in the times of the greateſt Greatneſse of Popes, reſiſted and plainely withſtood them in this part.
                  
                     And firſt, all Chriſtian Emperours were for a long time ſo farre from acknowledging the Popes Superioritie ouer them, as by the contrary the Popes acknowledged themſelves for their Vaſſals, reuerencing and obeying the Emperours as their Lords; for proofe whereof, I remit you to my Apologie.
                  
                  And for the creating of Popes; the Emperours were in ſo long and continuall poſſeſsion thereof, as I will vſe for my firſt witneſse a Pope himſelfe; who (in a Sigebert, ad ann. 773. Walthram. Naumburg. lib. de Epiſc, inuestitura. Mart. Polon. ad ann. 780. Theod. à Niem. de priuileg. & Iurib. Imper. & diſt. 30. C. Hadrian. 2.
                      
                     Synod of an hundreth fifty and three Biſhops and Abbots) did ordaine, That the Emperour CHARLES the Great ſhould haue the Right of chooſing the Pope, and ordaining the Apostolicall Seate, and the dignitie of the Romane Principalitie: nay, farther hee ordained, That all Archbiſhops and Biſhops ſhould receiue their Inueſtiture from the Emperour, or els be of no auaile; And, that a Biſhop wanting it ſhould not bee conſecrate; pronouncing an Anathema againſt all that ſhould diſobey this Sentence.
                  And that the Emperours aſſent to the Popes Election was a thing ordinary for a long time,

                     
                        See Platin. in v
                           •
                        t. Pel
                           •
                        g. 2. Gregor. 1. & Seuerini. 
                     Platina, and a number of the Popes owne writers beare witneſse: And Lib. de Clericis. 
                     Bellarmine himſelfe, in his booke of Controuerſies, cannot get it handſomely denied. Nay, the Popes were euen forced then to pay a certaine ſumme of money to the Emperours for their Confirmation: And this lasted almoſt ſeuen hundreth yeeres after CHRIST; witneſse In Chron. ad ann. 680.
                      
                     Sigebert and in vit. Agathon & Anaſt. in vit. eiuſd. Agath. & Herm. Contract ad ann. 678. aedit. poſter. & Diſt. 63. c. Agatho. 
                     Luitprandus, with other Popiſh Hiſtorians.
                  
                  And for Emperours depoſing of Popes, there are likewiſe diuers examples. The Emperour 
                     Iuitpr. Hiſt. lib. 6 c. 10, 11. Rhegino ad an. 963. & Platin in vit. Ioan. 13.
                      
                     Ottho depoſed Pope Iohn the twelfth of that name, for diuers crimes and vices; eſpecially of lecherie. The Emperour 
                     Marianus Scot. Sigeb. Abbas. Vrſp. ad ann. 1046. & Platin in vit. Greg. 6.
                      
                     Henry the third in a ſhort time depoſed three Popes; Benedict the ninth, Silueſter the third, and Gregory the ſixt, as well for the ſinne of Auarice, as for abuſing their extraordinarie authoritie againſt Kings and Princes.
                  And as for Kings that haue denied this temporall Superioritie of Popes; Firſt, we haue the vnanime teſtimonie of diuers famous Hiſtoriographers for the generall of many Chriſtian Kingdomes. As, Walthram. Naumburg. in lib. 
                     Walthram teſtifieth That

the Biſhops of Spaine, Scotland, England,
                     li
                           •
                        . de inueſt. Epiſc. Vixit circae ann. 1110.
                      
                     Hungary, from ancient inſtitution till this moderne noueltie, had their Inueſtiture by Kings, with peaceable inioying of their temporalities wholly and entirely; and whoſoeuer (ſaith hee) is peaceably ſolicitous, let him peruſe the liues of the Ancients, and read the Hiſtories, and hee ſhall vnderſtand thus much. And for verification of this generall aſsertion; we will firſt begin at the practiſe of the Kings of France, though not named by Walthram in this his enumeration of Kingdomes: amongſt whom my firſt witneſse ſhall be that vulgarly knowen Letter of 
                        See Annales Franciae Nicolai. Gillij in Philip. Pulchro. 
                     Philip le Bel King of France to Pope Boniface the viij. the beginning whereof, after a ſcornefull ſalutation, is Sciat tua maxima fatuitas, nos in temporalibus nemini ſubeſſe.
                  
                  And likewiſe after that Anno 1268 ex arreſtis Senatus Pariſienſ. 
                     Lewes the ninth, ſurnamed Sanctus, had by a publike inſtrument (called Pragmatica Sanctio) forbidden all the exactions of the Popes Court within his Realme: Pope Pius 
                     Ioan. Maierius, lib. de Sciſmat. & Concil. the ij in the beginning of Lewes the eleuenth his time, greatly miſliking this Decree ſo long before made, ſent his Legate

to the ſaid King Lewes with Letters patents, vrging his promiſe which he had made when he was Dolphin of France, to repeale that Sanction if euer hee came to bee King. The King referreth the Legate ouer with his Letters-patents to the Councel of Paris: where the matter being propounded, was impugned by Ioan. Romanus, the Kings Atturney; with whoſe opinion the Vniuerſitie of Paris concurring, an Appeale was made from the attempts of the Pope to the next generall Councell; the Cardinall departing with indignation.
                  But that the Kings of France and Church therof haue euer ſtoken to their Gallican immunitie, in denying the Pope any temporall power ouer them, and in reſiſting the Popes as oft as euer they preſt to meddle with their temporall power, euen in the donation of Benefices; the Histories are ſo full of them, as the onely examples thereof would make vp a bigge Volume by it ſelfe. And ſo farre were the Sorboniſts for the Kings and French Churches priuiledge in this point, as they were wont to maintain; That if the Pope fell a quarrelling the King for that cauſe, the Gallican Church might elect a Patriarch
                     
of their owne, renouncing any obedience to the Pope. And Gerſon was ſo farre from giuing the Pope that temporall authoritie ouer Kings (who otherwiſe was a deuoute Roman Catholike) as hee wrote a Booke de Auferibilitate Papae; not onely from the power ouer Kings, but euen ouer the Church.
                  And now permitting all further examples of forraigne Kings actions, I will onely content mee at this time with ſome of my owne Predeceſſors examples of this Kingdom of England, that it may thereby the more clearly appeare, that euen in thoſe times, when the worlde was fulleſt of darkened blindneſse and ignorance, the Kings of England haue oftentimes, not only repined, but euen ſtrongly reſiſted and withſtoode this temporall vſurpation and encroachment of ambitious Popes.
                  And I will firſt begin at Matt. Teris. in Henr. 1. anno 
                           
                              •
                           100.
                      King Henry the firſt of that name, after the Conquest; who after he was crowned gaue the Biſhopricke of Wincheſter to William Gifford, and forthwith inueſted him into all the poſſeſsions belonging to the Biſhopricke, contrarie to the Canons of the new Synod, 
                     Idem ibid. ann. 1113.
                      King Henrie

                     alſo gaue the Archbiſhopricke of Canterburie to Radulph Biſhop of London; and gaue him inueſtiture by a Ring and a Croſiers ſtaffe.
                  
                  
                     Alſo Pope 
                     Idem. ibid. anno. 119.
                      Calixtus held a Councell at Rhemes, whither King Henry had appointed certaine Biſhops of England and Normandie to goe; Thurstan, alſo, elected Archbiſhop of Yorke, got leaue of the King to goe thither, giuing his faith that hee would not receiue Conſecration of the Pope; And comming to the Synode, by his liberal gifts (as the faſhion is) wanne the Romanes fauour, and by their meanes obtained to bee Conſecrate at the Popes hand. Which as ſoone as the King of England knewe, hee forbad him to come within his Dominions.
                  
                  Moreouer King Edward the firſt, prohibited the Abbot of Ex Archiuis Regni. 
                     Waltham and Dean of Pauls, to collect a tenth of euery mans goods for a ſupply to the holy Land, which the Pope by three Bulles had committed to their charge; and the ſaid Deane of Pauls compering before the King and his Councell, promiſed for the reuerence

he did beare vnto the King, not to meddle any more in that matter, without the Kings good leaue and permiſsion. Here (I hope) a Church-man diſobeyed the Pope from obedience to his Prince euen in Church matters: but this new Ieſuited Diuinitie was not then knowen in the world.
                  The ſame Edward I. impleaded the Deane of the Chappell of Vuluerhampton, becauſe the ſaid Deane had, againſt the priuiledges of the Kingdome, giuen a Prebend of the ſame Chappell to one at the Popes command: whereupon the ſaid Deane compeered, and put himſelfe in the Kings will for his offence.
                  The ſaid Edward I. depriued alſo the Biſhop of Durham of all his liberties, for diſobeying a prohibition of the Kings. So as it appeareth, the Kings in thoſe dayes thought the Church men their SVBIECTS, though now wee be taught other Seraphicall doctrine.
                  For further proofe whereof Iohn of Ibſtocke was committed to the goale by the ſaide King, for hauing a ſuite in the Court of Rome ſeauen yeares for the Rectorie of Newchurch.
                  
                  And Edward II. following the footſteps of

his Father; after giuing out a Summons against the Abbot of Walden, for citing the Abbot of S. Albons and others in the Court of Rome, gaue out letters for his apprehenſion.
                  And likewiſe, becauſe a certaine Prebend of Banbury had drawen one Beuercoat by a Plea to Rome without the Kings Dominions, therefore were Letters of Caption ſent foorth against the ſaid Prebend.
                  And Edward III. following likewiſe the example of his Predeceſſors; Becauſe a Parſon of Liche had ſummoned the Prior of S. Oſwalds before the Pope at Auinion; for hauing before the Iudges in England recouered the arrerage of a penſion; directed a Precept, for ſeaſing vpon all the goods both ſpirituall and Temporall of the ſaid Parſon, becauſe hee had done this in preiudice of the King and Crowne. The ſaide King alſo made one Harwoden to bee declared culpable and worthy to bee puniſhed, for procuring the Popes Bulles against a Iudgment that was giuen by the Kings Iudges.
                  And likewiſe; Becauſe one entred vpon the Priory of Barnewell by the Popes Bull, the ſaid

Intrant was committed to the Tower of London, there to remaine during the Kings pleaſure.
                  So as my Predeceſſours (ye ſee) of this Kingdome, euen when the Popes triumphed in their greatnes, ſpared not to puniſh any of their Subiects, that would preferre the Popes obedience to theirs euen in Church matters: So farre were they then from either acknowledging the Pope for their temporal Superior, or yet from doubting that their owne Church-men were not their Subiects. And now I will cloſe vp all theſe examples with an Act of Parliament in King Richard 2. his time; whereby it was prohibited, That none ſhould procure a Benefice from Rome, vnder paine to be put out of the Kings protection. And thus may yee ſee, that what thoſe Kings ſucceſſiuely one to another by foure generations haue acted in priuate, the ſame was alſo maintained by a publike Law.
                  By theſe few examples now (I hope) I haue ſufficiently cleared my ſelfe from the imputation, that any ambition or deſire of Noueltie in mee ſhould haue ſtirred me, either to robbe the Pope of any thing due vnto him, or to aſſume vnto

my ſelfe any further authoritie, then that which other Christian Emperours and Kings through the world, and my owne Predeceſſours of England in especiall, haue long agone maintained. Neither is it enough to ſay (as Parſons doeth in his anſwere to the Lord Cooke) That farre more Kings of this Countrey haue giuen many more examples of acknowledging, or not reſiſting the Popes vſurped Authoritie; ſome perchance lacking the occaſion, and ſome the abilitie of reſiſting them: for euen by the ciuill Law, in the caſe of violent intruſion and long and wrongfull poſſeſsion against mee, it is enough if I proue that I haue made lawfull interruption vpon conuenient occaſions.
                  But the Cardinall thinkes the Oath, not onely vnlawfull for the ſubstance thereof, but alſo in regard of the Perſon whom vnto it is to bee ſworne: For (ſaith he) The King is not a Catholike; And in two or three other places of his booke, he ſticketh not to call me by my name very broadly, an Heretike, as I haue already tolde. But yet before I be publikly declared an Heretike; by the Popes owne Law my people ought not to refuſe their Obedience vnto me. And

(I trust) if I were but a Subiect, and accuſed by the Pope in his Conclaue before his Cardinals, he would haue hard prouing me an Heretike, if he iudged mee by their owne ancient Orders.
                  For firſt, I am no Apoſtate, as the Cardinall would make mee; not onely hauing euer been brought vp in that Religion which I preſently profeſſe, but euen my Father and Grandfather on that ſide profeſsing the ſame: and ſo cannot be properly an Heretike by their owne doctrine, ſince I neuer was of their Church. And as for the Queene my Mother of worthie memorie, although ſhe continued in that Religion wherin ſhe was nouriſhed, yet was ſhee ſo farre from being ſuperſtitious or Ieſuited therein, that at my Baptiſme (although I was baptized by a Popiſh Archbiſhop) ſhee ſent him word to forbeare to vſe the ſpettle in my Baptiſme; which was obeyed, being indeed a filthy and an apiſh trick, rather in ſcorne then imitation of CHRIST. And her owne very words were, That ſhee would not haue a pockie Prieſt to ſpet in her childs mouth. As alſo the Font wherin I was Chriſtened, was ſent from the late Queene heere of famous

memorie, who was my Godmother; and what her Religion was, Pius V. was not ignorant. And for further proofe, that that renowmed Queene my Mother was not ſuperſtitious, as in all her Letters (whereof I receiued many) ſhe neuer made mention of Religion, nor laboured to perſwade me in it; ſo at her last words, ſhe cōmanded her Maſter-houſhold, a Scottiſh Gentleman my ſeruant, and yet aliue, ſhee commanded him (I ſay) to tell me; That although ſhe was of another Religion then that wherein I was brought vp; yet ſhe woud not preſſe me to change, except my owne conſcience forced mee to it. For ſo that I led a good life, and were carefull to doe iustice and gouerne well, ſhe doubted not but I would be in a good caſe with the profeſsion of my owne Religion. Thus am I no Apoſtate, nor yet a deborder from that Religion which one part of my Parents profeſſed, and an other part gaue me good allowance of. Neither can my Baptiſme in the rites of their Religion make me an Apoſtate, or Heretike in respect of my preſent profeſsion, ſince wee all agree in the ſubſtance thereof, being all baptized In the Name of the Father, the Sonne, and the

holy Ghoſt: vpon which head there is no variance amongst vs.
                  And now for the point of Heretike, I will neuer bee aſhamed to render an account of my profeſsion, and of that hope that is in me, as the Apoſtle preſcribeth. I am ſuch a CATHOLIKE CHRISTIAN, as beleeueth the three Creeds; That of the Apoſtles, that of the Councell of Nice, and that of Athanaſius; the two latter being Paraphraſes to the former: And I beleeue them in that ſenſe, as the ancient Fathers and Councels that made them did vnderſtand them. To which three Creedes all the Miniſters of England doe ſubſcribe at their Ordination. And I alſo acknowledge for Orthodoxe all thoſe other formes of Creeds, that either were deuiſed by Councels or paticular Fathers, against ſuch particular Hereſies, as moſt reigned in their times.
                  I reuerence and admit the foure first generall Councels as Catholike and Orthodoxe. And the ſaid foure generall Councels are acknowledged by our Acts of Parliament, and receiued for Orthodoxe by our Church.
                  As for the Fathers, I reuerence them as much

and more then the Ieſuites doe, and as much as themſelues euer craued. For what euer the Fathers for the firſt fiue hundreth yeeres did with an vnanime conſent agree vpon, to be beleeued as a neceſſary point of ſaluation, I either will beleeue it alſo, or at leaſt will be humbly ſilent; not taking vpon me to condemne the ſame: But for euery priuate Fathers opinion, it bindes not my conſcience more then Bellarmines; euery one of the Fathers vſually contradicting others. I wil therefore in that caſe follow S. 
                     Lib. 2. con. Creſconium. cap. 32.
                     
                     Auguſtines rule in iudging of their opinions, as I finde them agree with the Scriptures: what I find agreeable thereunto I will gladly imbrace; what is otherwiſe I will (with their reuerence) reiect.
                  As for the Scriptures; no man doubteth I will beleeue them. But euen for the Apocrypha; I hold them in the ſame account that the Ancients did. They are ſtill printed and bound with our Bibles, and publikely read in our Churches. I reuerence them as the writings of holy and good men: but ſince they are not found in the Canon, we account them to be ſecundae lectionis, or Lib. 1. de ve
                           •
                        b. Dei. c. 4.
                      
                     ordinis (which is Bellarmines owne diſtinction) and therefore not ſufficient whereupon

alone to ground any article of Faith, except it be confirmed by ſome other place of Canonicall Scripture; Concluding this point with Ruffinus (who is no Noueliſt, I hope) That the Apocryphall Bookes were by the Fathers permitted to be read; not for Confirmation of Doctrine, but onely for inſtruction of the people.
                  As for the Saints departed; I honour their memory, and in the honour of them doe we in our Church obſerue the dayes of ſo many of them, as the Scripture doth canonize for Saints; but I am loath to beleeue all the tales of the Legended Saints.
                  And firſt for the bleſſed Virgin MARIE, I yeeld her that which the Angel Gabriel pronounced of her, and which in her Canticle ſhee prophecied of her ſelfe: that is, That Luc. 1.28. ſhe is bleſſed amongst women, and Ibid. ver. 48. That all generations ſhall call her bleſſed. I reuerence her as the Mother of CHRIST, whom of our Sauiour tooke his fleſh, and ſo the Mother of GOD, ſince the Diuinitie and Humanitie of CHRIST are inſeparable. And I freely confeſſe, that ſhee is in glory both aboue Angels and men, her owne Sonne (that is both GOD and man) only excepted.

But I dare not mocke her and blaſpheme againſt GOD, calling her not onely Diua but Dea, and praying her to command and controule her Sonne, who is her GOD, and her SAVIOVR. Nor yet can I thinke, that ſhe hath no other thing to doe in heauen, then to heare euery idle mans ſuite and buſie her ſelfe in their errands; whiles requeſting, whiles commaunding her ſonne, whiles comming downe to kiſſe and make loue with Prieſts, and whiles diſputing and brawling with Deuils. In heauen ſhe is in eternall glory and ioy, neuer to bee interrupted with any worldly buſines; and there I leaue her with her bleſſed SONNE our Sauiour and hers in eternall felicitie.
                  As for Prayer to Saints; Chriſt (I am ſure) hath commaunded vs to Come all to him that are loaden with ſinne,Matth 11.28. 
                     Coloſ. 28.23. and hee will relieue vs: and S. Paul hath forbidden vs to worſhip Angels, or to vſe any ſuch voluntary worſhip, that hath a ſhew of humilitie in that it ſpareth not the fleſh. But what warrant wee haue to haue recourſe vnto theſe Dij Penates or Tutelares, theſe Courtiers of God, I know not; I remit that to theſe philoſophicall neoterike Diuines. It ſatiſfieth

me to pray to God through Chriſt as I am commanded, which I am ſure muſt bee the ſafeſt way; and I am ſure the Safeſt way is the beſt way in points of ſaluation. But if the Romiſh Church hath coined new articles of faith, neuer heard of in the firſt 500. yeeres after Chriſt, I hope I ſhal neuer be condemned for an Heretike, for not being a Noueliſt. Such are the priuate Maſſes, where the Prieſt playeth the part both of the Priest and of the people; And ſuch are the Amputation of the one halfe of the Sacrament from the people; The Transſubſtantiation, Eleuation for Adoration, and Circumportation in proceſsion of the Sacrament; the works of Supererogation, rightly named Theſaurus Eccleſiae, the baptiſing of Bels, and a thouſand other trickes: But aboue all the worſhipping of Images. If my faith bee weake in theſe, I confeſſe I had rather beleeue too litle then too much. And yet ſince I beleeue as much as the Scriptures do warrant, the Creeds do perſwade, and the ancient Councels decreed, I may well be a Schiſmatike from Rome, but I am ſure I am no Heretike.
                  
                  For Reliques of Saints, If I had any ſuch

that I were aſſured were members of their bodies I would honorably bury them, and not giue them the reward of condemned mens members, which are onely ordained to be depriued of buriall: But for worſhipping either them or Images, I must account it damnable idolatry.
                  I am no Iconomachus, I quarrell not the making of Images, either for publike decoration, or for mens priuate vſes: But that they ſhould be worſhipped, bee prayed to, or any holineſſe attributed vnto them, was neuer knowen of the Ancients: and the Scriptures are ſo directly, vehemently and punctually againſt it, as I wonder what braine of man, or ſuggestion of Sathan durst offer it to Christians; and all must be ſalued with nice Philoſophicall distinctions: As, Idolum nihil eſt: and, They worſhip (forſooth) the Images of things in being, and the Image of the true GOD. But the Scripture forbiddeth to worſhip the Image of any thing that GOD created. It was not a nihil then that GOD forbade onely to be worſhipped, neither was the braſen Serpent, nor the body of Moſes a nihil; and yet the one was deſtroyed, and the other hidden for eſchewing of Idolatrie. Yea, the Image

of GOD himſelfe is not onely expreſly forbidden to be worſhipped, but euen to be made. The reaſon is giuen, That no eye euer ſaw GOD; and how can wee paint his face, when Moſes (the man that euer was moſt familiar with GOD) neuer ſaw but his backe parts? Surely, ſince he cannot bee draawen to the viue, it is a thankeleſſe labour to marre it with a falſe repreſentation; which no Prince, nor ſcarce any other man will be contented with in their owne pictures. Let them therefore that maintaine this Doctrine, anſwere it to CHRIST at the latter day, when he ſhall accuſe them of Idolatry; And then I doubt if he will be payed with ſuch nice ſophiſticall Diſtinctions.
                  But Chriſts Croſſe muſt haue a particular priuiledge (ſay they) and bee worſhipped ratione contactus. But firſt we muſt know what kinde of touching of Chriſts body drew a vertue from it; whether euery touching, or only touching by faith? That euery touching of his body drew not vertue from it, is more then manifeſt. When Luke 8. the woman in the bloody flux touched him, ſhee was healed by her faith: But Peter then tolde him that a crowd and throng of many people

then touched him; and yet none of them receiued any benefit or vertue from him. Iudas touched him many and many a time, beſides his laſt kiſſe; ſo did the villaines that buffeted and crucified him, and yet I may ſafely pronounce them accurſed, that would bestow any worſhippe vpon their reliques: yea, wee cannot denie but the land of Canaan it ſelfe (whereupon our Lord did daily tread) is ſo viſibly accurſed, being gouerned by faithleſse Turkes, full of innumerable ſects of hereticall Chriſtians, and the very fertilitie thereof ſo far degenerated into a pitiful ſterilitie,Luc. 11.28. as he must be accurſed that accounteth it bleſsed. Nay, when a certaine woman bleſſed the belly that bare Chriſt, and the breaſts that gaue him ſucke; Nay rather (ſaith he) Bleſſed are thoſe that heare the Word of God and keepe it. Except then they could firſt prooue that Chriſt had reſolued to bleſſe that tree of the Croſſe whereupon he was nailed; they can neuer proue that his touching it could giue it any vertue. And put the caſe it had a vertue of doing miracles, as Peters ſh
                        •
                     dow had, yet doth it not follow, that it is lawfull to worſhip it, which Peter would neuer accept of. Surely the Prophets that

in ſo many places curſe thoſe that worſhip Images that haue eyes and ſee not, that haue eares and heare not, would much more haue curſed them that worſhip a piece of a ſticke, th
                        •
                     t hath not ſo much as any reſemblance or repreſentation of eyes or eares.
                  As for Pugatorie and all the Iubilees, In dulgences, ſatisfactions for the dead, &c. traſh depending thereupon, it is not worth the talking of, Bellarmine cannot finde any ground for it in all the Scriptures. Onely I would pray him to tell me; If that faire greene Meadow that is in Purgatorie, haue a brooke running thorow it,Lib. 2 de Purgat cap. 7.
                      that in caſe I come there, I may haue hawking vpon it. But as for me; I am ſure there is a Heauen and a Hell, praemium & poena, for the Elect and reprobate: How many other roomes there bee, I am not on God his counſell.Iohn 14. 
                     Multae ſunt manſiones in domo Patris mei, ſaith CHRIST who is the true Purgatorie for our ſinnes: But how many chambers and anti-chambers the Deuill hath, they can beſt tell that goe to him: But in caſe there were more places for ſoules to goe to then wee know of, yet let vs content vs with that which in his Word hee hath reuealed vnto vs, and not inquire further into his ſecrets.

Heauen and Hell are there reuealed to be the eternall home of all mankinde: let vs indeauour to winne the one and eſchew the other; and there is an end.
                  Now in all this diſcourſe haue I yet left out the maine Article of the Romiſh faith; and that is the Head of the Church or Peters Primacie; for who denieth this, denieth fidem Catholicam, ſaith Bellarmine. That Biſhops ought to be in the Church, I euer maintained it, as an Apoſtolike inſtitution, and ſo the ordinance of GOD; contrary to the Puritanes, and likewiſe to Bellar lib. 4. de Rom. Pont. cap. 25.
                     
                     Bellarmine; who denies that Biſhops haue their Iuriſdiction immediatly from God. (But it is no wonder he takes the Puritanes part, ſince Ieſuits are nothing but Puritan-Papiſts,) And as I euer maintained the ſtate of Biſhops and the Eccleſiaſticall Hierarchie for order ſake; ſo was I euer an enemy to the confuſed Anarchie or paritie of the Puritanes, as well appeareth in my 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     . Heauen is gouerned by order, and all the good Angels there; nay, Hell it ſelfe could not ſubſist without ſome order; And the very Deuils are diuided into Legions and haue their chiefetaines: how can any ſocietie then vpon

earth ſubſiſt without order and degrees? And therefore I cannot enough wonder with what braſen face this Anſwerer could ſay,Page 98. 
                     That I was a Puritane in Scotland, and an enemy to Proteſtants: I that was perſecuted by Puritanes there, not from my birth only, but euen ſince foure moneths before my birth? I that in the yeere of GOD 84 erected Biſhops, and depreſſed all their popular Paritie, I then being not 18. yeeres of age? I that in my ſaid Booke to my Sonne, doe ſpeake tenne times more bitterly of them nor of the Papiſts; hauing in my ſecond Edition therof affixed a long Apologetike Preface, onely in odium Puritanorum? and I that for the ſpace of ſixe yeares before my comming into England, laboured nothing ſo much as to depreſse their Paritie, and re-erect Biſhops againe? Nay, if the daily Commentaries of my life and actions in Scotland, were written (as Iulius Caeſars were) there would ſcarcely a moneth paſſe in all my life, ſince my entring into the 13. yeare of my age, wherein ſome accident or other would not conuince the Cardinall of a lye in this point. And ſurely I giue a faire commendation to the Puraitnes in that place of my booke, where I affirme

that I haue found greater honeſty with the high-land and border theeues, then with that ſort of people. But leauing him to his own impudence, I returne to my purpoſe.
                  Of Biſhops and Church Hierarchie I very well allowe (as I ſaide before) and likewiſe of Rancks and Degrees amongſt Biſhops. Patriarches (I know) were in the time of the Primitiue Church, and I likewiſe reuerence that inſtitution for order ſake: and amongſt them was a contention for the firſt place. And for my ſelfe (if that were yet the queſtion) I would with all my heart giue my conſent that the Biſhop of Rome ſhould haue the first Seate: I being a Weſterne King would go with the Patriarch of the Weſt. And for his temporall Principalitie ouer the Signory of Rome, I doe not quarrell it neither; let him in God his Name be Primus Epiſcopus inter omnes Epiſcopos, and Princeps Epiſcoporum; ſo it be no other wiſe but as Peter was Princeps Apoſtolorum. But as I well allow of the Hierarchie of the Church for diſtinction of Orders (for ſo I vnderſtand it) ſo I vtterly denie that there is an earthly Monarch thereof, whoſe word must be a Law, and

who cannot erre in his Sentence, by an infallibilitie of Spirit. Becauſe earthly Kingdomes muſt haue earthly Monarches; it doeth not follow, that the Church muſt haue a viſible Monarch too: for the world hath not ONE earthly temporall Monarch. CHRIST is his Churches Monarch, and the holy Ghost his Deputie: Reges gentium dominantur eorū,
                     Luk. 22.25. 
                     vos autem non ſic. CHRIST did not promiſe before his aſcenſion, to leaue Peter with them to direct and inſtruct them in all things; but hee promiſed to ſend the holy Ghoſt vnto them for that end.Iohn 14.26.
                  
                  And as for theſe two before cited places, wherby Bellarmine maketh the Pope to triumph ouer Kings; I meane Paſce oues, and Tibi dabo claues: the Cardinall knowes well enough,Matth. 18.18. that the ſame words of Tibi dabo, are in another place ſpoken by Chriſt in the plural number. And he likewiſe knowes what reaſon the Ancients doe giue, why Chriſt bade Peter paſcere oues: and alſo what a cloude of witneſſes there is, both of Ancients, and euen of late Popiſh writers, yea diuers Cardinals, that do all agree that both theſe ſpeeches vſed to Peter, were meant to all the Apostles repreſented in his perſon: Otherwiſe

how could Paul direct the Church of Corinth to excommunicate the inceſtuous perſon cum ſpiritu ſuo,
                     1. Cor. 5.4. whereas hee ſhould then haue ſaid, cum ſpiritu Petri? And how could all the Apoſtles haue otherwiſe vſed all their cenſures, only in Chriſts Name, and neuer a word of his Vicar? Peter (wee reade) did in all the Apoſtles meetings ſit amongſt them as one of their number: And when choſen men were ſent to Anti
                           •
                        
                        chia from that great Apoſtolike Councell at Ieruſalem (Acts 15.
                     Act. 15.22, 23.) The text ſaith, It ſeemed good to the Apoſtles and Elders with the whole Church, to ſend choſen men, but no mention made of the Head therof; and ſo in their Letters no mention is made of Peter, but onely of the Apoſtles, Elders, and Brethren. And it is a wonder, why Paul rebuketh the Church of Corinth for making exception of Perſons, becauſe ſome followed Paul, ſome Apollos, ſome Cephas,
                     1 Cor. 1.12. if Peter was their viſible Head, for then thoſe that followed not Peter or Cephas, renounced the Catholike faith. But it appeareth well that Paul knew little of our new doctrine, ſince he handleth Peter ſo rudely,Galat. 2.
                           •
                        
                      as he not onely compareth but preferreth himſelf vnto him. But

our Cardinall prooues Peters ſuperioritie,Gal 1.18. by Pauls going to viſite him. Indeed Paul ſaith, hee went to Ieruſalem to viſite Peter, and conferre with him; but he ſhould haue added, and to kiſſe his feet.
                  To conclude then, The truth is that Peter was both in age, and in the time of CHRISTS calling him, one of the firſt of the Apostles; In order the principall of the firſt twelue, and one of the three whom CHRIST for order ſake preferred to al the reſt. And no further did the Biſhop of Rome claime for three hundred yeares after CHRIST: Subiect they were to the generall Councels, and euen but of late did the Councell of Conſtance depoſe three Popes, and ſet vp the fourth. And vntil Phocas dayes (that murthered his master) were they ſubiect to Emperours. But how they are now come to be Chriſts Vicars, nay Gods on earth, triple-Crowned, Kings of heauen, earth and hell, Iudges of all the world, and none to iudge them, Heads of the fayth, Abſolute deciders of all Controuerſies by the infallibility of their ſpirit, hauing all power both Spirituall and Temporall in their hands, the high Biſhops, Monarches

of the whole earth, Superiours to all Emperours and Kings; yea, Supreme Vice-gods, who whether they will or not cannot erre: how they are now come (I ſay) to this toppe of greatneſſe, I know not: but ſure I am, Wee that are KINGS haue greatest neede to looke vnto it. As for mee, Paul and Peter I know, but theſe men I know not: And yet to doubt of this, is to denie the Catholique faith; Nay, the world it ſelfe muſt be turned vpſide downe, and the order of Nature inuerted (making the left hand to haue the place before the Right,Bellar. de Rom. Pont. lib. 1. cap 17.
                      and the laſt named to be the firſt in honour) that this primacie may be maintained.
                  Thus haue I now made a free Confeſsion of my Faith: And (I hope) I haue fully cleared my ſelfe from being an Apoſtate; and as far from being an Heretike, as one may bee that beleeueth the Scriptures, and the three Creedes, and acknowledgeth the foure firſt generall Councels. If I bee loath to beleeue too much, especially of Nouelties, men of greater knowledge may well pitie my weakeneſſe; but I am ſure none will condemne me for an Heretike, ſaue ſuch as make the Pope their God; and thinke him ſuch a ſpeaking

Scripture, as they can define Hereſie no otherwiſe, but to bee whatſoeuer Opinion is maintained againſt the Popes definition of faith. And I will ſincerely promiſe, that when euer any point of the Religion I profeſſe, ſhalbe proued to be new, and not Ancient, Catholike, and Apoſtolike (I meane for matter of Faith) I will as ſoone renounce it; cloſing vp this head with the Maxime of Vincentius Lirinenſis,
                     Libello aduerſus haereſes. that I will neuer refuſe to imbrace any opinion in Diuinity neceſſary to ſaluation, which the whole Catholike Church with an vnanime conſent, haue conſtantly taught and beleeued euen from the Apoſtles daies, for the ſpace of many ages thereafter without interruption. But in the Cardinals opinion, I haue ſhewed my ſelfe an Heretike (I am ſure) in playing with the name of Babylon, and the Towne vpon ſeuen hils; as if I would infinuate Rome at this preſent to bee ſpiritually Babylon. And yet that Rome is called Babylon,
                     1. Pet. 5.13. both in S. Peters Epiſtle and in the Apocalyps, our Anſwerer freely confeſſeth. As for the definition of the Antichriſt, I wil not vrge ſo obſcure a point, as a matter of Faith to be neceſſarily beleeued of al Chriſtians; but what I thinke

herein, I will ſimply declare.
                  That there muſt be an ANTICHRIST, and in his time a generall Defection; we all agree. But the Time, Seat, and Perſon of this Antichriſt, are the chiefe Queſtions whereupon we differ: and for that, wee muſt ſearch the Scriptures for our reſolution.2. Theſ. 2. As for my opinion; I thinke S. Paul in the 2. to the Theſſalonians doeth vtter more clearely that which S. 
                           •
                        ohn speaketh more myſtically of the Antichriſt.
                  
                  Firſt that in that place he meaneth the Antichriſt, it is plain, ſince he ſaith there muſt be firſt a Defection;Verſe 3. and that in the Antichriſts time onely that eclipſe of Defection muſt fall vpon the Church, all the Romiſh Catholikes are ſtrong enough: otherwiſe their Church muſt be daily ſubiect to erre, which is cleane contrary to their maine doctrine. Then d
                        •
                     ſcribing him (he ſaith) that The man of Sin,
                     Verſe 3, 4. 
                     Filius perditionis, ſhal exalt himſelfe aboue all that is called God.
                     Pſal. 82.6. But who theſe be whom of the Pſalmiſt ſaith Dixi, vos Dijeſtis, Bellarmine can tell. In old Diuinitie it was wont to be Kings: Bellarmine wil adde Church-men; Let it be both. It is well enough knowen, who

now exalteth himſelfe aboue both the ſwords.
                  And after that S. Paul hath thus deſcribed the Perſon, he next deſcribeth the Seat; and telleth that He ſhall ſit in the Temple of GOD,
                     2. Theſ. 2.4. that is, the boſome of the Church; yea, in the very heart thereof. Now where this Apoſtolike Seat is, I leaue it to be gueſſed: And likewiſe who it is that ſitting there, ſheweth himſelfe to be God; pardoning ſinnes, redeeming Soules, and defining Faith, controuling and iudging all men, and to be iudged of none.
                  Anent the Time, S. Paul is plaineſt of all. For he calleth the Theſſalonians to memo
                        •
                     y,Verſe 5. 
                     That when he was with them hee told them theſe things: and therefore they know (ſaith hee) what the impediment was,
                     Verſe 6. 
                     and who did withhold that the man of ſinne was not reuealed, although the myſtery of iniquitie was already working.
                     Verſe 7. That the Romane Emperours in S. Pauls time needed no reuealing to the Chriſtians to be men of Sinne or ſinfull men, no child doubteth: but the reuelation he ſpeaketh of was a myſterie, a ſecret; It ſhould therefore ſeeme that hee durſt not publiſh in his Epistle what that impediment was. It may be hee meant

by the tranſlating of the Seate of the Romane Empire, and that the tranſlation there of ſhould leaue a roume for the man of Sinne to ſit downe in. And that he meant not that man of Sinne of theſe Ethnicke Emperours in his time, his introduction to this diſcourſe maketh it more then manifeſt. For he ſaith (fearing they ſhould be deceiued, thinking the day of the Lords ſecond comming to be at hand) he hath therefore thought good to forewarne them that this generall Defection muſt firſt come. Whereby it well appeareth that hee could not meane by the preſent time but by a future, and that a good long time. otherwiſe he proued ill his argument, that the Lords comming was not at hand. Neither can the forme of the Destruction of this man of Sinne agree with that maner of ſpoile, that the Gothes & Vandals made of For ſo doeth Tortus call Rome when it was ſpoiled by them, though it was Chriſtian many yeres before. 
                     Ethnick Rome. For our Apostle ſaith, Verſe 8.
                     That this wicked man ſhalbe conſumed by the Spirit of the Lords mouth, and aboliſhed by his comming. Now I would thinke that the word of God and the Preaching thereof, ſhould bee meant by the Spirit of the Lords mouth, which ſhould peece and peece conſume and diminiſh the power of

that man of Sinne, till the brightneſse of the Lordes ſecond comming, ſhould vtterly aboliſh him. And by his expreſsing the meanes of his working, he doeth likewiſe (in my opinion) explane his meaning very much. For he ſaith,Verſ. 8.9. 
                     It ſhall be by a ſtrong deluſion, by lying wonders, &c. Well, what Church it is that vanteth them of their innumerable miracles, and yet moſt of them contrary to their owne doctrine: Bellarmine can best tell you with his hungry Mare,Bellar. lib. 3. de Euchar. cap. 8.
                      that turned her taile to her prouender and kneeled to the Sacrament; And yet (I am ſure) he wil be aſhamed to ſay, that the holy Sacrament is ordeined to be worſhipped by Oues & Boues, & caetera pecora campi.
                  
                  Thus haue I prooued out of S. Paul now, that the time of the Antichriſts comming, and the generall Defection was not to bee till long after the time that he wrote in; That his Seat was to be in the Temple and Church of God; and, That his Action (which can beſt poynt at his Perſon) ſhould be to exalt himſelfe aboue all that were called Gods. S. Iohn indeed doth more amply, though myſtically deſcribe this Antichriſt, which vnder the figure of a monſtrous Beaſt, with ſeuen

heads and ten hornes, he ſets forth in the xiij. chap. and then interpreteth in the xvij. where he cals her a Whore ſitting vpon many waters,
                     Reuel. 17.51. and riding vpon the ſaide monſtrous Beaſt;
                     Verſ. 3. concluding that Chapter with calling that Woman,Verſ. 18. 
                     that great city which reigneth ouer the Kings of the earth.
                     Verſ 5. And both in that Chapter, and in the beginning of the next, hee calles that great City,Cap. 18.52. 
                     Babylon.
                  
                  So as to continue herein my formerly propoſed Methode, of the Time, Seat, and Perſon of Antichriſt; this place doth clearely and vndeniably declare that Rome is, or ſhalbe the Seat of that Antichriſt. For first, no Papiſt now denieth that by Babylon here Rome is directly meant; and that this Woman is the Antichriſt, doeth clearely appeare by the time of his working (deſcribed by 42. moneths in the xiij. Chap.Verſ. 5.) which doeth iuſtly agree with that three yeeres and a halfes time, which all the Papiſtes giue to the Reigne of Antichriſt. Beſides that, the Beaſt it ſelfe with ſeuen heads and ten hornes, hauing one of her heads wounded and healed againe, is deſcribed iuſt alike in the xiij. and xvij. chap. being in the former prooued to be the Antichriſt by

the time of her reigne; and in the latter Rome by the name of Babylon, by the confeſsion of all the Papiſts: ſo as one point is now cleare, that Rome is the Seat of the Antichriſt.
                  
                  Neither will that place in the xj. Chap. ſerue to ſhift off this poynt, and proue the Antichriſts Seate to bee in Ieruſalem, where it is ſaide; That the Corpſes of the Witneſſes ſhall lie in the great Citie,Chap. 11.8. ſpiritually Sodome and Egypt, where our Lord alſo was crucified. For the word ſpiritually is applied both to Sodome, Egypt, and Ieruſalem in that place; And when he hath named Sodome and Egypt, hee doeth not ſubioyne Ieruſalem with a ſingle vbi; but with an vbi &, as if hee would ſay; and this Antichriſts abomination ſhall bee ſo great, as his Seate ſhall be as full of Spirituall whoredomes and Idolatries, as Sodome and Egypt was; nay, and ſo bloodie in the perſecution of the Saints, as our Lord ſhall bee crucified againe in his members. And who hath ſo meanely read the Scriptures (if he haue euer read them at all) that knoweth it not to bee a common phraſe in them, to call CHRIST perſecuted and ſlaine, when his Saints are ſo vſed? So did CHRIST ſay,Matt. 25.40.
                     
ſpeaking of the latter day; and in the ſame ſtyle did hee ſpeake to S. Paul at his conuerſion.Acts 9.4. And that Babylon, or Rome (ſince Bellarmine is contented it bee ſo called) is that great Citie, where our Lord was crucified, the laſt verſe of the xviij. Chap. doeth alſo clearely proue it. For there it is ſaid,Reuel. 18.24. 
                     That in that Citie was found the blood of the Prophets, & of the Saints, and of all that were ſlaine vpon the earth; and I hope CHRIST was one of them that were ſlaine vpon the earth. And beſides that, it may well bee ſaide that hee was ſlaine in that great Citie Babylon, ſince by the Romane authoritie he was put to death, vnder a Romane Iudge, and for a Romane quarrell: for he could not bee a friend to Caeſar, that was not his enemie.
                  This poynt now being cleared of the Antichriſts Seate, as I haue already ſayd; wee are next to find out the Time when the Antichriſt ſhall raigne, if it bee not already come. In the xiij. Chap. S. Iohn ſaith, that this Beast with the ſeuen heads and tenne hornes,Cap. 13.3. 
                     had one of his heads wounded and healed againe; and interpreting that in the xvij. hee ſaith, that theſe

ſeuen heads are alſo ſeuen Kings,
                     Cap. 17, 10. 
                     whereof fiue are fallen, one is, and an other is not yet come, and when he commeth hee ſhall continue a ſhort ſpace. And the beaſt that was and is not, is the eight,
                     Verſe 11. 
                     and yet one of the ſeuen. By which Beaſt hee meaneth the Antichriſt, who was not then come, I meane in the Apoſtles dayes, but was to come after. So as betweene the time of the Apoſtles and the ende of the world, muſt the Time of the Antichriſts comming be; and with this the Papists doe alſo agree. Whereby it appeareth that Babylon, which is Rome, ſhall bee the Seate of the Antichriſt; but not that Ethnicke Rome which was in the Apoſtles dayes (for Iohn himſelfe profeſſeth that he is to write of nothing,Reuel. 1.1. & cap. 41. but that which is to come after his time.) Nor yet that turning Chriſtian Rome while ſhe was in the conuerting, which immediatly followed the Apoſtles time, glorious by the Martyrdome of ſo many godly Biſhops: But that Antichriſtian Rome, when as the Antichriſt ſhall ſet downe his ſeat there; after that by the working of that Mysterie of iniquitie, Chriſtian Rome ſhall become to bee corrupted; and ſo that deadly

wound, which the Gothes and Vandales gaue Rome, ſhall be cured in that Head or King, the Antichriſt, who thereafter ſhall ariſe & reigne for a long ſpace.
                  But here it may be obiected, that the Antichriſt cannot reigne a long ſpace; ſince S. Iohn ſaith in two or three ſundry places, that the Antichriſt ſhall worke but the ſpace of three yeeres and a halfe. Surely who will but a little acquaint himſelfe with the phraſes and Style of S. Iohn in his Apocalyps,
                     cap. 7. ſhall finde that he doeth ordinarily ſet downe numerum certum pro incerto.
                     cap. 9.16.18. So doeth he in his twelue thouſand of euery tribe that will be ſafe; ſo doeth hee in his Army of two hundred thouſand, that were ſent to kill the third part of the men, and ſo doeth hee in diuers other places. And therefore who will but remember that in all his Viſions in the ſaid Booke, hee directly imitates the faſhions of the Prophet Ezekiels, Daniels, and Zacharies Viſions (borowing their phraſes that prophecied before CHRIST, to vtter his Prophecies in, that was to ſpeake of the laſt dayes) ſhall finde it very probable that in theſe three dayes and a halfe hee imitated Daniels Weekes, accounting

for his Week the time between CHRISTS firſt and ſecond comming, and making Antichriſt to triumph the halfe of that time or ſpirituall Weeke. For as to that literall interpretation (as all the Papiſts make it) of three yeeres and a halfe, and that time to fall out directly the very laſt dayes, ſaue fiue and fortie, before CHRIST his ſecond comming, it is directly repugnant to the whole New Teſtament. For CHRIST ſaith, That in the latter dayes men ſhall be feaſting, marrying, & at all ſuch worldly fineſse, when the last houre ſhall come in a clappe vpon them; One ſhall bee at the Mill.Matth. 24.41. One vpon the toppe of the houſe, and ſo foorth.Matth. 25. 
                     CHRIST telleth a Parable of the fiue fooliſh Virgins to ſhew the vnlooked-for comming of this houre; Nay, he ſaith the Sonne of man, nor the Angels in heauen know not this time. S. Peter biddeth vs WATCH AND PRAY, euer awaiting vpon that houre. And S. Iohn in this ſame Apocalyps doeth Reuel. 3.3. and 16.15. twiſe tell vs, that CHRIST will come as a theefe in the night; And ſo doeth CHRIST ſay in the Matth. 24.44 
                     Euangel. Whereas if the Antichriſt ſhall reigne three yeeres and a halfe before the latter day, and that

there ſhall be but iuſt 45. daies of time after his destruction; then ſhall not the iuſt day and houre of the latter day, be vnknowen to them that ſhall be aliue in the world at the time of Antichriſts deſtruction. For firſt according to the Papiſts doctrine, all the world ſhall know him to be the Antichiſt, both by the two Witneſſes doctrine, and his ſudden deſtruction; And conſequently they cannot be ignorant, that the latter day ſhal come iuſt 45. dayes after: and ſo CHRIST ſhal not come as a theefe, nor the world be taken at vnawares; contrary to all the Scriptures before alleadged, and many more. And thus haue wee proued Rome to be the Seat of the Antichriſt, and the ſecond halfe of that ſpiritual Weeke between the firſt and ſecond comming of CHRIST, to be the time of his Reigne. For in the firſt halfe thereof the myſtery of iniquitie beganne to worke; but the man of ſinne was not yet reuealed.
                  But who theſe witneſſes ſhould be is a great question. The generall conceit of the Papiſts is, that it must be Enoch and Elias: And herein is Bellarmine ſo ſtrong, as hee thinketh him in a great error (if not an Heretike) that doubteth

of it. But the vanitie of this Iewiſh fable I wil in few words diſcouer.
                  The Cardinall,
                     Bellar. de Rom. Pont. lib. 3. cap. 6.
                      in his booke of Controuerſies bringeth ſowerplaces of Scripture for probation of this idle dreame: two in the Olde Teſtament, Malachie and Eccleſiaſticus, and two in the New, CHRIST in Matthew (hee might haue added Marke too) and Iohn in the xi. of the Apocalyps. Firſt, for the generall of all thoſe places, I dare boldly affirme, That there is not a word in them, nor in all the reſt of the Scriptures that ſaith, that either Enoch or Elias ſhall returne to fight againſt Antichriſt, and ſhall be ſlaine by him, nor any ſuch like matter. Next as to euery place in particular, to beginne with Malachie, I know not who can better interprete him then CHRIST, who twiſe in Matthew, chap. xi. and xvij. and once in Marke tels both the multitude,Mat. 11.14. and 17.12. Mar. 9.13. and his owne Diſciples, that Iohn Baptiſt was that promiſed Elias. And herein doth Bellarmine deale most vnfaithfully with CHRIST: for his demonſtration that Antichriſt is not yet come, becauſe E
                           •
                        och and Elias are not yet returned; hee, for his probation thereof, citeth theſe wordes of

                     Chriſt in the xvij of Matthew, Elias ſhall indeed come and reſtore all things; but omits his very next words interpreting the ſame, That he is alreadie come in the perſon of Iohn Baptiſt. Nay, wherby he taketh vpon him to anſwere Biblianders obiection, that CHRIST did by Iohn the Baptiſt, vnderstand the prophecie of Elias comming to be accompliſhed, he picketh out the words, Qui habet aures, audiat, in the xi. of Matthew, immediatly following that purpoſe of Elias, making of them a great myſtery: and neuer taketh knowledge, that in the xvij. by him ſelfe before alledged, CHRIST doth interpret Malachy in the ſame maner without any ſubioyning of theſe words, Qui habet aures, audiat; adioyning ſhameleſly hereunto a fowle Paraphraſe of his owne, telling vs what CHRIST would haue ſaide; nay, in my conſcience, hee meant what CHRIST ſhould and ought to haue ſaid, if he had beene a good Catholike, ſetting downe there a gloſſe of Orleance that deſtroyes the Text. Thus ye ſee, how ſhamefully he abuſeth CHRISTS wordes, who in three ſundry places (as I haue ſaid) interpreteth the ſecond comming of Elias to be meant by Iohn the

                     Baptiſt. Hee likewiſe cauils moſt diſhoneſtly vpon that word Venturus. For CHRIST vſeth that word but in the repeating their opinion: but interpreting it, that hee was alreadie come in the perſon of Iohn Baptiſt.
                     Matt. 17.11. As if hee had ſaid, The propheſie is indeed true that Elias ſhall come; but I ſay vnto you that Elias iam venit, meaning of Iohn Baptiſt: and ſo he firſt repeates the words of the Propheſie in the future time, as the Prophet ſpake them and next ſheweth them to be now accompliſhed in the Perſon of Iohn, in the preſent time.Malac. 4.5. Matth 27. Neither can theſe words of Malachie [Dies magnus & horribilis] falſifie CHRISTS Commentarie vpon him. For if that day whereupon the Sauiour of the world ſuffered, when theThis obſcuring of the Sunne was ſo extraordinary and fearfull, that Dionyſius, onely led by the light of nature and humane learning, cryed out at the ſight thereof, Aut Deuspatitur, aut vices patientis dolet.
                      Sunne was totally obſcured from the ſixt houre to the ninth; the vaile of the Temple rent aſunder from the top to the bottome; and the earth did quake, the stones were clouen, the graues did open themſelues and the dead aroſe· If that day (I ſay) was not a great and horrible day, I know not what to cal a horrible day. Which day no doubt had deſtroyed the whole nation of the Iewes without exception by a iuſt Anatheme,
                     Mala. 4.6. if the ſaid Iohn the fore runner

had not firſt conuerted many, by the doctrine of Repentance and by Baptiſme. But why ſhould I preſume any more to interprete Malachy, ſince it is ſufficient that CHRIST himſelfe hath interpreted him ſo? And ſince Ipſe dixit; nay, ter dixit, per quem facta ſunt omnia, what mortall man dare interprete him otherwiſe; nay, directly contrary?
                  
                     Eccle. 48 9.Now for that place of Eccleſiaſticus; as the ſonne of Syrach onely borroweth it from Malachie (as appeareth by theſe wordes of his,Mala. 4.6. of conuerting the ſonnes hearts to their Fathers, which are Malachies owne words) ſo doth CHRISTS Comentary ſerue as well to interprete the one as the other: it being no ſhame for that mortall Ieſus to bee commented and interpreted by the immortall and true IESVS, though to the ſhame and confuſion of the Ieſuits hereſies herein.
                  But Enoch muſt bee ioyned to Elias in this errand, onely to beare vp the couples, as I thinke. For no place of Scripture ſpeaketh of his returning againe, only it is ſaid in Eccleſiaſticus the xliiij, that Enoch pleaſed GOD, and was tranſlated to Paradiſe,
                     Eccleſ. 44 16 
                     vt daret Gentibus

ſapientiam, or poenitentiam; ſince they will haue it ſo. And what is this to ſay? marry that Enoch ſhall returne againe to this worlde, and fight against the Antichriſt. A prettie large Comment indeed, but no right Commentary vpon that Text. When Bellarmine was talking of Elias; he inſiſted, That Elias muſt come to conuert the Iewes principally, reſtituere tribus Iacob. But when he ſpeaketh here of Enoch, he must dare Gentibus poenitentiam, and not a word of Iewes. Belike they ſhal come for ſundry errands, and not both for one: Or like Paul and Peter, the one ſhall be Apoſtle for the Iewes, and the other for the Gentiles. What need ſuch wilde racked Commentaries for ſuch three wordes? Will not the ſenſe ſtand well and clearely enough, that Enoch pleaſed GOD and was tranſlated to Paradiſe; that by the example of his reward, the Nations might repent and imitate his holy footſteps? For what could more mightily perſwade the Nations to repent; then by letting them ſee that holy Man carried quicke vp to Heauen, for reward of his vprightneſse; whereas all the rest of the people died and went to corruption? And where Scripture

faileth, the Cardinall must helpe himſelfe with the Fathers, to proue both that Enoch and Elias are yet aliue, and that they ſhall hereafter die; but with the like felicitie, as in his alledging of Scriptures; to vſe his owne wordes of me in his P. 27. pamphlet. For which purpoſe hee citeth fiue Fathers; Irenaeus, Tertullian, Epiphanius, Hierome and Aguſtine. Vpon this they all agree in deed, that Enoch and Elias are ſtill aliue both, which no Chriſtian (I hope) will denie. For Abraham, Iſaac, and Iacob are all ſtill aliue,Mat. 22 32. as Chriſt telleth vs; for God is Deus viuentium, non mortuorum. Much more then are Enoch and Elias aliue, who neuer taſted of death after the manner of other men. But as to the next point, that they ſhould die hereafter, his firſt two witneſſes, Irenaeus and Tertullian ſay the direct contrary.
                        Lib. 5. For Irenaeus ſaith, that they ſhall remaine in Paradiſe till the conſummation, conſpicātes in corruptionem. Now to remain there till the conſummation, and to ſee incorruption, is directly contrary to their returning to the world againe and ſuffering of death.Lib. cont. Iadaeos. cap. 2.
                      
                     Tertullian likewiſe agreeing hereunto ſaith moſt clearely, That Enoch hath neuer taſted of death, vt aeternitatis

candidatus: now hee is ill priuiledged with eternitie, if he muſt die againe; As for his places cited out of the other three Fathers, they all confirme that firſt point, That they are ſtill aliue: but that they muſt die againe, they make no mention.
                  But here ſpeaking of the Ancient Fathers, let mee take this occaſion to forewarne you concerning them: That though they miſtake and vnderſtand not rightly many myſteries in the Apocalyps, it is no wonder. For the booke thereof, was ſtill ſealed in their dayes. And though the Myſterie of iniquitie was alreadie working,2. Theſ. 2. yet was not the man of Sinne yet reuealed. And it is a certaine rule in all darke propheſies; That they are neuer clearely vnderſtood, till they be accompliſhed.
                  And thus hauing anſwered his two places, in the Olde Teſtament, by his thirde in the New Teſtament, containing Chriſts owne words: which being, luce clariora, I neede ſpeake no more of them. I am now to ſpeake of the fourth place of Scripture, which is in the xj. of the Apocalyps. For the two witneſſes (forſooth) there mentioned, muſt be Enoch and Elias.
                     Reuelat. 11.
                     
But how this can ſtand with any point of Diuinity or likelihood of Reaſon that theſe two glorified Bodies ſhall come downe out of heauen or Paradiſe (make it what you will) preach, and fight againſt the Antichriſt, bee ſlaine by him after many thouſand yeeres exemption from the naturall courſe of death, riſe againe the third day in imitation of Chriſt; & then (hauing wrought many woonders) to goe vp againe to Heauen; making an ordinary Poste betwixt Heauen and Earth: how this (I ſay) can agree either with Diuinitie or good Reaſon, I confeſſe it paſſeth my capacity. And eſpecially that they muſt bee clad in Sackcloth, whoſe bodies (I hope) haue beene ſo long agone ſo free from ſinne, as I thinke they ſhould neede no more ſuch mac
                        •
                     ration for ſinne. For they muſt be now either in Heauen or Paradiſe. If in Heauen (as doubtleſſe they are) their bodies muſt bee glorified: for no corruptible thing can enter there;Reuel. 21.27. and conſequently they can no more be ſubiect to the ſenſible things of this world, especially to death. But if they be in earthly Paradiſe, wee muſt firſt know where it is.
                  
                     Lib de Gra. 
                           •
                        rimi homini:
                     Bellarmine indeede in his Controuerſies is

much troubled to find out the place where Paradiſe is, and whether it be in the earth, or in the ayre. But theſe are all vanities. The Scriptures tell vs,Gene. 2. that Paradiſe and the garden of Eden therein, was a certaine place vpon the earth, which God choſe out to ſet Adam into, and hauing thereafter for his ſinne baniſhed him from the ſame, it is a blaſphemy to thinke that any of Adams poſteritie came euer there againe. For in Adam were all his poſteritie accurſed, and baniſhed from the earthly Paradiſe: like as all the earth in generall, and Paradiſe in ſpeciall were accurſed in him; the ſecond Adam hauing by grace, called a certaine number of them to bee Coheritors with him of the heauenly Paradiſe and Ieruſalem. And doubtleſly, the earthly Paradiſe was d
                        •
                     faced at the Flood, if not before: and ſo loſt all that exquiſite fertility and pleaſantnes, wherein it once ſurpaſſed all the reſt of the earth. And that it ſhould be lifted vp in the aire, is like one of the dreames of the Alcoran. Surely no ſuch miracle is mentioned in the Scriptures, and hath no ground but from the curious fancies of ſome boyling braines, who cannot be content,Rom. 12.3. 
                     Sapere ad ſobrietatem.
                  
                  
                     In heauen then for certaine are Enoch and Elias:
                     Gene. 5.24. for Enoch (ſaith the text) walked with GOD and was taken vp,2. King. 2.11, 10. and Elias was ſeene carried vp to heauen in a fiery chariot. And that they who haue beene the In-dwellers of Heauen theſe many thouſand yeeres, and are freed from the Lawes of mortalitie; that theſe glorious and incorruptible bodies (I ſay) ſhall come into the worlde againe, preach and worke miracles, and fighting against the Antichriſt bee ſlaine by him, whome naturall death could not before take hold of: as it is a fabulous inuention, ſo is it quite contrary to the nature of ſuch ſanctified creatures. Especially I wonder, why Enoch ſhould be thought to bee one of theſe two witneſſes for CHRIST. For it was Moſes and Elias that were with Chriſt at the transfiguration, ſignifying the Law and the Prophets: which would be the fitteſt witneſſes for conuincing of Antichriſt. But why they haue exempted Moſes, and put Enochs head in the yoake, I cannot conceiue. But I haue too much laboured in the refuting of this fooliſh, and indeed childiſh fable, which I am ſo farre from beleeuing in any ſort, as I protest in GODS preſence, I cannot

hold any learned Diuine (in our age now) to be a Chriſtian, that will beleeue it; but worthy to bee ranked with the Scribes & Phariſes, that raued and dreamed vpon the comming againe of Elias, though CHRIST told them the contrary. As for ſome of the Ancients that mistooke this matter, I doe not cenſure them ſo hardly; for the reaſon that I haue already alledged concerning them.
                  And hauing now refuted that idle fable; that thoſe two Witneſſes were Enoch and Elias: it falleth mee next to gueſſe, what in my opinion ſhould be meant by them. I confeſse, it is farre eaſier to refu
                        •
                     e ſuch a groundleſſe fable as this is, contrary to all grounds of Diuinity and Reaſon, then to ſet downe a true interpretation of ſo high and darke a myſtery. And therefore as I will not preſume to binde any other man to my opinion herein, if his owne reaſon leads him not thereunto, ſo ſhall I propone ſuch probable coniectures, as (I hope) ſhall be free from Hereſie, or vnlawfull curioſity.
                  In two diuers faſhions may the mysterie of theſe Witneſſes be lawfully and probably interpreted, in my opinion. Whereof the one is, that by theſe two Witneſses ſhould be meant the Olde

and New Teſtaments. For as the Antichriſt cannot chuſe but bee an aduerſary to the word of GOD, aboue all things; ſo will he omit no endeuour to diſgrace, corrupt, ſuppreſſe and deſtroy the ſame. And now whether this Booke of the two Teſtaments, or two Witneſſes of Chriſt, haue ſuffered any violence by the Babylonian Monarchy or not, I need ſay nothing; Res ipſa loquitur. I will not weary you with recounting thoſe Common Places vſed for diſgracing it: as calling it a Noſe of waxe, a dead Letter, a leaden Rule, and a hundred ſuch like Phraſes of reproch. But how far the Traditions of men, and Authority of the Church are preferred to theſe witneſses, doeth ſufficiently appeare in the Babylonian doctrine. And if there were no more but that little booke with that pretie Inſcription, Del' Inſuffiſance del' Eſcriture Sainte,
                     Cardinall Peron.
                      it is enough to proue it. And as to the corrupting thereof;Luke 15.8. the corruptions of the old Latine tranſlation muſt not be corrected, though it bid euertere domum in ſtead of euerrere, for ſeeking of a penny;Iohn 21.22, 23. And though it ſay of Iohn, Sic eum volo manere donec veniam, in place of Si, though it bee knowen a plaine lye, and that the

very next wordes of the Text diſprooue the ſame. Nay, ſo farre muſt we be from correcting it, as that the vulgar Tranſlation muſt be preferred by Catholikes, to the Bible in the owne Originall tongue. And is it a ſmall corrupting of Scriptures to make all, or the moſt part of the Apocrypha of equall faith with the Canonicall Scriptures, contrary to the Fathers opinions and Decrees of ancient Councels? And what blaſphemous corrupting of Scripture is it, to turne Dominus into Domina throughout the whole Pſalmes?
                     
                        Made by Bonauentura Doctor Seraphicus. And thus our Ladies Pſalter was lately reprinted in Paris. Is not this to confound CHRISTS perſon with hers? And as for ſuppreſsing of the Scriptures how many hundreth yeeres were the people kept in ſuch blindneſſe, as theſe witneſſes were almoſt vnknowne? for the Layicks durst not, being forbidden, and the moſt part of the Cleargie, either would or could not meddle with them.
                  Thus were theſe two witneſſes of Chriſt (whom of himſelfe ſaith,Iohn 5.39. 
                     Scrutamini Scripturas, illae enim teſtimonium perhibent de me) Theſe Reue. 11.4. two Oliues bringing peace to all the beleeuers, euen peace of Conſcience: Theſe Ibid. two

Candleſticks ſtanding in the ſight of GOD, and giuing light to the Nations; repreſented by Candleſtickes euen in the very Order of the Roman Maſſe:
                     See Expoſitio M
                              •
                           ſſae, annexed to Ordo Romanus, ſet forth by G. Caſsander.
                      Thus were theſe two Witneſſes (I ſay) diſgraced, corrupted and ſuppreſsed (nay, ſo ſuppreſsed and ſilenced, as he was brent for an Heretike that durst preſume to looke vpon them) kept cloſe in a ſtrange tongue that they might not be vnderstood, Legends and lying woonders ſupplying their place in the Pulpits.Verſe 8. And ſo did their Bodies lie in the Streetes of the great Citie, ſpiritually Sodome, for ſpirituall fornication which is idolatrie; ſpiritually Egypt,
                     Coloſ. 2.20. for bringing the Saints of God in bondage of humane Traditions [Quare oneramini ritibus?
                     Verſe 8.
                     ] So did their bodies (I ſay) lie 3. daies and a halfe; that is, the halfe of that ſpirituall Weeke betweene Chriſt his firſt and ſecond comming; and as dead carkaſes indeed did the Scriptures then lye without a monument, being layed open to all contempt, cared for almoſt by none, vnderſtood by as few; nay, no man durſt call for them for feare of puniſhment, as I haue already ſaid. And thus lying dead, as it were, without life or vigour (as the Law of God did

till it was reuiued in Ioſias time)2 Chro 34.14. The Inhabitants of the earth, that is, worldly men,Verſe 10. 
                     reioyced and ſent gifts to other, for ioy that their fleſhly libertie was now no more awed, nor curbed by that two edged ſword: for they were now ſure, that to doe what they would, their purſe would procure them pardons from Babylon. Omnia vaenalia Romae; ſo as men needed no more to looke vp to heauen, but downe in their purſes to finde Pardons. Nay, what needed any more ſuing to heauen, or taking it by violence and feruencie of zeale; when the Pardons came and offered themſelues at euery mans doores? And diuers ſpirituall men vaunted themſelues, that they neither vnderſtood Olde Teſtament nor new.
                  
                  Thus were theſe two Witneſſes vſed in the ſecond halfe of this ſpirituall Weeke; who in the first halfe thereof were clad in ſackecloth;
                     Verſe 3. that is, preached repentance to all Nations, for the ſpace of fiue or ſixe hundreth yeeres after Chriſt: GOD making his Word or Witneſſe ſo triumph,Reuel. 6.2. riding vpon the white Horſe in the time of the Primitiue Church, as that they ouercame all that oppoſed themſelues vnto it,

beating downe euery high thing,2. Cor. 10.4. as Paul ſayth; excluding from heauē all that beleeue not therein: as ſtrongly with the ſpirituall fire thereof, conuincing the ſtiffenecked pride of vnbeleeuers, as euer Moſes or Elias did, by the plagues of Egypt and famine, conuince the rebellious Egyptians and ſtiffe-necked Iſraelites.
                  
                  Neither ſhall it be enough to diſgrace, corrupt and ſuppreſſe them;Reuel. 11.7. but KILLED muſt they be at the laſt. To which purpoſe commeth forth Printed at Venice Anno 1562. 
                     Cenſura generalis, vt mucrone cenſorio iugulare eas poſsit; and cutteth their throates indeed. For the Authour ordaineth all Tranſlations, but their owne, to be burnt, which is yet commonly practiſed: nay he profeſſeth, he commeth not to correct but to destroy them, controlling and calling euery place of Scripture Hereticall, that diſagreeth front their Traditions (with almoſt as many foule wordes and railing epithetes, as the Cardinal beſtoweth on my Apologie) not ruling, nor interpreting Scripture by ſcripture, but making their Traditions to be ſuch a touchstone for it, as he condemneth of Hereſie not only thoſe places of Scripture that he citeth, but layeth the ſame generall condemnation vpon

all other the like places whereſoeuer they be writin the Scriptures. And yet (praiſed bee GOD) we beginne now with our eyes, as our predeceſſors haue done in ſome ages before, to ſee theſe Witneſſes riſe againe, and ſhine in their former glory: GOD, as it were,Verſe 11. 
                     ſetting them vp againe vpon their feete,
                     12. and raiſing them to the heauens in a triumphall cloud of glory, like Elias his fiery chariot. Which exalting of the Goſpel againe,13. hath bred ſuch an earthquake and alteration amongſt many Nations; as a tenth part, or a good portion of theſe that were in ſubiection to that great Citie, to wit, Babylon, are fallen from her; ſeuen thouſand, that is, many thouſands hauing beene killed vpon the occaſion of that great alteration; and many others conuerted to the feare of GOD, and giuing glory to the GOD of heauen. This now is one of the wayes, by which (I thinke) this place of Scripture may be lawfully and probably interpreted.
                  The other is more common, and ſeemeth more literally to agree with the Text. And this is to interpret, not the word of GOD, but the Preachers thereof to bee meant by theſe Witneſſes.
                     
Few they were that firſt beganne to reueale the man of Sinne, and diſcouer his corruptions; and therefore well deſcribed by the number of two Witneſſes:
                     Deut. 19.15. 
                     Nam in ore duorum aut trium teſtiū ſtabit omne verbum. And in no greater number were they that begun this worke, then the greatneſſe of the errand did neceſſarily require,Reuel. 11.3. They prophecied in ſackcloth, for they preached Repentance. That diuers of them were put to cruell deaths, is notorious to the world· And likewiſe that (in the perſons of their Succeſſours in doctrine) Sauguis Martyrum eſt ſemen Eccleſ. 
                     they roſe againe; and that in ſuch power and efficacie, as is more then miraculous.Verſe 11. For where it is accounted in the Scriptures a miraculous work of GOD wrought by his holy Spirit,Actes 2.41. when the Apoſtle S. Peter conuerted about three thouſand in one day; theſe Witneſſes I ſpeake of, by the force of the ſame Spirit, conuerted many mighty Nations in few yeeres: who ſtill continue praiſing GOD, that he hath deliuered vs from the tyranny of Antichriſt that raigneth ouer that great Citie; and with a full crie proclaiming, Goe out of her my people,
                     Reuel. 18.4. 
                     leſt ye be partaker of her ſinnes and of her plagues. Let therefore theſe Miracle-mongers

that ſurfet the world, and raiſe the priſe of paper daily, with ſetting foorth olde, though new gilded Miracles and Legends of lies; 
                        〈◊〉
                      ſuch (I ſay) conſider of this great and wonderfull miracle indeede, and to their ſhame compare it with their paultry wares. Thus hauing in two faſhions deliuered my coniecture, what I take to be meant by theſe two Witneſſes in the xj of the Apocalyps, there being no great difference between them: In the one, taking it to bee the word of God it ſelfe; In the other, the word of God too, but in the mouthes of his Preachers: It reſteth nowe that I come to the third point of the deſcription of Antichriſt, which is anent his Perſon.
                  
                  That by the Whoore of Babylon that rideth vpon the Beast, is meant a Seat of an Empire, and a ſucceſsiue number of men ſitting thereupon, and not any one man; doeth well appeare by the forme of the deſcription of the Antichriſt throughout all the ſayd Booke. For in the last verſe of the xvij.Cap. 17. Chapter the Woman is expounded to bee, That great Citie that reigneth ouer the Kings of the earth;Verſe 18. which cannot ſignifie the only perſon of one man, but a ſucceſſiue

number of men (as I haue already ſaide) whoſe ſeat that great City muſt be: like as in the ſame Chapter,Verſe 9. The ſeuen heads of the Beaſt are two wayes expounded. First, they are called ſeuen Hils, which is plaine; And next they are called ſeuen Kings, which cannot bee meant by the Kings that ſhall giue their power to the Beaſt,
                     Verſe 13. and bee ſubiect vnto her, which is immediately after expreſsed by the tenne hornes:
                     Verſe 12. But rather appeareth to be thoſe ſeuen formes of gouernment of that Seat: fiue of which had already been and fallen; As Kings, Conſuls, Dictators, Decemuiri, and Tribuni militum. The ſixt was in the time of S. Iohn his writing of this booke, which was the Gouernment of the Emperours. The ſeuenth which was not yet come, and was to laſt but for a ſhort ſpace, was theFrom the time of Conſtantine the great his remouing of the Empire from Rome to Conſtantinople, t
                           •
                         the time of Boniface the third, to w
                           •
                        t, 
                           •
                        
                        bout 276. yeeres 
                     Eccleſiaſticall Gouernment by Biſhops, which was to come vpon the tranſlation of the Empire from Rome to Conſtantinople; though their gouernment was in a maner ſubſtitute to the Emperours. For though that forme of Gouernment lasted about the space of 276. yeeres; yet was it but ſhort in compariſon of the long time of the reigne of the Antichriſt (not

yet expired) which ſucceeded immediatly thereunto. And the eighth, which is the Beaſt that was and is not, and is to goe to perdition,
                     Verſe 11. is the Antichriſt: the eighth forme of Gouernement indeed by his abſoluteneſſe, and yet the ſeuenth, becauſe hee ſeemeth but to ſucceed to the Biſhops in an Eccleſiasticall forme of gouernement, though by his greatnes hee ſhall make Babylons Empire in glory, like to that Magnificence wherein that great Citie triumphed, when it moſt flouriſhed: which in S. Iohns time was much decayed, by the factions of the great men, the mutinies of the armies, and the vnworthineſſe of the Emperours. And ſo that flouriſhing ſtate of that great Citie or Beaſt, which it was in before S. Iohns time, and Being much Not in reſpect of the extent, and limites of the Empire: but in regard of the gouernement therof, and glory of the citie. Reuel. xviij. Verſe 9. and 11. Verſe 10.16.19. decayed was but in a maner in his time, ſhould bee reſtored vnto it againe by Antichriſt: who as he aſcendteh out of the botomleſſe pit, ſo muſt hee goe to Deſtruction. And likewiſe by that great lamentation that is made for the deſtruction of Babylon in the xvij. Chapter, both by the Kings and by the Merchants of the earth; where it is thrice repeated for aggrauating the pitie of her deſolation, that That great Citie

fell in an houre: By that great lamentation (I ſay) it well appeareth, That the raigne of Antichriſt must continue longer then three yeeres and a halfe, or any one mans time. For the Kings that had committed fornification with her,Verſe 9. 
                     & in delicijs vixerant; behoued to haue had a longer time for contracting of that great acquaintance:Verſe 12. And the Merchants of the earth ſet her foorth and deſcribe her at great length, as the very ſtaple of all their riches; which could not bee ſo ſoone gathered as in one mans time. And to conclude now this deſcription of the Antichriſt; I will ſet downe vnto you all that is ſpoken of him in the Apocalyps in a ſhort methode, for the further explaining of theſe three points that I haue already handled.
                  The Antichriſt is foure times (in my opinion) deſcribed by Iohn in the Apocalyps, in foure ſundrie viſions; and a ſhort Compendium of him repeated againe in the xx. Chapter.1. Deſcription of Antichriſt He is first deſcribed by a pale Horſe in the viſion of the Seales in the ſixt Chapter.Reuel. cap. vj 
                     Verſe 2. For after that CHRIST had triumphed vpon a white Horſe in the firſt Seale, by the propagation of the Goſpel;Verſe 4. and that the red Horſe in the ſecond Seale,

is as buſie in perſecution, as CHRIST is in ouercomming by the conſtancie of his Martyrs; and that famine and other plagues ſignified by the blacke Horſe in the third Seale,Verſe 5. haue ſucceeded to theſe former perſecutions:Verſe 8. Then commeth foorth the Antichriſt vpon a pale Horſe in the fourth Seale, hauing Death for his rider, and Hell for his conuoy; which rider fitted well his colour of paleneſſe: and he had power giuen 
                     Or them, after other Tranſlations, whereby is ioyntly vnderſtood the ſaid pale horſe, together with his rider and cōuoy, Death and Hell. 
                     him ouer the fourth part of the earth (which is Europe) to kill with the ſword and vſe great perſecution; as Ethnick Rome did, figured by the red Horſe: and to kill vvith ſpirituall hunger or famine of the true word of GOD; as the blacke Horſe did by corporall famine and with death, whereby ſpirituall death is meant. For the Antichriſt, ſignified by this pale Horſe, ſhall afflict the Church both by perſecution and temporall death; as alſo by alluring the Nations to idolatry, and ſo to ſpirituall death: and by the beaſts of the earth ſhall hee procure their ſpirituall death; for hee ſhall ſend out the Locuſts (ouer whom he is King) mentioned in the ninth Chapter of this booke; and the three Frogges, mentioned in the xvj. of the

ſame; for intiſing of all Kings and Nations to drinke of the cup of her abominations. That that decription now of Antichriſt endeth there,Verſe 9. it is more then plaine: for at the opening of the firſt Seale,Verſe 10. the ſoules and blood of the murthered Saints cry for vengeance and haſting of iudgement;Verſe 12. which in the ſixt Seale is graunted vnto them by CHRISTS comming at the latter day; ſignified by heauens departing away, like a ſcrol when it is rolled: with a number of other ſentences to the ſame purpoſe.
                  
                     The ſecond deſcription.But becauſe this might ſeeme a ſhort and obſcure deſcription of the Antichriſt; hee deſcribeth him much more largely & specifikely, eſpecially in the viſion of the Trumpets in the ninth Chapter.Verſe 1. For there hee ſaith, at the blowing of the fift Trumpet, Hereſies being first ſpread abroad in three of the four former blasts; to wit, in the firſt, third, and fourth blast (for I take temporall perecution to be onely ſignified by the ſecond blast) hee then ſaw a ſtarre fall from Heauen,
                     Verſe 2. 
                     to whom was giuen the key of the bottomleſſe pit; which being opened by him,
                     Verſe 3. 
                     with the ſmoke thereof came foorth a number of Locuſts, whom he largely

deſcribeth, both by their craft and their ſtrength; and then telleth the name of this their King, who brought them out of the bottomleſse pit, which is, Deſtroyer: By this Starre fallen from heauen, being ſignified, as I take it,Verſe 11. ſome Perſon of great dignitie in the Church, whoſe duetie being to giue light to the world (as CHRIST ſaith) doeth contrary thereunto fall away like Lucifer, and ſet vp a Kingdome,Matth. 5.14. by the ſending foorth of that noiſome packe of craftie cruell vermine, deſcribed by Locuſts: and ſo is the Seat of the Antichriſt begun to bee erected, whoſe doctrine is at length declared in the ſecond vvoe, after the blast of the ſixt Trumpet; where it is ſaide,Verſe. 13. 
                     Verſe 20. That the remnant of men which were not killed by the plagues, repented not of the works of their hands, that they ſhould not worſhip Deuils, and idols of golde, and of ſiluer, and of braſſe, and of ſtone, and of wood, which neither can ſee, heare, nor goe. (As for worſhipping of Deuils;
                     Lib. de Cultu Adoration. lib. 3. diſp. 1. cap. 5.
                      looke your great Ieſuited Doctor, Vaſques: and as for all the reſt, it is the maine doctrine of the Romane Church.) And then it is ſubioyned in this text,

that they repented not of their murther,
                     Verſe 21. 
                     their ſorcerie, their fornications, nor their theft.
                  
                  By their murther, their perſecution is meant, and bloody maſſacres. For their Sorcery conſider of their Agnus Dei, that will ſloken fire; of the hallowed ſhirts, and diuers ſorts of Reliques; and alſo of Prayers that will preſerue men from the violence of ſhot, of fire, of ſword, of thunder, and ſuch like dangers; And iudge, if this be not very like to Sorcerie and incantation of charmes.
                  By their Fornication is meant both their ſpirituall fornication of Idolatry, and alſo their corporall fornication; which doth the more abound amongſt them, as well by reaſon of the reſtraint of their Churchmen from marriage, as alſo becauſe of the many Orders of idle Monaſtike liues amongſt them, as well for men as women: And continuall experience prooueth, that idleneſse is euer the greateſt ſpurre to lecherie. And they are guiltie of Theft, in ſtealing from GOD the titles and greatnes of power due to him, and beſtowing it vpon their head, the Antichriſt: As alſo by heaping vp their treaſure with their iuggling wares and merchandiſe of

the ſoules of men, by Iubiles, Pardons, Reliques and ſuch like ſtrong deluſions.
                  That he endeth this deſcription of Antichriſt in the ſame ninth Chapter may likewiſe well appeare,Cap. 10. ver. 6 by the Oath that that Mightie Angell ſweareth in the ſixt verſe of the tenth Chapter: And after the blaſt of the ſixt Trumpet, that time ſhall be no more,
                     Verſe 7. and that when the ſeuenth Angell ſhall blow his Trumpet, the myſterie of GOD ſhalbe finiſhed, as he had declared it to his ſeruants the Prophets.
                     Cap. xj. Onely in the eleuenth Chapter he deſcribeth the means whereby the Antichriſt was ouercome, whoſe raigne he had before deſcribed in the ix. Chapter; and telleth vs that the two witneſſes,
                     Verſe 3. after that they haue beene perſecuted by the Antichriſt ſhall in the end procure his destruction. And in caſe any ſhould thinke, that the Antichriſt is onely ſpoken of in the xj. Chapter, and that the Beaſt ſpoken of in the xiij. and xvij. Chapters doth onely ſignifie Ethnicke Rome; there needeth no other refutation of that conceit, then to remember them, that the Antichriſt is neuer named in all that xi. Chapter,Cap. xj. but where hee is called in the ſeuenth verſe thereof

                     the Beaſt that commeth foorth of the bottomles pit:
                     Verſe 7. which by the deſcription of the place he commeth out of prooueth it to be the ſame Beaſt which hath the ſame originall in the xvij. Chapter, and in the very ſame words▪ ſo as it is euer but the ſame Antichriſt repeated, and diuerſly deſcribed in diuers viſions.
                  
                     The third deſcription.Now in the xij. and xiij. Chapters and ſo foorth till the xvij. he maketh a more large and ample propheticall deſcription of the ſtate of the Church, and raigne of the Antichriſt. For in the xij.Cap. xij. Verſe 6. Chap. he figureth the Church by a Woman flying from the Dragon (the Deuill) to the wilderneſſe; And when the Dragon ſeeth he cannot otherwiſe ouer-reach her,Verſe 15. he ſpeweth forth waters like floods to cary her away; which ſignifieth many Nations, that were let looſe to perſecute and vex the Church. And in the xiij. Chapter,Cap. xiij. out of that Sea of Nations that perſecuted her ariſeth that great Citie (Queene of all the Nations, and head of that perſecution) figured by a Beaſt with ſeuen heads and ten hornes,
                     Verſe 1. like a Leopard;
                     Verſe 2. as well for the colour becauſe it was full of ſpots, that is, defiled with corruptions; as alſo vſing a baſtard forme of gouernement, in

ſhew ſpirituall, but in deed temporall ouer the Kings of the earth; like the Leopard that is a baſtard beaſt betwixt a Lion and a Parde: hauing 
                        
                           •
                        eete like a Beare, to ſignifie his great ſtrength; and the mouth of a Lion, to ſhew his rauenous and cruell diſpoſition.
                  This Beaſt who had his power from the Dragon, and had gotten a deadly wound inVerſe 3. one of his heads, or formes of gouernment (by the Gothes and Vandals) and yet was healed againe; opened his mouth to blaſphemies,
                     Verſe 6. 
                     and made warre againſt the Saints: nay,Verſe 7. all the world muſt worſhip him; which worſhip Ethnicke Rome neuer craued of any, being contented to call their neighbour Kings Amici & ſocij populi Romani. And whether worſhip or adoration, euen with that ſame title, hee vſed to Popes at their creation, our Cardinall can beſt tell you.
                  But then commeth another beaſt vp out of the earth,
                     Verſe 11. hauing indeed a more firme & ſetled originall: for ſhe doth viſibly and outwardly ſucceed to the true Church, and therefore ſhe hath two hornes like the Lambe, in outward ſhew repreſenting the ſpouſe of CHRIST,
                     
and pretending CHRIST to bee her defence: But ſhee ſpeaketh like the Dragon, teaching damnable and deuiliſh doctrine. And this Apoſtatike (I ſhould ſay Apoſtolike) Church, after that ſhe hath made her great power manifeſt to the world,Verſe 12. by doing all that the firſt Beaſt could doe, In conſpectu eius; that is, by ſhewing the greatneſſe of her power, to be nothing inferiour to the greatneſſe of the former Ethnicke Empire: ſhee then is mooued with ſo great a deſire to aduance this Beaſt, now become Antichriſt, as ſhee cauſeth the earth and all that dwell therein, to worſhip this former Beaſt or Roman Monarch; transferring ſo, as it were, her owne power in his perſon. Yea, euen Emperours and Kings ſhall be faine to kiſse his feet. And for this purpoſe ſhall ſhe worke great Miracles, wherin ſhe greatly prides her ſelfe, deceiuing men with lying wonders and efficacie of lyes,2. Theſ. 2.9 as S. Paul ſaith. And amongſt the reſt of her wonders,Verſe 13. ſhe must bring Fire out of heauen, Fulmen excommunicationis, which can dethrone Princes.Verſe 15. So that all that will not worſhip the image of the Beaſt, that is, his vnlimited Supremacie, muſt be killed and burnt as

Heretikes. Yea, ſo peremptory will this Beaſt or falſe Prophet be (ſo called in the xvj. Chapter of this booke) for the aduancement of the other Beaſt, or Antichriſt; Verſe 17 as all ſorts and rankes of people muſt receiue the marke or name of that Beaſt in their right hand, or in their forehead; without the which it ſhould bee lawfull to none to buy, or ſell:
                     Verſe 16. By the Marke in the forehead, ſignifying their outward profeſsion and acknowledgement of their ſubiection vnto her; And by the Marke in their right hand, ſignifying their actuall implicite obedidience vnto her, who they thinke cannot erre, though ſhee ſhould commaund them to rebell against their naturall Princes; like that Coeca obediencia wherunto all the Ieſuits are ſworne: and like thoſe Romiſh prieſts in this Countrey, that haue renounced and forſworne againe that Oath of Alleagiance; grounded vpon their naturall oath; which thought at their taking it, they confeſſed they did it out of conſcience, and as obliged thereunto by their naturall duetie; yet now must they forſweare it againe, for obedience to the Popes command; to whoſe will their conſcience and reaſon muſt be blindly captiuated. And

who euer denied this abſolute power, might neither buy nor ſell; for no man was bound to keepe any faith, or obſerue any ciuill contracts with Heretikes: yea, to aequiuocate and commit periurie towards them, is a lawfull thing in a Catholike.
                  Now as to the Myſtery anent the Number of his name, whether it ſhalbe vnderſtood by the number compoſed of the Letters in that Greeke word ΛΑΤΕΙΝΟΣ,Verſe 15. which word well ſutes with the Romiſh Church,Irenaeus aduerſus Haereſ. lib. 5.
                      
                     Romiſh Faith, and Latine Seruice. Or whether, in reſpect that in the Text, it is called the number of the man, ye will take it for the number or date of the yeere of GOD, wherein that firſt Man liued, that firſt tooke the title of the Antichriſt vpon him, I leaue it to the Readers choiſe. By that firſt Man, I meane Bonifacius tertius, who firſt called himſelfe Vniuerſall Biſhop, which S. Gregorie that liued till within three yeeres of his time, Epistol. lib. 6. cap. 30.
                      foretold would be the ſtyle of the Antichriſt, or his Praecurſor: for though he died threeſcore yeeres before the 666. of CHRIST, yet was that Title but fully ſetled vpon his Succeſſors, ſixtie yeeres after his time. Or if yee liſt to count it

from Pompey his ſpoiling of the Temple, to this ſame Mans time; it will goe very neere to make iuſt vp the ſaid number 666.
                  
                  Now the raigne of the Antichriſt being thus prophetically deſcribed in the xiij. Chapter;Cap. xiiij. Verſe 3. his fall is prophecied in the xiiij. Firſt by the ioyfull and triumphall New ſong of the Saints in heauen: And next by the proclamation of three Angels;Verſe 6. whereof the firſt hauing an euerlaſting Goſpel in his hand to preach to all Nations (the true armour indeed wherewith the Witneſſes fought against the Antichriſt;) This firſt Angel, I ſay,Verſe 7. proclaimed Feare and glory to GOD, ſince the houre of his Iudgement was come.
                     Verſe 8. And the ſecond proclaimed the fall of Babylon,
                     Verſe 9. which is the deſtruction of the Antichriſt. And the third prohibited vnder great paines, euen the paine of eternall damnation, that none ſhould worſhip the Beaſt, or receiue his Marke. But though that in the reſt of this Chapter the latter day be againe prophecied, as a thing that ſhall come ſhortly after the reuealing of the man of Sinne; yet in the xv. Chap. he telleth of ſeuen plagues,
                     Cap. xv. Verſe 1. vnder the name of Vials, that ſhall firſt fall

vpon the Antichriſt and his kingdome: which, being particularly ſet downe in the xvj.Chap. xvj. Chapter, hereckoneth amongſt the reſt. In the fifth Vial, the plague of darkeneſſe;Verſe 10. yea, ſuch darkeneſſe as the kingdome of Antichriſt ſhall bee obſcured: whereby at the powring foorth of the ſixt Vial, the way of the Kings of the Eaſt ſhalbe prepared;Verſe 12. the man of Sinne being begun to be reuealed, and ſo all impediments remooued that might let the inuaſion of that Monarchie: euen as that great riuer Euphrates that runneth by the literall Babylon. guarded it from the Kings of the Eaſt, the Medes and Perſians, the time of the Babylonian Monarchie, til by the drying thereof, or vnexspected paſſage made through it by Cyrus,
                     Dan. 5.3. 
                     Babylon was wonne, and Baltaſar deſtroyed, and his Monarchie ouerthrowne: euen while hee was ſitting in that literall Babylon, corporally drunken and quaffing in the veſsels ordained for GODS Seruice; and ſo ſitting as it were in the Temple of GOD, and abuſing the holy Myſteries thereof.
                  For remedy whereof, at the powring forth of the ſixt Vial,
                     Verſe 13. 
                     three vnclean Spirits, like frogs, ſhall then come foorth out of the mouth of

the Dragon, that Beaſt, and of the falſe Prophet; which I take to be as much to ſay, as that how ſoone as the kingdome of Antichriſt ſhalb
                        •
                      ſo obſcured, with ſuch a groſſe and a palpable ignorance, as learning ſhall be almoſt loſt out of the world, and that few of the very Prieſts themſelues ſhall bee able to read Latine, much leſſe to vnderſtand it; and ſo a plaine way made for the Deſtruction of Babylon: Then ſhall a new ſect of Spirits ariſe for the defence of that falling Throne, called three in number, by reaſon of their three-folde direction; beeing raiſed and inspired by the Dragon Sathan, authorized and maintained by the Beaſt the Antichriſt, and inſtructed by the falſe Prophet the Apoſtatike Church, that hath the hornes like the Lambe, but speaketh like the Dragon. Theſe Spirits indeed, thus ſent forth by this three-folde authoritie for the defence of their Triple crowned Monarch, are well likened to Frogs; for they are Amphibions, and can liue in either Element earth or water: for though they be Churchmen by profeſſion, yet can they vſe the trade of politike Stateſmen;Verſe 14. going to the Kings of the earth, to gather them to the battell of that great

day of GOD Almightie. What Maſſacres haue by their perſwaſions beene wrought through many parts of Chriſtendome, and how euill▪ Kings haue ſped that haue beene counſelled by them, all the vnpartiall Hiſtories of our time doe beare record. And whatſoeuer King or State will not receiue them, and follow their aduiſe, rooted out muſt that King or State be, euen with Gunpowder ere it faile. And theſe Frogs had reaſon indeed to labor to become learned, thereby to diſsipate that groſse miſt of ignorance, wherewith the reigne of Antichriſt was plagued before their comming foorth.Verſe. 17. Then doeth this Chapter conclude with the laſt plague that is poured out of the ſeuenth Viall vpon the Antichriſt, which is the day of Iudgement:Verſe. 19. for then Babylon (ſaith he) came in remembrance before God.
                  
                  
                     The fourth deſcription.But in the xvij Chapter is the former Viſion interpreted and expounded; and there is the Antichriſt repreſented by a Woman, ſitting vpon that many-headed Beaſt;
                     Cap. xvij. Verſe 3. becauſe as CHRIST his true Spouſe and Church is repreſented by a Woman in the xij. Chap. ſo here is the Head of his adulterous Spouſe or falſe Church repreſented alſo by a woman, but hauing a cup

ful of abominations in her hand;
                     Verſe 4. as her ſelfe is called a whoore for her ſpirituall adultery,Verſe 1. hauing ſeduced the Kings of the earth to bee partakers of her Spirituall fornication:Verſe 2. And yet wonderfull gorgious and glorious was ſhee in outward ſhew; but drunken with the blood of the Saints, by a violent perſecution of them.Verſe 6. And that ſhe may the better be knowen, he writeth her name vpon her forehead agreeable to her qualities: A Myſtery, that great Babylon, that mother of whoredomes and abominations of the earth. A Myſtery is a name that belongeth vnto her two maner of wayes: One,Verſe 5. as ſhe taketh it to her ſelfe; another, as ſhe deſerueth it indeed. To her ſelfe ſhe taketh it, in calling herſelfe the viſible Head of the Myſtical bodie of CHRIST, in profeſsing her ſelfe to bee the diſpenſer of the Mysteries of GOD, and by her onely muſt they bee expounded: This great God in earth and Head of the faith, being a Myſtes by his profeſsion; that is, a Prieſt. And if the obſeruation of one be true, that hee had of olde the word Myſtery written on his Myter; then is this prophecie very plainely accompliſhed. Now that indeede shee deſerues that name

the reſt of her Title doeth beare witneſſe,Verſe 5. that ſheweth her to be the Mother of all the whoredomes and abominations of the earth: and ſo is ſhe vnder the pretext of holineſſe, a Myſtery indeed of all iniquitie and abominations; vnder the marke of pretended feeding of Soules, deuouring Kingdomes, and making Chriſtendome ſwimme in blood.
                  Now after that this ſcarlet or bloody Beaſt and her Rider are deſcribed, by their ſhape, garments, name and qualities: the Angel doth next interpret this viſion vnto Iohn, expounding vnto him what is ſignified both by the Beaſt and her Rider; telling him, the ſeuen heads of the Beaſt are ſeuen Hils,
                     Verrſe. 9. meaning by the ſituation of that Citie or ſeat of Empire; and that they are alſo ſeuen Kings or formes of gouernement in the ſaid Citie, whereof I haue told my conceit already.Verſe 12. As for the tenne Hornes, which hee ſheweth to be tenne Kings, that ſhall at one houre receiue their power and Kingdome with the Beaſt, I take that number of ten to be Numerus certus pro incerto, euen as the number of ſeuen heads and ten hornes vpon the Dragon the Deuill, cannot but bee an vncertaine

number. And that he alſo imitates in thoſe ten hornes, the ten hornes of the ſeuen headed Beaſt in the ſeuenth of Daniel: and therefore I take theſe ten Kings to ſignifie, all the Christian Kings, and free Princes and States in generall, euen you whome to I conſecrate theſe my Labors, and that of vs all he prophecieth, that although our firſt becomming abſolute and free Princes ſhould bee in one houre with the Beaſt (for great Chriſtian kingdomes and Monarches did but riſe, and receiue their libertie by the ruines of the Ethnicke Romane Empire, and at the destruction thereof) and at the very time of the beginning of the planting of the Antichriſt there; and that wee ſhould for a long time continue to worſhip the Beast,Verſe 13. hauing one Catholike or common conſenting minde in obeying her, yelding our power and authoritie vnto her, and kiſsing her feet, drinking with her in her cup of Idolatrie, and fighting with the Lambe,
                     Verſe 14 in the perſecution of his Saints, at her command that gouerneth ſo many Nations and people: yet notwithſtanding of all this,Verſe 16. wee ſhall in the time appointed by GOD, hauing thus fought with the Lambe, but being ouercome by him,
                     
that is, conuerted by his word; wee ſhall then (I ſay) hate the Whore, and make her deſolate, and make her naked, by diſcouering her hypocriſie and falſe pretence of zeale; and ſhall eate her fleſh, and burne her with fire. And thus ſhal the way of the Kings of the Eaſt be prepared,
                     Reuel. 16.12. as yee heard in the xvj. Chapter. And then doth hee ſubioyne the reaſon of this ſtrange change in vs:Verſe 17 for (ſaith hee) GOD hath put it in their hearts to fulfill his will, and with one conſent to giue their Kingdomes to the Beaſt, till the words of GOD be fulfilled, according to that ſentence of Salomon;Prou. 21.1. That the hearts of Kings are in the handes of GOD, to bee turned at his pleaſure. And hauing thus interpreted the Beast or Empire; he in a word expounds, that by the Woman that rode vpon her, or Monarch that gouerned her,Verſe 18 was meant that great Citie that raigned ouer the Kings of the earth: by the Seate of the Empire pointing out the qualitie of the perſons that ſhould ſit and domine there.
                  
                     Chap. xviij.Then is the greatneſse of her fall, and the great lamentation that both the Kings and merchants of the earth ſhall make for the ſame, proclaimed

by an other Angel in the xviij. Chapter.Verſe 9.10. The Kings lamenting her fall, becauſe they liued in pleaſure with her; which no Kings could doe with Ethnicke Rome, who conquered them by her ſword: for ſhee honoured them with Titles, and dispenſed with their luſtes and vnlawfull mariages. And the Merchants of the earth,
                     Verſe 11, 15, 16, 17, 18. 
                     and all Shipmaſters, and traffikers vpon the Sea ſhall lament the fall of that great city, which neuer had a fellow, for the loſse of their riches and trafficke which they inioyed by her meanes.Verſe 12, 13. And there hee deſcribeth all ſorts of rich wares, whereof that great City was the Staple: for indeede ſhee hath a neceſſary vſe for all ſuch rich and glorious wares, as well for ornaments to her Churches and princely Prelates, as for garments and ornaments to her woodden Saints; for the bleſſed Virgin muſt be daily clothed and decked in the newest and moſt curious faſhion, though it ſhould reſemble the habit of a Curtizane. And of all thoſe rich wares, the moſt precious is last named, which is the Soules of men:
                     Verſe 13. for ſo much beſtowed vpon Maſſes, and ſo much doted to this or that Cloyſter of Monkes or Friers, but moſt of all now to that irregular and incomprehenſible

order of Ieſuites; ſhall both redeeme his owne Soule, and all his Parents to the hundreth generation, from broyling in the fire of Purgatory. And (I hope) it is no ſmall merchandiſe of Soules, when men are ſo highly deluded by the hopes and promiſe of Saluation, as to make a Frier murther his Henry 3. K. of France. 
                     Soueraigne; a young knaue attempt the murther of his next Henry 4. 
                     Succeſſour; many one to conspire and attempt the like againſt the late Queene; and in my time, to attempt the deſtruction of a whole Kingdome and State by a blaſt of Powder: and heereby to play bankerupt with both the ſoules mentioned in the Scriptures, Animus & Anima.
                  
                  But notwithſtanding of this their great Lamentation, they are commanded by a voice from heauen to doe two things:Verſe 4. One, to flee from Babylon, leaſt they bee partakers of her ſinnes, and conſequently of her puniſhment. Which warning I pray God that yee all, my Beloued Brethren and Coſins, would take heede vnto in time, humbly beſeeching him to open your eyes for this purpoſe. The other commaund is, to reward her as ſhee hath rewarded you;
                     Verſe 6 
                     yea, euen to the double. For as ſhe did flie but

with your feathers, borrowing as well her Titles of greatnes and formes of honoring her from you; as alſo enioying all her temporall liuing by your liberalities; ſo if euery man doe but take his owne againe, ſhe will ſtand vp Cornicula Aeſopica. naked; and the reaſon is giuen, becauſe of her pride. For ſhe glorifieth her ſelfe liuing in pleaſure,
                     Verſe 7 and in her heart ſayth, ſhee ſitteth as a Queene (outward prosperity being one of their notes of a true Church) and is no Widow; for her Spouſe CHRIST is bound to her by an inuiolable knot (for hee hath ſworn neuer to forſake her) and ſhe ſhal ſee no mourning: for ſhe cannot erre, nor the gates of Hell ſhall not preuaile againſt her.
                  But though the earth and worldly men lament thus for the fall of Babylon in this eighteenth Chapter,Cap. xix. Verſe 1. yet in the nineteenth Heauen and all the Angels and Saints therein doe ſing a triumphall Cantique for ioy of her fall; praiſing God for the fall of that great Whoore:
                     Verſe 2. Great indeed, for our Bellar. in Reſad Gerſon. conſid. 11.
                      
                     Cardinall confeſseth, that it is hard to deſcribe what the Pope is, ſuch is his greatneſſe. And in the ende of that Chapter is the obſtinacie of that Whoore deſcribed,Verſe 19 who euen fought to the vttermost againſt him

that ſate on the white Horſe,
                     Verſe 20. 
                     and his armie, till the Beaſt or Antichriſt was taken, and the falſe Prophet, or falſe Church with him, who by Myracles, and lying Wonders deceiued them that receiued the marke of the Beaſt; and both were caſten quicke into the burning lake of fire and brimſtone; Vnde null redemptio. Like as in the ende of the former Chapter, to deſcribe the fulneſſe of the Antichriſtes fall (not like to that reparable wound that Ethnicke Rome gate) it is firſt compared to a Milſtone caſt in the ſea,
                     Cap. 18.21 that can neuer riſe and fleete againe:
                        Ibidem. Verſe 22, 23 And next it is expreſſed by a number of ioyfull things that ſhall neuer be heard there againe, where nothing ſhall inhabite but deſolation. But that the patience and constancy of Saints on earth, and God his Elected may the better be ſtrengthened and confirmed; their perſecution in the latter dayes, is ſhortly propheſied and repeated againe,Cap. xx. Verſe 2 after that Satan hath beene bound, or his furie restrained, by the worlds inioying of peace for a thouſand yeeres, or a great indefinite time; their perſecutors being named Gog and Magog,
                     Verſe 8 the ſecret and reuealed enemies of CHRIST. Whether this be

meant of the Pope and the Turke, or not; (who both began to riſe to their greatneſse about one time) I leaue to be gueſſed;Verſe 9. alwayes their vtter confuſion is there aſſuredly promiſed: and it is ſaid; that the Dragon, the Beaſt,
                     Verſe 10. and the falſe Prophet, ſhall all three bee caſt in that lake of fire and brimſtone, to be tormented for euer. And thereafter is the latter day deſcribed againe (which muſt be haſtened for the elects ſake) and then for the further comfort of the Elect,Verſe 11, 12, 13 Matth. 24 22 and that they may the more conſtantly and patiently indure theſe temporall and finite troubles, limited but to a ſhort ſpace;Chap. xxj.xxij in the laſt two Chapters are the ioyes of the eternall Ieruſalem largely deſcribed.
                  Thus hath the Cardinals ſhameleſse wreſting of thoſe two places of Scripture, Paſce oues meas, and Tibi dabo claues, for proouing of the Popes ſupreme temporall Authoritie ouer Princes; animated me to prooue the Pope to be THE ANTICHRIST, out of this foreſaid booke of Scripture; ſo to pay him in his owne money againe. And this opinion no Pope can euer make me to recant; except they firſt renounce any further medling with Princes, in any thing belonging

to their temporall Iuriſdiction. And my only wiſh ſhalbe, that if any man ſhall haue a fancie to refute this my coniecture of the Antichriſt; that he anſwere mee orderly to euery point of my diſcourſe: not contenting him to diſproue my opinion, except hee ſet downe ſome other methode after his forme for interpretation of that booke of the Apocalyps, which may not contradict no part of the Text, nor containe no abſurdities. Otherwiſe, it is an eaſie thing for Momus to picke quarrels in another mans tale, and tell it worſe himſelfe; it being a more eaſie practiſe to finde faults, then to amend them.
                  Hauing now made this digreſsion anent the Antichriſt, which I am ſure I can better faſten vpon the Pope, then Bellarmine can doe his pretended temporall Superioritie ouer Kings: I will returne againe to ſpeake of this Anſwerer; who (as I haue alreadie told you) ſo fitteth his matter with his maner of anſwering, that as his Style is nothing but a Satyre and heape full of iniurious and reprochfull ſpeeches, as well againſt my Perſon, as my Booke; ſo is his matter as full of lyes and falſities indeed, as he vniuſtly layeth to my charge. For three lyes hee maketh

againſt the Oath of Allegiance, contained and maintained in my Booke: beſides that ordinary repeated lye againſt my Book; of his omitting to anſwere my lyes, trattles, iniurious ſpeeches and blaſphemies. One groſſe lye hee maketh euen of the Popes first Breue. One lye of the Puritanes, whom he would gladly haue to bee of his partie. And one alſo of the Powder-Traitors, anent the occaſion that moued them to vndertake that treaſonable practiſe. Three lies he makes of that Acte of Parliament wherein this Oath of Allegiance is contained. He alſo maketh one notable lye againſt his owne Catholike Writers. And two, of the cauſes for which two Ieſuites haue bene put to death in England. And hee either falſifies, denies or wreſts fiue ſundry Hiſtories and a printed Pamphlet: beſides that impudent lye that he maketh of my Perſon; that I was a Puritane in Scotland, which I haue alreadie refuted. And for the better filling vp of his booke with ſuch good stuffe; he hath alſo fiue ſo ſtrange and new principles of Diuinitie therein, as they are either new, or at leaſt allowed by very few of his owne Religion. All which lyes, with diuers others, and fiue ſtrange, and (as I

thinke) erroneous points of Doctrine, with ſ
                        •
                     n dry falſifications of Hyſtories; are ſet downe in a Table by themſelues in the end of this my Epiſtle, hauing their Refutation annexed to euery one of them.
                  But as for the particular anſwering of his booke; it is both vnneceſſarie and vncomely for me to make a Reply. Vnneceſſarie, becauſe (as I haue alreadie told you) my Booke is neuer yet anſwered ſo farre as belongeth to the maine queſtion anent the Oath of Allegiance: the picking of aduantage vpon the wrong placing of the figures in the citations, or ſuch errors in the Print by caſuall addition, or omiſsion of words that make nothing to the Argument; being the greateſt weapons wherewith hee aſſaults my Booke. And vncomely it muſt needs be (in my opinion) for a King to fall in altercation with a Cardinall, at leaſt with one no more nobly deſcend
                        •
                     d then he is: That Eccleſiaſticall dignitie, though by the ſloath of Princes (as I ſaid before) it bee now come to that height of vſurped honour, yet being in the true originall and foundation thereof nothing elſe, but the title of the Prieſtes and Deacons of the pariſh Churches in the towne of

                     Rome; at the firſt, the ſtyle of Cardinals beeing generally giuen to all Prieſtes and Deacons of any Cathedrall Church, though the multitude of ſuch Cardinall Prieſts and Deacons reſorting to Rome, was the cauſe that after bred the reſtraining of that title of Cardinall Prieſts and Deacons, onely to the Pariſh prieſts and Deacons of Rome. And ſince that it is S. Gregorie, who in his Epiſtles ſixe hundreth yeares after CHRIST, maketh the firſt mention of Cardinals (and ſo theſe now Electours of the Apoſtolike Sea, beeing long and many hundreth yeers vnknowen or vnheard of, after the Apoſtol
                        •
                     ke age; and yet doth he ſpeake of them but in this ſenſe, as I haue now deſcribed) I hope the Cardinall, who calleth him the Apoſtle of England, cannot blame me that am King thereof, to acknowledge the Cardinall in no other degree of honour, then our ſaid Apoſtle did. But how they ſhould now become to be ſo ſtrangely exalted aboue their firſt originall institution, that from Pariſh-prieſts and Deacons (Prieſts inferiours) they ſhould now come to be Princes and Peeres to Kings: and from a degree vnder Biſhops (as both Lib. de Clericis, cap. 16.
                      
                     Bellarmine and Lib. de Epiſcopatibus, Titulis & Diaconijs Cardinalium. 
                     Onuphrius
                     
confeſſe (to be now the Popes ſole Electors, ſu
                        •
                     
                     plying with him the place of a General Counſel; whereby the conuening of generall Councels is now vtterly antiquated and aboliſhed; nay, out of their number onely, the Pope to be elected; who claimeth the abſolute Superiority ouer all Kings: how this their ſtrange vſurped exaltation (I ſay) ſhould thus creepe in and be ſuffered, it belongeth all them in our place and calling to look vnto it; who being GOD his Lieute
                           •
                        āts in earth, haue good reaſon to be iealous of ſuch vpſtart Princes, meane in their originall, come to that height by their owne creation, and now accounting themſelues Kings fellowes. But the ſpeciall harme they do vs, is by their defrauding vs of our common & Chriſtian intereſt in generall Councels; they hauing (as I ſayd) vtterly aboliſhed the ſame, by rowling it vp and making as it were a Monopoly thereof, in their Conclaue with the Pope. Whereas, if euer there were a poſſibilitie to bee expected of reducing all Christians to an vniformitie of Religion, it muſt come by the meanes of a generall Councell: the place of their meeting beeing choſen ſo indifferēt, as all Chriſtian Princes, either in their owne

Perſons, or their Deputie Commiſsioners, and all Church men of Chriſtian profeſſion that beleeue and profeſſe all the ancient grounds of the true, ancient, Catholike and Apoſtolike Faith, might haue tutum acceſſum thereunto; All the incendiaries and Noueliſt fire-brands on either ſide beeing debarred from the ſame, as well Ieſuites as Puritanes.
                  
                  And therefore hauing reſolued not to paine my ſelfe with making a Reply for theſe reaſons here ſpecified, grounded as well vpon the conſideration of the matter, as of the perſon of the Anſwerer; I haue thought good to content my ſelfe with the reprinting of my Apologie: hauing in a maner corrected nothing but the Copiers or Printers faults therein, and prefixed this my Epiſtle of Dedication and Warning therunto; that I may yet ſee, if any thing will be iuſtly ſaid againſt it: Not doubting but enow of my Subiects will reply vpon theſe Libellers, and anſwere them ſufficiently; wiſhing YOV deepely to conſider, and weigh your common intereſt in this Cauſe. For neither in all my Apologie, nor in his pretended Refutation thereof, is there any queſtion made anent the Popes power ouer mee

in particular, for the excommunicating or depoſing of me. For in my particular; the Cardinall doeth me that grace, that he ſaith, The Pope thought it not expedient at this time to excommunicate me by name; our queſtion beeing onely generall, Whether the Pope may lawefully pretend any temporall power ouer Kings, or no?
                  That no Church men can by his rule be ſubiect to any temporall Prince, I haue already ſhewed you; And what obedience any of you may looke for of any of them de facto, he plainly forewarneth you of, by the example of Gregorie the Great his obedience to the Emperor Mauritius: not beeing aſhamed to ſlaunder that great Perſonages Chriſtian humilitie and obedience to the Emperour, with the title of a constrained and forced obedience, becauſe hee might, or durſt doe no otherwiſe. Whereby he not onely wrongs the ſaid Gregorie in particular, but euen doeth by that meanes lay on an heauie ſlaunder and reproach vpon the Chriſtian humilitie and patience of the whole Primitiue Church, eſpecially in the time of perſecution: if the whole glorie of their Martyrdome and Chriſtian patience ſhall be thus blotted with that vile gloſſe of their

coacted and conſtrained ſuffering, becauſe they could or durſt do no otherwiſe; like the patience and obedience of the Iewes or Turkiſh ſlaues in our time cleane contrary to S. Paul and S. Pe
                        
                           ••
                        rs doctrine of obedience for conſcience ſake;Rom. 13.5. 1 Pet. 2.13. and as contrarie to Tertullians Apologie for Christians, and all the proteſtations of the ancient Fathers in that caſe. But it was good lucke for the ancient Chriſtians in the dayes of Ethnicke Emperors, that this prophane & new conceit was yet vnknowen among them: otherwiſe they would haue bin vtterly deſtroyed and rooted out in that time, and no man to haue pitied them, as moſt dangerous members in a Common-wealth, who would no longer bee obedient, then till they were furniſhed with ſufficient abilitie and power to reſist and rebell.
                  Thus may ye ſee, how vpon the one part our Cardinall will haue all Kings and Monarchs to be the Popes Vaſſals; and yet will not on the other ſide, allow the meaneſt of the Pope his vaſſals, to be ſubiect to any Chriſtian Prince. But he not thinking it enough to make the Pope our Superior, hath in a late Treatiſe of his (called the Recognition of his bookes of Controuerſies)

made the people and Subiects of euery one of vs, our Superiors. For hauing taken occaſion to reuiſite againe his bookes of Controuerſies and to correct or explaine what he findeth amiſſe or miſtaketh in them; in imitation of S. Auguſtine his retractions (for ſo hee ſaith in his Preface) he doth in place of retracting any of his former errours, or any matter of ſubſtance; not retract, but recant indeed, I meane ſing ouer againe, and obſtinatly confirme a number of the groſſeſt of them. Among the which, the exempting of all Church-men from ſubiection to any Temporall Prince, and the ſetting vp not onely of the Pope, but euen of the People aboue their naturall King; are two of his maine points.
                  As for the exemption of the Clerickes; he is ſo greedy there to proue that point,Actes 25.10. as he denieth Caeſar to haue beene Pauls lawfull Iudge: contrary to the expreſſe Text, and Pauls plain Appellation, and acknowledging him his Iudge; beſides his many times claiming to the Roman priuiledges,Actes 22.28. and auowing himſelfe a Roman by freedome; and therefore of neceſsitie a Subiect to the Roman Emperour. But it is a wonder that theſe Roman Catholikes, who vaunt themſelues

of the ancientie both of their doctrine and Church, and reproch vs ſo bitterly of our Nouelties, ſhould not bee aſhamed to make ſuch a new inept gloſse as this vpon S. Pauls Text; which as it is directly contrary to the Apostles wordes, ſo is it without any warrant, either of any ancient Councell, or of ſo much as any one particular Father that euer interpre
                        •
                     s that place in this ſort: Neither was it euer doubted by any Chriſtian in the Primitiue Church, that the Apoſtles, or any other degree of Chriſtians, were ſubiect to the Emperour.
                  And as for the ſetting vp of the People aboue their owne naturall King, hee bringeth in that principle of Sedition, that he may thereby proue, that Kings haue not their power and authoritie immediatly from God, as the Pope hath his: For euery King (ſaith he) is made and choſen by his people; nay, they do but ſo transferre their power in the Kings perſon, as they doe notwithstanding retaine their habituall power in their owne hands, which vpon certaine ocaſions they may actually take to themſelues againe. This, I am ſure, is an excellent ground in Diuini
                        ••
                     e for all R
                        •
                     bels and rebellious people, who are hereby allowed

to rebell againſt their Princes; and aſsume libertie vnto themſelues, when in their diſcretions they ſhall thinke it conuenient.
                  And amongst his other Testimonies for probation, that all Kings are made and created by the People; hee alledgeth the Creation of three Kings in the Scripture, Saul, Dauid & Ieroboam; and though he be compelled by the expreſſe words of the Text, to confeſſe, that God by his Prophet Samuel anointed both 1. Sam. 10.1 
                     Saul and 1. Sam. 16.12.13. 
                     Dauid; yet will he, by the poſt-conſent of the people, proue that thoſe Kings were not immediatly made by God, but mediatly by the people; though he repeat thriſe that word of Lott, by the caſting whereof hee confeſſeth that Saul was choſen. And if the Election by Lott be not an immediate Election from God;Actes 1. then was not Matthias, who was ſo choſen and made an Apostle, immediatly choſen by God: and conſequently, hee that ſitteth in the Apoſtolike Sea cannot for ſhame claim to be immediatly choſen by God, if Matthias (that was one of the twelue Apostles, ſupplying Iudas his place) was not ſo choſen. But as it were a blasphemous impietie, to doubt that Matthias was immediatly choſen by God, and yet was

hee choſen by the caſting of Lots, as Saul was: ſo is it well enough knowen to ſome of you (my louing Brethren) by what holy Spirit or caſting of Lots the Popes vſe to bee elected; the Colledge of Cardinals, his electors, hauing beene diuided in two mighty factions euer ſince long before my time; and in place of caſting of Lotts, great fat penſions beeing cast into ſome of their greedy mouthes for the election of the Pope, according to the partiall humours of Princes. But I doe moſt of all wonder at the weakneſſe of his memorie: for in this place hee maketh the poſt conſent of the people to bee the thing that made both theſe Kings, notwithſtanding of their preceding inauguration and anoyntment by the Prophet at GODS commandement; forgetting that in the beginning of this ſame little booke of his, anſwering one that alledgeth a ſentence of S. Cyprian, to prooue that the Biſhops were iudged by the people in Cyprians time, hee there confeſseth, that by theſe words, the conſent of the people to the Biſhops election muſt be onely vnderstood. Nor will he there any wayes be mooued to graunt, that the peoples power, in conſenting to or refuſing the Election of a Biſhop;

ſhould be ſo vnderſtood, as that therby they haue power to elect Biſhops: And yet do theſe words of Cyprian ſeeme to be farre ſtronger for granting the peoples power to elect Church-men, then any words that hee alledgeth out of the Scripture are for the peoples power in electing a King. For the very words of Cyprian by himſelfe there cited are,Cyprian. lib. 1. Epiſt. 4.
                      That the very people haue principally the power, either to chuſe ſuch Prieſts as are worthy, or to refuſe ſuch as are vnworthy: And, I hope, he can neuer proue by the Scripture, that it had been lawfull to the people of Iſrael, or that it was left in their choiſe, to haue admitted or refuſed Saul or Dauid at their pleaſure, after that the Prophet had anointed them, and preſented them vnto them.
                  Thus ye ſee how little he careth (euen in ſo little a volume) to contradict himſelfe, ſo it may make for his purpoſe; making the conſent of the people to ſignifie their power of Election in the making of Kings, though in the making of Biſhops, by the peoples cōſent, their approbauen of a deede done by others must onely bee vnderſtood. And as for his example of Ieroboams election to be king,1. King. 12.20 hee knoweth well enough,

that Ieroboam was made King in a popular mutinous tumult and rebellion; onely permitted by God, and that in his wrath, both againſt theſe two Kings and their people. But if he will needs helpe himſelfe againſt all rules of Diuinity, with ſuch an extraordinary example for proofe of a generall Rule; why is it not as lawfull for vs Kings to oppoſe hereunto the example of Iehu his Inauguration to the Kingdome;2. King 9.2, 
                           •
                        . who vpon the Prophets priuat anointment of him, and that in moſt ſecret maner, tooke preſently the Kings office vpon him, without euer crauing any ſort of approbation from the people?
                  And thus may ye now clearely ſee, how deepe the claime of the Babylonian Monarch toucheth vs in all our common intereſt: for (as I haue already tolde) the Pope, nor any of his Vaſſals, I meane Church-men, muſt be ſubiect to no Kings nor Princes: and yet all Kings and their Vaſſals muſt not onely be ſubiect to the Pope, but euen to their own people. And now, what a large liberty is by this doctrine left to Churchmen, to hatch or foſter any treaſonable attempts againſt Princes, I leaue it to your conſiderations, ſince doe what they will, they are accountable to none of vs:

nay, all their treaſonable practiſes muſt bee accounted workes of pietie, and they (being iuſtly puniſhed for the ſame) muſt be preſently inrolled in the liſt of Martyrs and Saints; like as our new printed Martyrologie hath put Garnet and Ouldcorne in the Regiſter of Engliſh Martyrs abroad, that were hanged at home for Treaſon againſt the Crown and whole State of England: ſo as I may iuſtly with Iſaiah,
                     Iſai 5.20. pronounce a Woe to them that ſpeake good of euill, and euill of good;
                     Verſe 23. 
                     which put light for darkeneſſe, and darkneſſe for light; which iuſtifie the wicked for a reward, & take away the righteouſnes of the righteous from him. For euen as in the time of the greateſt blindneſſe in Popery, though a man ſhould find his wife or his daughter lying a bed in her Confeſſors armes; yet was it not lawfull for him ſo much as to ſuſpect that the Frier ahadny errand there, but to Confeſſe and inſtruct her: Euen ſo, though Ieſuites practiſing in Treaſon bee ſufficiently verified, and that themſelues cannot but confeſſe it; yet muſt they bee accounted to ſuffer Martyrdome for the Faith, and their blood work miracles, and frame a ſtramineum argumentum vpon ſtrawes;

when their heads are ſtanding aloft, withered by the Sunne and the winde, a publike ſpectacle for the eternall commemoration of their treacherie. Yea, one of the reaſons, that is giuen in the Printers Epistle of the Colonian edition of the Cardinal or his Chaplains pamphlet, why he doth the more willingly print it, is; becauſe that the innocencie of that moſt holy and constant man Henry Garnet, is declared and ſet forth in that booke; againſt whom, ſome (he knew not who) had ſcattered a falſe rumour of his guiltineſse of the Engliſh treaſon.
                  But, Lord, what an impudencie or wilfull ignorance is this, that he, who was ſo publikely and ſolemnely conuicted and executed, vpon his own ſo cleare, vnforced and often repeated confeſsion, of his knowledge and concealing of that horrible Treaſon, ſhould now be ſaid to haue a certaine rumor ſpred vpon him of his guiltineſſe, by I know not who? with ſo many attributes of godlineſſe, constancie and innocencie bestowed vpon him, as if publike Sentences and Executions of Iustice, were rumors of I know not who. Indeed, I muſt confeſse, the booke it ſelfe ſheweth a great affection to performe, what is thus promiſed

in the Preface thereof: for in two or three places therin, is there moſt honorable lying mention made of that ſtraw Saint; wherein, though he confeſse that Garnet was vpon the foreknowledge of the Powder-Treaſon, yet in regarde it was (as he ſaith) only vnder the Seale of Confeſſion, he ſticketh not to praiſe him for his concealing thereof, and would gladly giue him the crowne of glory for the ſame: not being aſhamed to proclaime it as a principal head of Catholique doctrine; That the ſecret of Sacramental con
                        
                           •
                        eſsion ought not to be reuealed, not for the eſchewing of whatſoeuer euil. But how damnable this doctrine is, and how dangerouſly pre
                     
                        •
                     udiciall to all Princes & States; I leaue it to you to iudge, whom all it moſt highly concerneth. For although it he true, that when the Schoolemen came to be Doctors in the Church, and to marre the old grounds in Diuinitie by ſowing in amongſt them their Philoſophicall diſtinctions: though they (I ſay) do maintain, That wha
                        •
                     ſoeeuer thing is told a Confeſſor vnder the vaile of confeſsion, how dangerous ſoeuer the matter bee, yet he is bound to conceale the parties name: yet doe none of them, I meane of the olde Schoolemen,

deny, that if a matter bee reuealed vnto them, the concealing whereof may breed a great or publike danger; but that in that caſe the Confeſſor may diſcloſe the matter, though not the perſon, and by ſome indirect means make it come to light, that the danger thereof may bee preuented. But that no treaſon nor diueliſh plot, though it ſhould tend to the ruine or exterminion of a whole Kingdome, muſt be reuealed, if it bee told vnder Confeſsion; no not the matter ſo far indirectly diſcloſed, as may giue occaſion for preuenting the danger thereof: though it agree with the conceit of ſome three or foure new Ieſuited Doctors, it is ſuch a new and dangerous head of doctrine, as no King nor State can liue in ſecuritie where that Poſition is maintained.
                  And now, that I may as well prooue him a lyar in facto, in his narration of this particular Hyſtory; as I haue ſhewed him to be in iure, by this his damnable and falſe ground in Diuinity: I wil truly informe you of Garnets caſe, which is far otherwiſe then this Anſwerer alleageth. For firſt, it can neuer bee accounted a thing vnder Confeſsion, which he that reueals it doth not diſcouer with a remorſe, accounting it a ſin whereof

he repenteth him; but by the contrary, diſcouers it as a good motion, and is therein not diſſuaded by his Confeſsor, nor any penance enioyned him for the ſame: and in this forme was this Treaſon reuealed to Garnet, as himſelfe confeſſed. And next, though he ſtood long vpon it, that it was reuealed vnto him vnder the vaile of Confeſsion, in reſpect it was done in that time, while as the partie was making his Confeſsion vnto him; Yet at the laſt he did freely confeſſe, that the party reuealed it vnto him as they were walking, and not in the time of Confeſsion: But (hee ſaid) hee deliuered it vnto him vnder the greateſt Seale that might be, and ſo he tooke that he meant by the Seale of Confeſsion; And it had (as he thought) a relation to Confeſsion, in regard that he was that parties Confeſſor, & had taken his Confeſsion ſometimes before, and was to take it againe within few dayes thereafter. He alſo ſaid, that he pretended to the partie, that he would not conceale it from his Superior. And further it is to be noted, that hee confeſſed, that two diuers perſons conferred with him anent this Treaſon; and that when the one of them, which was Catesby, conferred with him thereupon,

it was in the other parties preſence and hearing: and what a Confeſsion can this be in the hearing of a third perſon? And how far his last wordes (whereof our Anſwerer ſo much vaunts him) did disproue it to haue been vnder Confeſsion, the Earle of Northamptons Booke doth beare witneſſe.
                  Now as to the other parties name, that reuealed the Powder-Treaſon vnto him, it was Greenwell the Ieſuite, and ſo a Ieſuite reuealed to a Ieſuite this treaſonable plot, the Ieſuite reuealer not ſhewing any remorſe, and the Ieſuit whome to it was reuealed not ſo much as inioyning him any penance for the ſame. And that ye may knowe that more Ieſuites were alſo vpon the partie, Owldcorne the other Powder-Martyr, after the miſgiuing and diſcouerie of that Treaſon, preached conſolatorie doctrine to his Catholike auditory; exhorting them not to faint for the miſgiuing of this enterpriſe, nor to thinke the worſe thereof that it ſucceeded not; alleadging diuers Preſidents of ſuch godly enterpriſes that miſgaue in like manner: especially, one of Saint Lewis King of France, who in his ſecond iourney to the Holy land, died by the way, the

greatest part of his army being deſtroyed by the plague; his firſt iourney hauing likewiſe miſgiuen him by the Soldans taking of him: exhorting them thereupon not to giue ouer, but ſtill to hope that God would bleſſe their enterpriſe at ſome other time, though this did faile.
                  Thus ſee ye now with what boldnes and impudencie he hath belied the publikely knowen veritie in this errand, both in auowing generally that no Ieſuite was any waies guilty of that treaſon, for ſo he affirmeth in his Booke; and alſo that Garnet knewe nothing thereof, but vnder the Seale of Confeſsion. But if this were the firſt lie of the affaires of this State, which my fugitiue Prieſtes and Ieſuites haue coined and ſpread abroad, I could charme them of it, as the prouerbe is. But as well the walles of diuers Monaſteries and Ieſuites Colleges abroad, are filled with the painting of ſuch lying Histories, as alſo the bookes of our ſaid fugitiues are farced with ſuch ſort of ſhameleſſe ſtuffe; ſuch are the innumerable ſorts of torments and cruell deathes, that they record their Martyrs to haue ſuffered here; ſome torne at foure Horſes; ſome ſowed in Beares skinnes, and then killed with Dogges:

nay, women haue not beene spared (they ſay) and a thouſand other ſtrange fictions, the vanities of all which I will in two words diſcouer vnto you.
                  Firſt as for the cauſe of their puniſhment, I doe conſtantly maintaine that which I haue ſaid in my Apology: That no man, either in my time, or in the late Queenes, euer died here for his conſcience. For let him be neuer ſo deuout a Papist, nay, though hee profeſſe the ſame neuer ſo conſtantly, his life is in no danger by the Law, if hee breake not out into ſome outward acte expreſly against the words of the Law, or plot not ſome vnlawfull or dangerous practiſe or attempt; Priests and Popiſh Church-men onely excepted, that receiue orders beyond the ſeas; who for the manifold treaſonable practiſes that they haue kindled & plotted in this countrey, are diſcharged to come home againe vnder paine of treaſon, after their receiuing of the ſaide Orders abroad; and yet, without ſome other guilt in them then their bare home-comming, haue none of thē bin euer put to death. And next, for the cruell torments & ſtrange ſorts of death that they ſay ſo many of them haue bin put vnto; if there were

no more but the Lawe and continually obſerued cuſtome of England, theſe many hundred yeeres, in all criminall matters, it will ſufficiently ſerue to refute all theſe monstrous lies: for no tortures are euer vſed here, but the Manicles or the Racke, and theſe neuer but in caſes of high Treaſon; and all ſorts of Traitours die but one maner of death here, whether they bee Papiſt or Proteſtant traitours; Queene Maries time only excepted. For then indeede no ſorts of cruell deathes were spared vnexecuted vpon men, women and children profeſsing our Religion: yea, euen againſt the lawes of God and Nature, women with childe were put to cruell death for their profeſsion; and a liuing childe falling out of the mothers belly, was throwen in the ſame fire againe that conſumed the mother. But theſe tyrannous perſecutions were done by the Biſhops of that time, vnder the warrant of the Popes authoritie, and therefore were not ſubiect to that constant order and formes of execution, which as they are heere eſtabliſhed by our Lawes and cuſtomes, ſo are they accordingly obſerued in the puniſhment of all criminals. For all Prieſts and Popiſh Traitours heere receiue their

Iudgement in the temporall Courts, and ſo doe neuer exceed thoſe formes of execution which are preſcribed by the Law, or approued by continuall cuſtome. One thing is alſo to be marked in this caſe; that ſtrangers are neuer called in queſtion here for their Religion, which is far otherwiſe (I hope) in any place where the Inquiſition domines.
                  But hauing now too much wearied you with this long diſcourſe, whereby I haue made you plainely ſee, that the wrong done vnto me in particular; firſt by the Popes Breues, and then by theſe Libellers, doth as deepely intereſt you all in generall, that are Kings, free Princes, or States, as it doth mee in particular: I will now conclude, with my humble prayers to God, that he will waken vs vp all out of that Lethargike ſlumber of Securitie, wherein our Predeceſsors and we haue lien ſo long; and that wee may firſt grauely conſider, what wee are bound in conſcience to doe for the planting and ſpreading of the true worſhip of God, according to his reuealed will, in all our Dominions; therein hearing the voice of our onely Paſtor (for his Sheepe will know his voyce,Iohn 10.27. as himſelfe ſaith) and not

following the vaine, corrupt & changeable traditions of men. And next that wee may prouidently looke to the ſecuritie of our owne States, and not ſuffer this incroching Babylonian Monarch to winne ſtill ground vpon vs. And if God hath ſo mercifully dealt with vs, that are his Lieutenants vpon earth, as that he hath ioyned his cauſe with our intereſt, the ſpirituall libertie of the Goſpel with our temporall freedome: with what zeale and courage may wee then imbrace this worke: for our labours herein being aſſured, to receiue at the laſt the eternall and ineſtimable reward of felicitie in the kingdome of Heauen; and in the meane time to procure vnto our ſelues a temporall ſecuritie, in our temporall Kingdomes in this world.
                  As for ſo many of you as are already perſwaded of that Truth which I profeſſe, though differing among your ſelues in ſome particular points; I think little perſwaſion ſhould moue you to this holy and wiſe Reſolution: Our Greatnes, nor our number, praiſed bee God, being not ſo contemptible, but that we may ſhew good example to our neighbors; ſince almoſt the halfe of all Chriſtian people and of all ſorts and degrees, are

of our profeſsion; I meane, all gone out of Babylon, euen from Kings and free Princes, to the meaneſt ſort of people. But aboue all (my louing Brethren and Coſins) keepe faſt the vnity of Faith amongſt your ſelues; Reiect 1. Tim. 1.4. queſtions of Genealogies and Ibid. c. 4.7. 
                     Aniles fabulas, as Paul ſaith; Let not the fooliſh heate of your Preachers for idle Controuerſies or indifferent things, teare aſunder that myſticall Body, whereof yee are a part, ſince the very coat of him whoſe members wee are was without a ſeame: And let not our diuiſion breed a ſlander of our faith, and be a word of reproch in the mouthes of our aduerſaries, who make Vnitie to be one of the ſpeciall notes of the true Church.
                  And as for you (my louing Brethren and Coſins) whome it hath not yet pleaſed GOD to illuminate with the light of trueth; I can but humbly pray with Elizeus, that it would pleaſe GOD to open your eyes, that yee might ſee what innumerable and inuincible armies of Angels are euer prepared and ready to defend the truth of GOD:
                     Actes 26.29. and with S. Paul I wiſh, that ye were as I am in this caſe; especially that yee would ſearch the Scriptures, and ground your Faith vpon your

owne certaine knowledge, and not vpon the report of others; ſince euery Man muſt be ſaf
                           •
                         by his owne faith.
                     Abac. 2 4. But, leauing this to GOD his mercifull prouidence in his due time, I haue good reaſon to remember you, to maintaine the ancient liberties of your Crownes and Common-wealthes, not ſuffering any vnder GOD to ſet himſelfe vp aboue you; and therein to imitate your owne noble predeceſſors, who (euen in the dayes of greateſt blindnes) did diuers times couragiouſly oppoſe themſelues to the incroaching ambition of Popes. Yea, ſome of your Kingdomes haue in all ages maintained, and without any interruption enioyed your libertie, againſt the moſt ambitious Popes. And ſome haue of very late had an euident proofe of the Popes ambitious aspiring ouer your temporall power; wherein ye haue conſtantly maintained and defended your lawfull freedome, to your immortall honour. And therefore I heartily wiſh you all, to doe in this caſe the office of godly and iuſt Kings and earthly Iudges: which conſiſteth not onely in not wronging or inuading the liberties of any other perſon (for to that will I neuer preſſe to perſwade you) but alſo in defending and maintaining

theſe lawfull liberties wherewith GOD hath indued you. For ye, whom GOD hath ordained to protect your people from iniuries, ſhould bee aſhamed to ſuffer your ſelues to bee wronged by any. And thus, aſſuring my ſelfe, that ye will with a ſetled iudgement free of preiudice, weigh the reaſons of this my Diſcourſe, and accept my plainneſſe in good part, gracing this my Apologie with your fauours, and yet no longer then till it ſhall be iuſtly and worthily refuted; I end, with my earneſt prayers to the Almightie for your prosperities, and that after your happy temporall Raignes in earth, yee may liue and raigne in Heauen with him for euer.
               
               
                  
                     
                     A CATALOGVE OF the Lyes of Tortus, together with a briefe Confutation of them.
                     
                        
                           Tortus. Edit. Politan. pag. 9.
                        1 IN the oath of Allegiance the Popes power to excommunicate euen Hereticall Kings, is expreſly denied.
                     
                     
                        Confutation.
                        The point touching the Popes power in excommunicating Kings, is neither treated of, nor defined in the Oath of Allegiance, but was purpoſely declined. See the wordes of the Oath, and the Praemonition. pag. 9.
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           Tortus. p. 10.
                        2 For all Catholike writers doe collect from the words of Chriſt, Whatſoeuer thou ſhalt looſe vpon earth, ſhall bee looſed in heauen, that there appertaineth to the Popes authoritie, not only a power to abſolue from ſinnes, but alſo from penalties, cenſures, lawes, vowes and oathes.
                     
                     
                        Confutation.
                        That all Roman-catholike writers do not concurre with this Libeller, in thus collecting frō Chriſts words, Mat. 16. To omit other reaſons, it may appeare by this that many of them do write. That what Chriſt promiſed there, that he did actually exhibite to his diſciples Iohn 20. when he ſaid, whoſe ſinnes yee remit, they ſhall be remitted, thereby reſtraining this power of looſing formerly promiſed, vnto looſing from ſinnes, not mentioning any abſolution from lawes, vowes and oathes in this place. So doe Theophylact, Anſelme, Hugo Cardin. & Ferus in Mat. 16. So doe the principall Schoolemen. Alexand. Hales in Summa. part 4. q. 79. memb. 5. & 6. art. 3. Thom. in 4. diſt. 24. q. 3. art. 2. Scotus in 4. diſt. 19. art. 1.
                           
Pope Hadrian. 6. in 4. diſt. q. 2. de clauib. pag. 302. edit. Parſien. an. 1530. who alſo alledgeth for this interpretation, Auguſtine and the interlinear Gloſſe.
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           Tortus. p. 18.
                        3 I abhorre all Parricide, I deteſt all conſpiracies: yet it cannot be denied but occaſions of deſpaire were giuen [to the Powder-plotters.]
                     
                     
                        Confutation.
                        That it was not any iust occaſion of despaire giuen to the powder-Traitours, as this Libeller would beare vs in hand, but the inſtructions which they had from the Ieſuites, that cauſed them to attempt this bloody deſigne: See the Praemonition, pag. 127. and the booke intituled, The proceedings againſt the late Traitours.
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           Tortus. p. 26.
                        4 For not only the Catholiques, but alſo the Caluiniſt-puritanes deteſt the taking of this Oath.
                     
                     
                        Confutation.
                        The Puritanes doe not decline the Oath of Supremacie, but daily doe take it, neither euer refuſed it. And the ſame Supremacie is defended by Caluin himſelfe, Inſtit. lib. 4. cap. 20.
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           Tortus. p. 28.
                        5 Firſt of all the Pope writeth not, that he was grieued at the calamities which the Catholiks did ſuffer for the keeping of the Orthodox faith in the time of the late Queene, or in the beginning of King Iames his reigne in England, but for the calamities which they ſuffer at this preſent time.
                     
                     
                        Confutation.
                        
                           The onely recitall of the words of the Breue wil ſufficiently confute this lye. For thus writeth the Pope. The tribulations and calamities which ye haue continually ſuſteined for the keeping of the Catholique faith, haue alway afflicted vs with great griefe of minde. But foraſmuch as we vnderſtand, that at this time all things are more grieuous, our affliction hereby is wonderfully increaſed.
                     
                     
                        
                        
                           Tortus. p. 28.
                        6 In the firſt article [of the Statute] the Lawes of Queene Elizabeth are confirmed.
                     
                     
                        Confutation.
                        There is no mention at all made of confirming the Lawes of Q. Elizabeth, in the firſt article of that Statute.
                     
                     
                        
                           Tortus. p. 29.
                        7 In the 10. article [of the ſayd Statute] it is added, that if the [Catholikes] refuſe the third time to take the Oath being tendered vnto them, they ſhall incurre the danger of looſing their liues.
                     
                     
                        Confutation.
                        There is no mention in this whole Statute either of offring the oath the third time, or any endangering of their liues.
                     
                     
                        
                           Tortus. p. 30.
                        8 In the 12. article, it is enacted, that whoſoeuer goeth out of the land to ſerue in the warres vnder forreine Princes, they ſhall firſt of all take this Oath, or elſe be accounted for Traytors.
                     
                     
                        Confutation.
                        It is no where ſaid in that Statute, that they which ſhall thus ſerue in the warres vnder forreine Princes, before they haue taken this Oath, ſhalbe accounted for Traitors, but only for felons.
                     
                     
                        
                           Tortus. p. 35.
                        9 We haue already declared, that the [Popes] Apoſtolike power in binding and looſing is denyed in that Oath [of Allegeance.]
                     
                     
                        Confutation.
                        There is no aſſertory ſentence in that Oath, nor any word but onely conditionall, touching the power of the Pope in binding and looſing.
                     
                     
                        
                           Tortus. p. 37.
                        10 The Popes themſelues, euen wil they, nill they, were conſtrained to ſubiect themſelues to Nero and Diocletian.
                        
                     
                     
                        
                        Confutation.
                        That Chriſtians without exception, not vpon constraint but willingly and for conſcience ſake, did ſubiect themſelues to the Ethnicke Emperours, it may appeare by our Apologie, p. 23, 24. and the Apologetickes of the ancient Fathers.
                     
                     
                        
                           Tortus. p. 47.
                        11 In which words [of the Breues of Clement the 8.] not onely Iames King of Scotland, was not excluded, but included rather.
                     
                     
                        Confutation.
                        If the Breues [of Clement] did not exclude mee from the Kingdome, but rather did include me, why did Garnet burne them? why would he not reſerue them that I might haue ſeene them, that ſo he might haue obtained more fauour at mine hands, for him and his Catholickes?
                     
                     
                        
                           Tortus. p. 60.
                        12 Of thoſe 14. articles [contained in the Oath of Allegeance] eleuen of them concerne the Primacie of the Pope in matters ſpirituall.
                     
                     
                        Confutation.
                        No one article of that Oath doeth meddle with the Primacie of the Pope in matters ſpirituall: for to what end ſhould that haue bene, ſince we haue an expreſſe Oath elſ-where againſt the Popes Primacie in matters ſpirituall?
                     
                     
                        
                           Tortus. p. 64.
                        13 Amongſt other calumnies this is mentioned, that Bellarmine was priuie to ſundry conſpiracies againſt Q Elizabeth, if not the authour.
                     
                     
                        Confutation.
                        It is no where ſaid [in the Apologie] that Bellarmine was either the Authour, or priuie to any conſpiracies againſt Queene Elizabeth but that he was their principall instructer and teacher, who corrupted their iudgement with ſuch dangerous poſitions & principles, that it was an eaſie matter to reduce the generals into particulars,

and to apply the dictates which hee gaue out of his Chaire, as opportunity ſerued, to their ſeuerall deſignes.
                     
                     
                        
                           Tortus. p. 64.
                        14 For hee [Bellarmine] knoweth, that Campian onely conſpired againſt Hereticall impiety.
                     
                     
                        Confutation.
                        That the true and proper cauſe of Campians execution, was not for his conſpiring againſt hereticall impiety, but for conſpiring againſt Queene Elizabeth, and the State of this Kingdome, it was moſt euident by the iudiciall proceedings againſt him.
                     
                     
                        
                           Tortus. p. 65.
                        15 Why was H. Garnet, a man incomparable for learning in all kindes, and holineſſe of life, put to death, but becauſe hee would not reueale that which he could not doe with a ſafe conſcience?
                     
                     
                        Confutation.
                        That Garnet came to the knowledge of this horrible plot not only in confeſſion, as this Libeller would haue it, but by other meanes, n
                              •
                           ither by the relation of one alone, but by diuers, ſo as hee might with ſafe conſcience haue diſcloſed it; See the Premonition, p. 125, 126, &c. and the Earle of Northamptons Booke.
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           Tortus. p. 71.
                        16 Pope Sixtus 5. neither commaunded the French King to be murdered, neither approued that fact, as it was done by a priuate perſon.
                     
                     
                        Confutation.
                        The falſehood of this doeth eaſily appeare by the Oration of Sixtus. 5.
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           Tortus. p. 91.
                        17 That which is added concerning Stanley his Treaſon, is neither faithfully nor truely related: for the Apologer (as his maner is) doth miſerably depraue it, by adding many lyes.
                     
                     
                        Confutation.
                        That which the Apologie relateth concerning Stanley his Treaſon, is word for word recited out of Cardinall Allens Apologie

for Stanley
                                 •
                              s treaſon, as it is to be ſeene there.
                     
                     
                        
                           Tortus. p. 93.
                        18 It is very certaine that H. Garnet at his arraignment, did alwayes conſtantly auouch, that neither hee nor any Ieſuite either were authors, or compartners, or aduiſers, or conſenting any way [to the powder-Treaſon.] And a little after. The ſame thing he proteſted at his death in a large ſpeech, in the preſence of innumerable people.
                     
                     
                        Confutation.
                        The booke of the proceedings againſt the late Traytors, and our Premonition, pag. 125, 126, &c. doe clearly prooue the contrary of this to be true.
                     
                     
                        
                           Tortus. p. 97.
                        19 King Iames ſince hee is no Catholike, neither is hee a Chriſtian.
                     
                     
                        Confutation.
                        Contrary: I am a true Catholike, a profeſſour of the truely ancient, Catholike, and Apoſtolike faith: and therefore am a true Chriſtian. See the confeſſion of my faith in the Premonition. pag. 35, 36, &c.
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           Tortus. p. 98.
                        20 And if the reports of them, which knewe him moſt inwardly, be trew, When he was in Scotland, he was a Puritane, and an Enemie to Proteſtants: Now in England hee profeſſeth himſelfe a Proteſtant, and an Enemie to the Puritans.
                     
                     
                        Confutation.
                        Contrary; and what a Puritane I was in Scotland: See my 
                              〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                           : and this my Premonition. p. 44, 45.
                        
                     
                  
                  
                     
                     ¶His falſifications in his alledging of Hiſtories, together with a briefe declaration of their falſhood.
                     
                        The words of Tortus. p. 70.
                        
                        1 IT was certaine that hee [Hnery 4. the Emperour] died a naturall death.
                     
                     
                        Confutation.
                        It was not certaine: ſince ſundry Hiſtorians write otherwiſe, that he dyed vpon his impriſonment by his ſonne Henry 5. either with the noyſomeneſſe and loathſomeneſſe of the priſon, or being pined to death by hunger. Read Faſciculus temporum at the yeere 1094. Laziardus epitom. vniuerſal. Hiſtor. c. 198. Paulus Langius in Chronico Citizenſi at the yeere 1105. and Iacobus Wimphelingus epitome Rerum Germanic. c. 28.
                        
                     
                     
                        Tortus. p. 83.
                        
                        2 Henry 4. the Emperour feared indeed, but not any corporall death, but the cenſure of Excommunication, from the which that he might procure abſolution, of his owne accord, he did thus demiſſely humble himſelfe [before Gregory 7.]
                     
                     
                        Confutation.
                        That Henry 4. thus deiected himſelfe before the Pope, it was neither of his owne accord, neither vpon any feare of the Popes Excommunication, which [in this particular] he esteemed of no force: but vpon feare of the loſſe of his kingdome and life, as the recordes of antiquitie doe euidently testifie. See Lambertus Schafnaburg. at the yeere 1077. Abbas Viſpergen at the yeere 1075. The authour of the life of Henry 4. Bruno in his Hiſtorie of the Saxon warre. Laziard. in epitom. vniuerſal. Hiſtor. c. 193. Cuſpian. in Henric. 4. Sigonius de Regno Italiae lib. 9.
                        
                     
                     
                        Tortus. p. 83.
                        
                        3 The trueth of the Hiſtory [of Alexander 3. treading vpon the necke of Fredericke Barbaroſſa with his foote] may bee iuſtly doubted of.
                     
                     
                        
                        Confutation.
                        
                           But no Hiſtorian doubteth of it; and many doe auouch it, as Hieronym. Bard. in victor. Naual. ex Beſſarion. Chronico apud Baro. ad ann. 1177. num. 5. Gerſon de poteſtate Eccléſiae conſid. 11. Iacob Bergom. in ſupplem. Chron. ad an. 1160. Nauclerus Gener. 40. Petrus Iuſtinian li. 2. Rerum Venetar. Papirius Maſſon. lib. 5. de Epiſcop. vrbis, who alſo alledgeth for this Gennadius Patriarch of Conſtantinople. Beſides Alphonſus Ciacconius de vit. Pontif. in Alexand. 3. and Azorius the Ieſuite. Inſtit. Moral. part. 2. lib. 5. c. 43.
                     
                     
                        Tortus. p. 83.
                        
                        4 What other thing feared Frederick Barbaroſſa but Excommuniticaon?
                     
                     
                        Confutation.
                        
                           That Frederick feared onely Pope Alexander his Excommunication, no ancient Historian doeth teſtifie. But many doe write, that this ſubmiſſion of his was principally for feare of looſing his Empire and Dominions. See for this, Martin. Polon. ad an. 1166. Platina in vita Alexand. 3. Laziard. in epitom. Hiſtoriae vniuerſal. c. 212. Naucler. generat. 40. Iacobus Wimphelingus in epitom. Rerum Germanic. c. 32.
                     
                     
                        Tortus. p. 88.
                        
                        5 Adde heereunto, that Cuſpinian. [in relating the hiſtory of the Turks brother who was poyſoned by Alexander 6.] hath not the conſent of other Writers to witneſſe the trueth of this Hiſtory.
                     
                     
                        Confutation.
                        
                           The ſame Hiſtory which is reported by Cuſpinian, is recorded alſo by ſundry other famous Historians. See Francis Guicciardin. lib. 2. Hiſtor. Ital. Paulus Iouius lib. 2. Hiſt. ſui temporis. Sabellic. Ennead. 10. lib. 9. Continuator. Palmerij, at the yeere 1494.
                     
                  
                  
                     
                     ¶The nouell Doctrines, with a briefe declaration of their Noueltie.
                     
                        Nouell doctrine, p. 9.
                        
                        1 IT is agreed vpon amongſt all, that the Pope may lawfully depoſe Hereticall Princes, and free their Subiects from yeelding obedience vnto them.
                     
                     
                        Confutation.
                        Nay, all are ſo farre from conſenting in this poynt, that it may much more truely be auouched, that none entertained that conceit before Hildebrand: ſince he was the firſt broacher of this new doctrine neuer before heard of, as many learned men of that age, and the age next following (to omit others of ſucceeding ages) haue expreſly teſtified. See for this poynt, the Epiſtle of the whole Clergie of Liege to Pope Paſchal the 2. See the iudgement of many Biſhops of thoſe times, recorded by Auentine in his hiſtory, lib. 5. fol. 579. Alſo the speech vttered by Conrade Biſhop of Vtrecht, in the ſayd 5. booke of Auentine, fol. 582. And another by Eberhardus, Arch-Biſhop of Saltzburge. Ibid. lib. 7. p. 684. Alſo the iudgement of the Arch-Biſhop of Triers, in conſtitut. Imperialib. à M. Haimensfeldio editis. pag. 47. The Epiſtle of Walthram Biſhop of Megburgh, which is extant in Dodechine his Appendix to the Chronicle of Marianus Scotus, at the yere 1090. Benno in the life of Hildebrand. The author of the booke De vnitate Eccleſiae, or the Apologie for Henry the 4. Sigebert in his Chronicle, at the yeare 1088. Godfrey of Viterbio in his Hiſtory intituled Pantheon, part. 17. Otho Friſingenſis, lib. 6. c. 35. & praefat. in lib. 7. Frederick Barbaroſſa. lib. 6. Gunther. Ligurin. de geſtis Frederici, and lib. 1. c. 10. of Raduicus, de geſtis eiuſdem Frederici. Vincentius in ſpeculo hiſtoriali lib. 15. c. 84. with ſundry others.
                     
                     
                        Nouell Doctrine. p. 51.
                        
                        2 In our ſupernaturall birth in Baptiſme wee are to conceiue of a ſecret and implied oath, which wee take at our new

birth to yeelde obedience to the ſpirituall Prince, which is Chriſts Vicar.
                     
                     
                        Confutation.
                        It is to be wondered at whence this fellow had this ſtrange new diuinity, which ſurely was firſt framed in his owne fantaſtical brain. Elſe let him make vs a Catalogue of his Authours, that holde and teach, that all Chriſtians, whether infants or of age, are by vertue of an othe taken in their Baptiſme, bound to yeeld abſolute obedience to Chriſts Vicar the Pope, or baptized in any but in Chriſt.
                     
                     
                        Nouell Doctrine. p. 94.
                        
                        2 But ſince that Catholike doctrine doth not permit, for the auoidance of any miſchiefe whatſoeuer, to diſcouer the ſecret of Sacramental confeſſion, he [Garnet] rather choſe to ſuffer moſt bitter death, then to violate the ſeale of ſo great a Sacramēt.
                     
                     
                        Confutation.
                        
                           That the ſecret of Sacramentall confeſſion is by no meanes to bee diſcloſed, no not indirectly, or in generall, ſo the perſon confeſſing be concealed, for auoydance and preuention of no miſchiefe, how great ſoeuer: Beſides that it is a poſition moſt daungerous to all Princes and Common wealths, as I ſhew in my Premonition, pag. 122, 123. it is alſo a Nouell Aſſertion, not heard of till of late dayes in the Christian worlde: Since the common opinion euen of the Schoolemen and Canonistes both olde and newe, is vnto the contrary, Witneſſe theſe Authours following: Alexand. Hales part. 4. qu. 78. mem. 2. art. 2. Thom. 4. diſt. 21. q. 3. art. 1. ad. 1. Scotus in 4. diſt. 21. q. 2. Hadrian. 6. in 4. diſt. vbi de Sacram. Confeſſ. edit. Pariſ. 1530. pag. 289. Dominic. Sot. in 4. diſt. 18. q. 4. art. 5. Franciſ. de victor. ſum. de Sacram. n. 189. Nauar. in Enchirid. c. 8. Ioſeph. Angles in Florib. part 1. pag. 247. edit. Antuerp. Petrus Soto lect. 11. de confeſſ. The Ieſuites alſo accorde hereunto, Suarez. Tom. 4. diſp. in 3. part. Thom. diſp. 33. §. 3. Gregor. de Valentia. Tom. 4. diſp. 7. q. 13. punct. 3. who ſaith the common opinion of the Schoolemen is ſo.
                        
                     
                     
                        Nouell Doctrine. p. 102.
                        
                        4 I dare boldly auow, that the Catholikes haue better reaſon

to refuſe the Oath [of Alleageance] then Eleazar had to refuſe the eating of ſwines fleſh.
                     
                     
                        Confutation.
                        This aſſertion implieth a ſtrange doctrine in deede, that the Popes Breues are to bee preferred before Moſes Law: And that Papiſtes are more bound to obey the Popes decree, then the Iewes were to obey the Law of God pronounced by Moyſes.
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           Nouell Doctrine. p. 135.
                        5 Churchmen are exempted from the Iuriſdiction of ſecular Princes, & therfore are no ſubiects to Kings: yet ought they to obſerue their Lawes concerning matters temporall, not by vertue of any Lawe, but by enforcement of reaſon, that is to ſay, not for that they are their Subiects, but becauſe reaſon will giue it, that ſuch Lawes are to bee kept for the publike good, and quiet of the Common-wealth.
                     
                     
                        Confutation.
                        How true friends the Cardinall and his Chaplen are to Kings, that would haue ſo many Subiects exempted from their power: See my Premonition, p. 20, 21. Alſo p. 114, 115. &c. But as for this and the like new Aphoriſmes, I would haue theſe cunning Merchants to ceaſe to vent ſuch ſtuffe for ancient and Catholike wares in the Christian world, till they haue disproued their owne Venetians, who charge them with Noueltie, and forgery in this poynt,
                     
                  
               
            
         
         
            
               
                  
                  Triplici nodo, triplex cuneus. OR AN APOLOGIE FOR THE OATH of Allegiance. Againſt the two Breues of Pope PAVLVS QVINTVS, and the late Letter of Cardinall BELLARMINE to G. BLACKVVEL the Arch-prieſt.
                  
                     Tunc omnes populi clamauerunt & dixerunt,
                     Magna est Ʋeritas, & praeualet.

                           ESDR. 3.
                        
                     
                  
                  ¶Authoritate Regiâ.
                  ¶Imprinted at London by Robert Barker, Printer to the Kings moſt Excellent Maieſtie. ANNO 1609.
               
               
                  
                  
                     
                  
               
            
            
               
                  
                  AN APOLOGIE FOR THE OATH of Allegiance.
                  
                     WHat a monſtrous, rare, nay neuer heard of Treacherous Attempt, was plotted within theſe few yeeres heere in England, for the deſtruction of Me, my Bed-fellow, and our Poſterity, the whole houſe of Parliament, and a great number of good Subiects of all ſorts and degrees: is ſo famous already through the whole world by the infamy thereof, as it is needleſſe to be repeated or publiſhed any more; the horrour of the ſinne it ſelfe doth ſo lowdly proclaime it. For if thoſe Gen 4.10. crying Sinnes (whereof mention is made in the Scripture) haue that

epithete giuen them for their publique infamie, and for procuring as it were with a loud crie from heauen a iuſt vengeance and recompenſe; and yet thoſe ſinnes are both old and too common, neither the world nor any one Countrey being euer at any time cleane voyd of them: If thoſe ſinnes (I ſay) are ſaid in the Scripture to cry ſo loud; What then muſt this ſinne doe, plotted without cauſe, infinite in crueltie, and ſingular from all examples? What proceeded hereupon is likewiſe notorious to the whole worlde; our Iuſtice onely taking hold vpon the Offenders, and that in as honourable and publique a forme of Trial, as euer was vſed in this Kingdome.
                  2. For although the onely reaſon they gaue for plotting ſo heinous an Attempt, was the zeale they carried to the Romiſh Religion; yet were neuer any other of that profeſsion the worſe vſed for that cauſe, as by our gracious Proclamation immediatly after the diſcouery of the ſaid fact doeth plainely appeare: onely at the next ſitting downe againe of the Parliament, there were Lawes

made, ſetting downe ſome ſuch orders as were thought fit for preuenting the like miſchiefe intime to come. Amongſt which a forme of OATH was framed to be taken by my Subiects, whereby they ſhould make a cleare profeſsion of their reſolution, faithfully to perſiſt in their obedience vnto me, according to their naturall allegiance; To the end that I might hereby make a ſeparation, not onely betweene all my good Subiects in generall, and vnfaithfull Traitors, that intended to withdraw themſelues from my obedience; But ſpecially to make a ſeparation betweene ſo many of my Subiects, who although they were otherwiſe popiſhly affected, yet retained in their hearts the print of their naturall duetie to their Soueraigne; and thoſe who being caried away with the like fanaticall zeale that the Powder-Traitors were, could not conteine themſelues within the bounds of their naturall Allegiance, but thought diuerſitie of religion a ſafe pretext for all kinde of treaſons, and rebellions againſt their Soueraigne. Which godly and wiſe intent God did bleſſe with ſucceſſe

accordingly: For very many of my Subiects that were popiſhly affected, aſwel prieſts, as layicks, did freely take the ſame Oath: whereby they both gaue me occaſion to thinke the better of their fidelitie, and likewiſe freed themſelues of that heauy ſlander, that although they were fellow profeſſors of one Religion with the powder Traitors, yet were they not ioyned with them in treaſonable courſes againſt their Souereigne; whereby all quietly minded Papiſts were put out of deſpaire, and I gaue a good proofe that I intended no perſecution againſt them for conſcience cauſe, but onely deſired to bee ſecured of them for ciuill obedience, which for conſcience cauſe they were bound to performe.
                  3. But the deuil could not haue deuiſed a more malicious tricke for interrupting this ſo calme and clement a courſe, then fell out by the ſending hither, and publiſhing a Breue of the Popes, countermaunding all them of his profeſsion to take this Oath; Thereby ſowing new ſeedes of ielouſie betweene me and my Popiſh Subiects, by ſtirring

them vp to diſobey that lawfull commandement of their Soueraigne, which was ordeined to be taken of them as a pledge of their fidelity; And ſo by their re
                        •
                     uſall of ſo iuſt a charge, to giue me ſo great and iuſt a ground for puniſhment of them, without touching any matter of conſ
                        •
                     : throwing themſelues needleſl
                        •
                      
                     
                        〈…〉
                      of theſe deſperate ſtraites: 
                        〈…〉
                      loſſe of their liues and 
                        〈…〉
                      their Allegiance to the
                        ••
                      
                     
                        〈…〉
                     ; or elſe to procure the condemnation of their Soules by renouncing the Catholike faith, as he alleadgeth.
                  4. And on the other part, although diſparity of Religion (the Pope being head of the contrary part) can permit no intelligence nor intercourſe of meſſengers betwerne me and the Pope: yet there being no denounced warre betweene vs, he hath by this action broken the rules of common ciuility and iuſtice betweene Chriſtian Princes, in thus condemning me vnheard, both by accounting me a perſecutor, which can not be but implyed by exhorting the Papiſts

to endure Martyrdome; as likewiſe by ſo ſtraitly commanding all thoſe of his Profeſsion in England, to refuſe the taking of this Oath; thereby refuſing to profeſſe their naturall obedience to me their Soueraigne. For if he thinke himſelfe my lawfull Iudge, wherefore hath he condemned me vnheard? And, if he haue nothing to doe with me and my gouernement (as indeed he hath not) why doeth hee mittere falcem in alienam meſſem, to meddle betweene mee and my Subiects, eſpecially in matters that meerely and onely concerne ciuill obedience? And yet could Pius Quintus in his greateſt furie and auowed quarrell againſt the late Queene, do no more iniury vnto her; then he hath in this cauſe offered vnto me, without ſo much as a pretended or an alleadged cauſe. For what difference there is, betweene the commaunding Subiects to rebell, and looſing them from their Oath of Allegiance as Pius Quintus did; & the commanding of Subiects not to obey in making profeſsion of their Oath of their dutiful Allegiance, as this Pope hath now done: no man can eaſily diſcerne.
                  
                     5. But to draw neere vnto his Breue, wherin certainly he hath taken more paines then he needed, by ſetting downe in the ſaid Breue the whole body of the Oath at length; whereas the only naming of the Title thereof might as wel haue ſerued, for any anſwere he hath made thereunto (making Vna litura, that is, the flat and generall condemnation of the whole Oath to ſerue for all his refutation) Therein hauing as well in this reſpect as in the former, dealt both vndiſcreetly with me, and iniuriouſly with his owne Catholikes. With me; in not refuting particularly what ſpeciall wordes hee quarrelled in that Oath; which if he had done, it might haue bene that for the fatherly care I haue not to put any of my Subiects to a needleſſe extremitie, I might haue bene contented in ſome ſort to haue reformed or interpreted thoſe wordes. With his owne Catholicks: for either if I had ſo done, they had beene therby fully eaſed in that buſineſſe; or at leaſt if I would not haue condeſcended to haue altered any thing in the ſaid Oath, yet would thereby ſome appearance or ſhadow of excuſe

haue beene left vnto them for refuſing the ſame: not as ſeeming thereby to ſwarue from their Obedience and Allegiance vnto me, but onely being ſtayed from taking the ſame vpon the ſcrupulous tenderneſſe of their conſciences, in regard of thoſe particular wordes which the Pope had noted and condemned therein.
                  And now let vs heare the wordes of his thunder.
                  
                     
                     POPE PAVLVS the fift, to the Engliſh Catholikes.
                     
                        
                           WElbeloued Sonnes, Salutation and Apoſtolical Benediction.The Pope his firſt Breue. The tribulations and calamities, which yee haue continually ſuſteined for the keeping of the Catholike Faith, haue alwaies afflicted vs with great griefe of minde: But for as much as we vnderſtand that at this time all things are more grieuous, our affliction hereby is wonderfully increaſed. For we haue heard how you are compelled, by moſt grieuous puniſhments ſet before you, to goe to the Churches of Heretikes, to frequent their aſsemblies, to be preſent at their Sermons. Truely we doe vndoubtedly beleeue, that they which with ſo great conſtancie and fortitude, haue hitherto indured moſt cruell perſecutions and almoſt infinite miſeries, that they may walke without ſpot in the Law of the Lord; will neuer ſuffer themſelues to bee defiled with the communion of thoſe that haue forſaken

the diuine Law. Yet notwithſtanding, being compelled by the zeale of our Paſtorall Office, and by our Fatherly care which we doe continually take ſor the ſaluation of your ſoules, we are inforced to admoniſh and deſire you; that by no meanes you come vnto the Churches of the Heretikes, or heare their Sermons, or communicate with them in their Rites, leſt you incurre the wrath of God. For theſe things may yee not doe without indamaging the worſhip of God, and your owne ſaluation. As likewiſe you cannot without moſt euident and grieuous wronging of Gods Honour, binde your ſelues by the Oath, which in like maner we haue heard with very great griefe of our heart is adminiſtred vnto you, of the tenor vnder written. viz.
                     
                        
                           The Oath.I A.B. doe truely and ſincerely acknowlege, profeſſe, teſtifie and declare in my conſcience before God and the world, That our Soueraigne Lord King IAMES, is lawfull King of this Realme, and of all other his Maieſties Dominions and Countreyes: And that the Pope neither of himſelfe, nor by any authoritie of the Church or Sea o
                              •
                            
                           Rome, or by any other meanes with any other,

hath any power or authoritie to depoſe the King, or to diſpoſe of any of his Maieſties Kingdomes or Dominions, or to authorize any forraigne Prince, to inuade or annoy him or his Countreys, or to diſcarge any of his Subiects of their Allegiance and obedience to his Maieſtie, or to giue Licence or leaue to any of them, to beare Armes, raiſe tumults, or to offer any violence or hurt to his Maieſties Royal perſon, State or Gouernment, or to any of his Maieſties Subiects within his Maieſties Dominions. Alſo I doe ſweare from my heart, that, notwithſtanding any declaration or ſentence of Excommunication, or depriuation made or granted, or to be made or granted, by the Pope or his Succeſſors, or by any Authoritie deriued, or pretended to be deriued from him or his Sea, againſt the ſaid King, his Heires or Succeſſors, or any Abſolution of the ſaid ſubiects from their Obedience; I will beare faith and true Allegiance to his Maieſtie, his Heires and Succeſſors, and him and them will defend to the vttermoſt of my power, againſt all Conſpiracies and Attempts whatſoeuer,

which ſhalbe made againſt his or their Perſons, their Crowne and dignitie, by reaſon or colour of any ſuch Sentence, or declaration, or otherwiſe, and will doe my beſt endeuour to diſcloſe and make knowen vnto his Maieſtie, his Heires and Succeſſors, all Treaſons and traiterous Conſpiracies, which I ſhall know or heare of, to be againſt him or any of them. And I doe further ſweare, That I doe from my heart abhorre, deteſt and abiure as impious and Hereticall, this damnable doctrine and Poſition, That Princes which be excommunicated or depriued by the Pope, may be depoſed or murthered by their Subiects, or any other whatſoeuer. And I doe beleeue, and in conſcience am reſolued, that neither the Pope nor any perſon whatſoeuer, hath power to abſolue me of this Oath, or any part thereof; which I acknowledge by good and full Authoritie to be lawfully miniſtred vnto me, and doe renounce all pardons and diſpenſations to the contrary. And all theſe things I doe plainely and ſincerely acknowledge and ſweare, according to theſe expreſſe wordes by me ſpoken,

and according to the plaine and common ſence and vnderſtanding of the ſame words, without any Equiuocation, or mental euaſion, or ſecret reſeruation whatſoeuer. And I doe make this Recognition and acknowledgement heartily, willingly and truely, vpon the true Faith of a Chriſtian. So helpe my GOD.
                     
                     Which things ſince they are thus; it muſt euidently appeare vnto you by the words themſelues, That ſuch an Oath cannot be taken without hurting of the Catholique Faith, and the Saluation of your Soules; ſeeing it conteines many things, which are flat contrary to Faith and Saluation. Wherefore wee doe admoniſh you, that you doe vtterly abſtaine from taking this and the like Oathes: which thing wee doe the more earneſtly require of you, becauſe we haue experience of the Conſtancie of your Faith, which is tried like Gold in the fire of perpetuall Tribulation. Wee doe wel knowe, that you will cheerefully vnder-goe all kind of cruell Torments whatſoeuer, yea and conſtantly endure death it ſelfe, rather then you will in any thing offend the Maieſtie of God. And this our Confidence is confirmed by thoſe things,

which are dayly reported vnto vs, of the ſingular vertue, valour and fortitude which in theſe laſt times doeth no leſse ſhine in your Martyrs, then it did in the firſt beginnings of the Church. Stand therefore, your Loynes being girt about with Veritie, and hauing on the Breſt-plate of righteouſneſse, taking the Shield of Faith, bee yee ſtrong in the Lord, and in the power of his might; And let nothing hinder you. Hee which will crowne you, and doeth in Heauen beholde your Conflicts, will finiſh the good worke which he hath begun in you. You know how he hath promiſed his Diſciples, that hee will neuer leaue them Orphanes: for hee is faithfull which hath promiſed. Hold faſt therefore his correction, that is, being rooted and grounded in Charitie, whatſoeuer ye doe, whatſoeuer yee indeuour, doe it with one accord, in ſimplicitie of Heart, in meekeneſſe of Spirit, without murmuring or doubting. For by this doe all men know that wee are the Diſciples of Chriſt, if we haue Loue one to another. Which Charitie, as it is very greatly to bee deſired of all faithfull Chriſtians; So certainely is it altogether neceſsary for you, moſt bleſſed Sonnes. For by this your Charitie,

the power of the Deuill is weakened, who doeth ſo much aſſaile you, ſince that Power of his is especially vp held by the Contentions and Diſagreement of our Sonnes. We exhort you therefore by the bowels of our Lord Ieſus Chriſt, by whoſe Loue we are taken out of the Iawes of eternall Death; That aboue all things, you would haue mutuall Charitie among you. Surely Pope Clement the eight of happy memory, hath giuen you moſt profitable Precepts of practiſing brotherly Charitie one to another, in his Letters in forme of a Breue, to our welbeloued Sonne M. George Arch-prieſt of the Kingdome of England, dated the 5. day of the moneth of October, 1602. Put them therefore diligently in practiſe, and bee not hindered by any difficultie or doubtfulneſſe. We command you that ye doe exactly obſerue the words of thoſe Letters, and that yee take and vnderſtand them ſimply as they ſound, and as they lie; all power to interpret them otherwiſe, being taken away. In the meane while, we will neuer ceaſe to pray to the Father of Mercies, that hee would with pitie beholde your afflictions and your paines; And that he would keepe and defend you with his continuall

Protection: whom we doe gently greete with our Apoſtolicall Benediction. Dated at Rome at S. Marke, vnder the Signet of the Fiſherman, the tenth of the Calends of October, 1606. the ſecond yeere of our Popedome.
                     
                  
                  
                     THE ANSWERE to the firſt Breue.
                     
                     
                        FIrſt, the Pope expreſſeth heerein his ſorrow, for that perſecution which the Catholiques ſuſtaine for the faiths ſake. Wherein, beſides the maine vntrueth whereby I am ſo iniuriouſly vſed, I muſt euer auow and maintaine, as the trueth is according to mine owne knowledge, that the late Queene of famous memorie, neuer puniſhed any Papiſt for religion, but that their owne puniſhment was euer extorted out of her hands againſt her will, by their owne miſbehauiour, which both the time and circumſtances of her

actions will manifeſtly make proofe of. For before Pius Quintus his excommunication giuing her ouer for a preye, and ſetting her Subiects at liberty to rebel, it is well knowen ſhe neuer medled with the blood or hard puniſhment of any Catholique, nor made any rigorous lawes againſt them. And ſince that time, who liſt to compare with an indifferent eye, the manifold intended Inuaſions againſt her whole Kingdome, the forraine practiſes, the internall publike rebellilions, the priuate plots and machinations, poyſonings, murthers, and all ſorts of deuiſes, et quid non? daily ſet abroach; and all theſe wares continually foſtered & fomented from Rome; together with the continuall corrupting of her Subiects, as well by temporall bribes, as by faire and ſpecious promiſes of eternall felicitie; and nothing but booke vpon booke publikely ſet forth by her fugitiues, for approbation of ſo holy deſignes: who liſt, I ſay, with an indifferent eye, to looke on the one part, vpon thoſe infinite & intollerable temptations, and on the other part vpon the iuſt, yet moderate

puniſhment of a part of theſe hainous offenders; ſhall eaſily ſee that that bleſſed defunct Lady vvas as free from perſecution, as they ſhall free theſe helliſh Inſtruments from the honour of martyrdome.
                     5. But novv hauing ſacrificed (if I may ſo ſay) to the Manes of my late predeceſſor, I may next vvith S. Paul iuſtly vindicate my ovvne fame, from thoſe innumerable calumnies ſpred againſt me, in teſtifying the trueth of my behauiour tovvard the Papiſts: vvherin I may truely affirme, that vvhatſoeuer vvas her iuſt and mercifull Gouernement ouer the Papiſts in her time, my Gouernement ouer them ſince hath ſo farre exceeded hers, in mercie and clemencie, as not onely the Papiſts themſelues grevve to that height of pride, in confidence of my mildeneſſe, as they did directly expect, and aſſuredly promiſe to themſelues liberty of conſcience and equalitie vvith other of my Subiects in all things; but euen a number of the beſt and faithfulleſt of my ſayd ſubiects, vvere caſt in great feare & amazement of my courſe and proceedings, euer prognoſticating and iuſtly

ſuſpecting that ſowre fruit to come of it, which ſhevved it ſelfe clearely in the powder-Treaſon. How many did I honour with knighthood, of knowen & open Recuſants? How indifferently did I giue audience, and acceſſe to both ſides, beſtowing equally all fauours and honors on both profeſſions? How free & continual acceſſe, had all rankes & degrees of Papiſts in my Court & company? And aboue alll, how frankly and freely did I free Recuſants of their ordinary payments? Beſides, it is euident what ſtrait order vvas giuen out of my ovvne mouth to the Iudges, to ſpare the execution of all Prieſts, (notwithſtanding their conuiction,) ioyning thereunto a gracious Proclamation, wherby all Prieſts, that were at liberty, and not taken, might goe out of the country by ſuch a day: my generall Pardon hauing bin extended to all conuicted Prieſts in priſon: whereupon they vvere ſet at liberty as good Subiects: and all Prieſts that were taken after, ſent ouer and ſet at liberty there. But time & paper vvill faile mee to make enumeration of all the benefits and fauours that I

beſtowed in generall and particular vpon Papiſts: in recounting whereof euery ſcrape of my pen would ſerue but for a blot of the Popes ingratitude and Iniuſtice, in meating me with ſo hard a meaſure for the ſame. So as I thinke I haue ſufficiently, or at leaſt with good reaſon wiped the Magno cum animi moerore, &c. 
                        teares from the Popes eyes, for complaining vpon ſuch perſecution, who if he had beene but politikely wiſe, although he had had no reſpect to Iuſtice and Veritie, would haue in this complaint of his, made a difference betweene my preſent time, and the time of the late Queene, And ſo by his commending of my moderation, in regarde of former times, might haue had hope to haue moued me to haue continued in the ſame clement courſe. For it is a true ſaying, that alledged kindnes vpon noble mindes, doth euer worke much. And for the maine vntrueth of any perſecution in my time, it can neuer be proued, that any were, or are put to death ſince I came to the Crowne for cauſe of Conſcience: except that now this diſcharge giuen by the Pope to all Catholiques to take their oath of Allegiance

to me, be the cauſe of the due puniſhment of many: which if it fall out to be, let the blood lig
                           •
                        t vpon the Popes head, who is the onely cauſe thereof.
                     As for the next point contained in his Breue concerning his diſcharge of all Papiſts to come to our Church, or frequent our rites and ceremonies,The intendement of this diſcourſe. I am not to meddle at this time with that matter, becauſe my errand now only is to publiſh to the world the Iniurie and Iniuſtice done vnto me in diſcharging my ſubiects to make profeſsion o
                           •
                         their obedience vnto me. Now as to the point where the oath is quarrelled, it is ſe
                           •
                         downe in few, but very weightie words; to wit, That it ought to be cleare vnto all Catholiques, that this oath cannot be taken with ſafety of the Catholike Faith, and of their ſoules health, ſince it containeth many things that are plainely and directly contrary to their faith & ſaluation. To this, the old ſaying fathered vpon the Philoſopher may very fi
                           •
                        ly be applied, Mul ta dicit ſed pauca probat: nay indeede, Nihil omnino probat. For how the profeſsion of the natural Allegiance of Subiects to their Prince

can be directly oppoſite to the faith & ſaluation of ſoules, is ſo farre beyond my ſimple reading in Diuinitie, as I muſt thinke it a ſtrange and new Aſſertion, to proceed out of the mouth of that pretended generall Paſtor of all Chriſtian ſoules. I reade indeede, and not in one, or two, or three places of Scripture, that Subiects are bound to obey their Princes for conſcience ſake, whether they were good or wicked Princes. So ſaide the people to Ioſh. 1.17. 
                        Ioſhua, As wee obeyed Moſes in all things, ſo will we obey thee. So the Iere. 27.12. Prophet commanded the people to obey the King of Babel, ſaying, Put your neckes vnder the yoke of the King of Babel, and ſerue him and his people, that yee may liue. So were the children of Iſrael, vnto Exod. 5.1. 
                        Pharaoh, deſiring him to let them goe: ſo to Ezra. 1.3. 
                        Cyrus, obtaining leaue of him to returne to build the Temple: and in a word, the Rom 13.5.Apoſtle willed all men to be ſubiect to the higher powers for conſcience ſake. Agreeable to the Scriptures did the Fathers teach. Auguſi
                              •
                           in Pſal. 124.
                         
                        Augustine ſpeaking of Iulian, ſaith, Iulian was an vnbeleeuing Emperour: was he not an Apoſtata, an Oppreſsour, and an Idolater?

Chriſtian Souldiers ſerued that vnbeleeuing Emperour: when they came to the cauſe of CHRIST, they would acknowledge no Lord, but him that is in heauen: When he would haue them to worſhip Idoles and to ſacrifice, they preferred GOD before him: But when hee ſaid, goe forth to fight, inuade ſuch a nation, they preſently obeyed. They diſtinguiſhed their eternall Lord from their temporall, and yet were they ſubiect euen vnto their temporall lord, for his ſake that was their eternall Lord and Maſter. 
                        Tertul
                              •
                           ad Scap. 
                        Tertullian ſaith, A Chriſtian is enemie to no man, much leſſe to the Prince, whom hee knoweth to be appointed of God: and ſo of neceſsitie must loue, reuerence and honour him, and wiſh him ſafe with the whole Romane Empire, ſo long as the world ſhall laſt: for ſo long ſhall it endure. We honour therefore the Emperour in ſuch ſort, as is lawfull for vs, and expedient for him, as a man, the next vnto God, and obtaining from God whatſoeuer hee hath, and onely inferiour vnto God. This the Emperour himſelfe would: for ſo is he greater then all, while hee is inferiour onely to the true God. 
                        Iuſt. Martyr Apol. 2. ad Ant. Imperat. Iuſtine Martyr; We onely adore God, and in all other things cherefully performe

ſeruice to you, profeſsing that you are Emperours and Princes of men. 
                        Amb. in orat cont. Auxent
                              •
                           ū de baſilicis traden. habetur lib. 5. Epiſt. Amb. Ambroſe; I may lament, weepe and ſigh: My teares are my weapons againſt their armes, ſouldiers, and the Gothes alſo: ſuch are the weapons of a Prieſt: Otherwiſe neither ought I, neither can I reſiſt. 
                        Optat. contra Parmen. lib. 3.
                         Optatus; Ouer the Emperour, there is none but onely God, that made the Emperour. And Greg. Mag. Epist. lib. 2. indict. 11. Epiſt. 61.
                         Gregory writing to Mauritius about a certaine Law, that a ſouldier ſhould not be receiued into a Monaſtery, nondū expleta militia, The Almightie God, ſaith he, holdes him guilty, that is not vpright to the most excellent Emperour in all things that he doth or ſpeaketh. And then calling himſelfe the vnworthy ſeruant of his Godlineſſe, goeth on in the whole Epiſtle to ſhew the iniuſtice of that Law, as he pretendeth: and in the ende concludes his Epiſtle with theſe words, I being ſubiect to your commaund, haue cauſed the ſame Law to bee ſent through diuers parts of your Dominions: and becauſe the Law it ſelfe doeth not agree to the Law of the Almightie God, I haue ſignified the ſame by my letters to your moſt excellent Lordſhip: ſo that on both parts I haue payed what I ought:

becauſe I haue yeelded obedience to the Emperour, and haue not holden my peace, in what I thought for God. Now how great a contrarietie there is betwixt this ancient Popes action in obeying an Emperour by the publication of his Decree, which in his owne conſcience he thought vnlawfull, and this preſent Popes prohibition to a Kings Subiects from obedience vnto him in things moſt lawfull and meere temporall; I remit it to the Readers indifferency. And anſwerably to the Fathers ſpake the Councels in their decrees. As the Councell of Concil. Arelatenſe ſub Carolo Mag. Can. 26·
                         
                        Arles, ſubmitting the whole Councell to the Emperour in theſe words: Theſe things we haue decreed to be preſented to our lord the Emperor, beſeeching his clemencie, that if we haue done leſſe then we ought, it may be ſupplied by his wiſedome: if any thing otherwiſe then reaſon requireth, it may bee corrected by his iudgement: if any thing bee found fault with by vs with reaſon, it may be perfected by his ayd with Gods fauourable aſsistance.
                     
                     But why ſhould I ſpeake of Charles the Great, to whom not one Councell, but ſixe ſeuerall Councels, Frankford, Arles, Tours,

Chalons, Ments & Rhemes did wholy ſubmit themſelues? and not rather ſpeake of all the generall Councels, that of Nice, Constantinople, Epheſus, Chalcedon, and the foure other commonly ſo reputed, which did ſubmit themſelues to the Emperours wiſdome, and pietie in all things? Inſomuch as that of Epheſus repeated it foure ſeuerall times, That they were ſummoned by the Emperours Oracle, becke, charge, and command, and betooke themſelues to his Godlineſſe, 
                        Vide epistolam generalis Conc. Epheſ. ad August. 
                        beſeeching him, that the decrees made againſt Neſtorius and his followers, might by his power haue their full force and validitie, as appeareth manifeſtly in the Epiſtle of the generall Councell of Epheſus written ad Auguſtos. I alſo reade that Chriſt ſaid, his 
                        Iohn 18.36. 
                        kingdome was not of this world, bidding, Giue to 
                        Mat. 22.21. Caeſar what was Caeſars, and to God what was Gods. And I euer held it for an infallible maxime in Diuinitie, That temporall obedience to a temporal Magiſtrate did nothing repugne to matters of faith or ſaluation of ſoules. But that euer temporall obedience was againſt faith and ſaluation of ſoules, as in this Breue is alledged, was neuer

before heard nor read of in the Chriſtian Church. And therefore I would haue wiſhed the Pope, before he had ſet downe this commaundement to all Papiſts here, That ſince in him is the power, by the infalibility of his ſpirit, to make new articles of faith when euer it ſhall pleaſe him; that he had firſt ſet it downe for an article of faith, before hee had commaunded all Catholikes to beleeue and obey it. I will then conclude the anſwere to this point in a Dilemma.
                     
                     Either it is lawful to obey the Soueraigne in temporall things, or not.Queſtion.
                     
                     If it be lawfull, (as I neuer heard nor read  it doubted of) then why is the Pope ſo vniuſt and ſo cruel towards his owne Catholikes, as to commaund them to diſobey their Soueraignes lawfull commandement?
                     If it be vnlawful, why hath he neither expreſſed  any one cauſe or reaſon thereof, nor yet wil giue thē leaue, (nay rather he ſhould commaund and perſwade them in plaine termes) not to liue vnder a King whom vnto they ought no obedience?
                     And as for the vehement exhortation vntoAnſwere to the Popes exhortation.
                        
them to perſeuere in conſtancie, and to ſuffer martyrdome, and all tribulation for this cauſe; it requireth no other anſwere then onely this, That if the ground be good whereupon he hath commaunded them to ſtand, then exhortation to conſtancie is neceſſary: but if the ground bee vniuſt, and naught (as indeed it is, and I haue in part already proued) then this Exhortation of his can work no other effect, then to make him guilty of the blood of ſo many of his ſheep, whom he doeth thus wilfully caſt away, not onely to the needleſſe loſſe of their liues, and ruine of their families, but euen to the laying on of a perpetuall flaunder vpon all Papiſts; as if no zealous Papiſt could be a true ſubiect to his Prince; and that the profeſsion of that Religion, and the temporall obedience to the Ciuill Magiſtrate, were two things repugnant & incompatible in themſelues. But euill information, and vntrue reports (which beeing carried ſo farre as betweene this and Rome,
                        Fama vires acquirit eundo. cannot but increaſe by the way) might haue abuſed the Pope, and made him diſpatch this Breue ſo raſhly.

For that great City, Queene of the World, and as themſelues confeſſe, 
                           Euſebius, Occumemus and Leo hold, that by Babylon in 1. Pet. 5.13 Rome is meant, as the Rhemiſts themſelues confeſſe. myſtically Babylon, cannot but be ſo full of all ſorts of intelligencies. Beſides, all complainers (as the Catholikes heere are) be naturally giuen to exaggerate their owne griefes, and multiply thereupon. So that it is no wonder, that euen a Iudge ſitting there, ſhould vpon wrong information, giue an vnrighteous ſentence; as ſome of their owne partie doe not ſticke to confeſſe, that Pius Quintus was too raſhly caried vpon wrong information, to pronounce his thunder of Excōmunication vpon the late Queene. And it may be, the like excuſe ſhal hereafter be made for the two Breues, which See the Relation of the whole proceedings againſt the Traitors, Garnet and his confederates. 
                        Clemens octauus ſent to England immediatly before her death, for debarring mee of the Crowne, or any other that either would profeſſe, or any wayes tollerate the profeſſors of our Religion; contrary to his manifold vowes and proteſtations, ſimul & eodem tempore, & as it were, deliuered vno & eodem ſpiritu, to diuers of my miniſters abroad, profeſsing ſuch kindneſſe, and ſhewing ſuch forwardneſſe to aduance

mee to this Crowne. Nay, the moſt part of Catholikes heere, finding this Breue when it came to their handes, to bee ſo farre againſt diuinity,The Catholikes opinion of the Breue policy, or naturall ſenſe, were firmely perſwaded, that it was but a counterfeit Libel, deuiſed in hatred of the Pope; or at the fartheſt, a thing haſtily done vpon wrong information, as was before ſaide. Of which opinion were not onely the ſimpler ſort of Papiſts, but euen ſome amongſt them of beſt account, both for learning and experience; whereof the Arch-prieſt himſelfe was one. But for ſoluing of this obiection, the Pope himſelfe hath taken new paines by ſending foorth a ſecond Breue, onely for giuing faith and confirmation to the former: That whereas before, his ſinne might haue beene thought to haue proceeded from raſhneſſe, and miſ-information, he will now wilfully and willingly double the ſame: whereof the Copie followeth.
                  
                  
                     
                     TO OVR BELOued ſonnes the Engliſh Catholikes, Paulus P.P. Vius.
                        
                     
                     
                        BEloued Sonnes,The ſecond Breue. Salutation and Apostolicall benediction. It is reported vnto vs, that there are found certaine amongſt you, who when as wee haue ſufficiently declared by our Letters, dated the laſt yeere on the tenth of the Calends of October in the forme of a Breue, that ye cannot with ſafe Conſcience take the Oath, which was then required of you; and when as we haue further ſtraightly commanded you, that by no meanes ye ſhould take it; yet there are ſome, I ſay, among you, which dare now affirme, that ſuch Letters concerning the forbidding of the Oath, were not written of our owne accord, or of our owne proper will, but rather for the reſpect and at the instigation of other men. And for that cauſe, the ſame men do goe about to perſwade you, that our commands in the ſaid letters are not to be regarded. Surely this newes did

trouble vs; and that ſo much the more, becauſe hauing had experience of your obedience (moſt dearely beloued ſonnes) who to the end ye might obey this holy Sea, haue godlily, and valiantly contemned your riches, wealth, honour, libertie, yea and life it ſelfe; we ſhould neuer haue ſuspected, that the trueth of our Apostolike letters could once be called into queſtion among you, that by this pretence yee might exempt your ſelues from our commandements. But we doe herein perceiue the ſubtiltie and craft of the enemie of mans ſaluation; and wee doe attribute this your backwardneſſe rather to him, then to your owne will. And for this cauſe, we haue thought good to write the ſecond time vnto you, and to ſignifie vnto you againe, that our Apostolike letters dated the laſt yeere on the tenth of the Calends of October concerning the prohibition of the Oath, were written not onely vpon our proper motion, and of our certaine knowledge, but alſo after long and weightie deliberation vſed concerning all thoſe things, which are conteined in them; and for that cauſe that yee are bound fully to obſerue them, reiecting all interpretation perſwading to the contrary. And this is our meere, pure, and

perfect will, being alwayes carefull of your ſaluation, and alwayes minding thoſe things which are moſt profitable vnto you. And we doe pray without ceaſing, that he that hath appointed our lowlines to the keeping of the flocke of Chriſt, would inlighten our thoughts and our counſels: whom wee doe alſo continually deſire, that hee would increaſe in you (our beloued Sonnes) faith, constancy, and mutuall charity and peace one to another. All whom, wee doe moſt louingly bleſse with all charitable affection.
                     
                        Dated at Rome at Saint Markes vnder the Signet of the Fiſherman, 
                           the x. of the Calends of September, 1607. the third yeere of our Popedome.
                           
                        
                     
                  
                  
                     
                     THE ANSWERE to the ſecond Breue.
                     
                     
                        NOw for this Breue, I may iuſtly reflect his owne phraſe vpon him, in tearming it to bee The craft of the Deuil. For if the Deuil had ſtudied a thouſand yeres, for to finde out a miſchiefe for our Catholikes here, hee hath found it in this: that now when many Catholiks haue taken their Oath, and ſome Prieſts alſo; yea, the Arch-prieſt himſelfe, without compunction or ſticking, they ſhall not now onely bee bound to refuſe the profeſsion of their naturall Allegiance to their Soueraigne, which might yet haue beene ſome way coloured vpō diuers ſcruples conceiued vpon the wordes of the Oath; but they muſt now renounce & forſ
                           •
                        eare their profeſsion of obedience already ſworne,A double Oath of euery Subiect. and ſo muſt as it were at the third inſtance forſweare

their former two Oaths, firſt cloſely ſworne, by their birth in the naturall Allegiance; and next, clearely confirmed by this Oath, which doeth nothing but expreſſe the ſame: ſo as no man can now hold the faith, or procure the ſaluation of his ſould in England, that muſt not abiure and renounce his borne and ſworne Allegiance to his naturall Soueraigne.
                     And yet it is not ſufficient to ratifie the laſt yeeres Breue, by a new one come foorth this yeere; but (that not onely euery yeere, but euery moneth may produce a new monſter) the great and famous Writer of the Controuerſies, the late vn-Ieſuited Cardinall Bellarmine, muſt adde his talent to this good worke, by blowing the bellowes of ſedition, and ſharpening the ſpur to rebellion, by ſending ſuch a Letter of his to the Arch-prieſt here, as it is wonder how paſsion and an ambitious deſire of maintaining that Monarchie, ſhould charme the wits of ſo famouſly learned a man.
                     The Copie where of here followeth.
                  
                  
                     
                     TO THE VERY REuerend Mr. George Blackwel, Arch-prieſt of the Engliſh: Robert Bellarmine Cardinall of the holy Church of Rome, greeting.
                     
                        REuerend Sir, and Brother in CHRIST, It is almost fourty yeeres ſince we did ſee one the other: but yet I haue neuer bin vnmindful of our ancient acquaintance, neither haue I ceaſed, ſeeing I could doe you no other good, to commend your labouring moſt painfully in the Lords vineyard, in my prayers to GOD. And I doubt not, but that I haue liued all this while in your memory, and haue had ſome place in your prayers at the Lords Altar. So therefore euen vnto this time wee haue abidden, as S. Iohn ſpeaketh, in the mutuall loue one of the other, not by word or letter, but in deede and trueth. But a late meſſage which was brought vnto vs within theſe few dayes, of your bonds and impriſonment, hath inforced mee

to breake off this ſilence; which meſſage, although it ſeemed heauy in regard of the loſſe which that Church hath receiued, by their beeing thus depriued of the comfort of your pastorall function among them, yet withall it ſeemed ioyous, becauſe you drewe neere vnto the glory of Martyrdome, then the which gift of God there is none more happy; That you, who haue fed your flocke ſo many yeeres with the word and doctrine, ſhould now feed it more gloriouſly by the example of your patience. But another heauy tidings did not a litle diſquiet and almoſt take away this ioy, which immediatly followed, of the aduerſaries aſſault, and peraduenture of the ſlip and fall of your Constancy in refuſing an vnlawfull Oath. Neither truely (moſt deare Brother) could that Oath therfore be lawfull, becauſe it was offered in ſort tempered and modified: for you know that thoſe kinde of modifications are nothing elſe, but ſleights & ſubtilties of Sathan, that the Catholique faith touching the Primacie of the Sea Apoſtolique, might either ſecretly or openly be ſhot at, for the which faith ſo many worthy Martyrs euen in that very England it ſelfe, haue reſiſted vnto blood. For moſt certaine

it is, that in whatſoeuer wordes the Oath is conceiued by the aduerſaries of the faith in that Kingdome, it tends to this end, that the authoritie of the head of the Church in England, may be transferred from the ſucceſſour of S. Peter, to the Succeſsour of K. Henry the eight. For that which is pretended of the danger of the Kings life, if the high Prieſt ſhould haue the ſame power in England, which hee hath in all other Chriſtian Kingdomes, it is altogether idle, as all that haue any vnderſtanding, may eaſily perceiue. For it was neuer heard of from the Churches infancy vntill this day, that euer any Pope did command that any Prince, though an Heretike, though an Ethnike, though a Perſecutor, ſhould be murdered; or did approue of the fact when it was done by any other. And why, I pray you, doeth onely the King of England feare that, which none of all other the Princes in Chriſtendome either doeth feare, or euer did feare?
                     But, as I ſaide, theſe vaine pretexts are but the trappes and ſtratagemes of Satan: Of which kinde I could produce not a f
                           •
                        we out of Ancient Stories, if I went about to write a book
                           •
                         and not an Epistle. One onely for example ſake I will

call to your memory S. Gregorius Nazianzenus in his firſt Oration againſt Iulian the Emperour, reporteth, That he, the more eaſily to beguile the ſimple Christians, did inſert the Images of the falſe gods into the pictures of the Emperor, which the Romanes did vſe to bow dawne vnto with a ciuill kind of reuerence: ſo that no man could doe reuerence to the Emperours picture, but withall he muſt adore the Images of the falſe gods; whereupon it came to paſſe that many were deceiued. And if there were any that found out the Emperours craft, and refuſed to worſhip his picture, thoſe were moſt grieuouſly puniſhed, as men that had contemned the Emperour in his Image. Some ſuch like thing, me thinkes, I ſee in the Oath that is offered to you, which is to ſo craftily compoſed, that no man can deteſt Treaſon againſt the King and make profeſsion of his Ciuill ſubiection, but he muſt be conſtrained perfidiouſly to denie the Primacie of the Apostolike Sea. But the ſeruants of Chriſt, and eſpecially the chiefe Prieſts of the Lord ought to be ſo farre from taking an vnlawfull Oath, where they may indamage the Faith, that they ought to beware that they giue not the leaſt ſuspicion of diſsimulation

that they haue taken it, leaſt they might ſeeme to haue left any example of preuarication to faithfull people. Which thing that worthy Eleazar did moſt notably performe, who would neither eate ſwines fleſh, nor ſo much as faine to haue eaten it, although hee ſaw the great torments that did hang ouer his head; leaſt, as himſelfe ſpeaketh in the ſecond booke of the Machabees, many yong men might be brought through that ſimilation, to preuaricate with the Law. Neither did Baſil the great by his example, which is more fit for our purpoſe, carrie himſelfe leſse worthily toward Valens the Emperour. For as Theodoret writeth in his Historie, when the Deputy of that heretical Emperour did perſwade Saint Baſill, that he would not reſiſt the Emperour for a little ſubtiltie of a few points of doctrine; that moſt holy and prudent man made anſwere, That it was not to bee indured, that the leaſt ſyllable of Gods word ſhould bee corrupted, but rather all kind of torment was to be embraced, for the maintenance of the Trueth thereof. Now I ſuppoſe, that there wants not amongſt you, who ſay that they are but ſubtilties of Opinions that are conteined in the

Oath that is offred to the Catholikes, and that you are not to ſtriue againſt the Kings Authoritie for ſuch a little matter. But there are not wanting alſo amongſt you holy men like vnto Baſil the Great, which will openly auow, that the very leaſt ſyllable of Gods diuine trueth is not to be corrupted, though many torments were to be endured, and death it ſelfe ſet before you. Amongſt whom it is meete, that you ſhould bee one, or rather the Standerd-bearer, and Generall to the reſt. And whatſoeuer hath beene the cauſe, that your Conſtancie hath quailed, whether it bee the ſuddenneſſe of your apprehenſion, or the bitterneſſe of your perſecution, or the imbecillitie of your old age: yet we truſt in the goodneſse of God, & in your owne long continued vertue, that it will come to paſse, that as you ſeeme in ſome part to haue imitated the fall of Peter, and Marcellinus, ſo you ſhall happily imitate their valour in recouering your ſtrength, and maintaining the truth. For if you will diligently weigh the whole matter with your ſelfe, truely you ſhall ſee, it is no ſmall matter that is called in queſtion by this Oath, but one of the principall heads of our faith and foundations of Catholique

Religion. For heare what your Apoſtle S. Gregory the Great hath written, in his 24. Epiſtle of his 11. booke. Let not the reuerence due to the Apoſtolique Sea, bee troubled by any mans preſumption: for then the eſtate of the members doeth remaine entire, when the head of the faith is not bruiſed by any iniury. Therefore by S. Gregories teſtimonie, when they are buſie about diſturbing or diminiſhing, or taking away of the Primacie of the Apoſtolique Sea: then are they buſie about cutting off the verie head of the faith, and diſſoluing of the state of the whole body, and of all the members. Which ſelfe ſame thing S. Leo doth confirme in his third Sermon of his Aſſumption to the Popedome, when he ſaith, Our Lord had a ſpeciall care of Peter, & prayed properly for Peters faith, as though the ſtate of others were more ſtable, when their Princes minde was not to be ouer come. Whereupon himſelfe in his Epiſtle to the Biſhops of the prouince of Vienna, doeth not doubt to affirme, that he is not partaker of the diuine Myſtery, that dare depart from the ſolidity of Peter, who alſo ſaith, That who thinketh the Primacy to be denied to that Sea,

he can in no ſort leſſen the authority of it: but by beeing puft vp with the ſpirit of his own pride, doth caſt himſelf headlong into hel. Theſe & many other of this kind, I am very ſure are moſt familiar to you: who beſides many other bookes, haue diligently read ouer the viſible Monarchie of your owne Saunders, a most diligent writer, and one who hath worthily deſerued of the Church of England. Neither can you be ignorant, that theſe most holy & learned men Iohn Biſhop of Rocheſter, and Tho. Moore, within our memorie, for this one most weightie head of doctrine, led the way to Martyrdome to many others, to the exceeding glory of the Engliſh nation. But I would put you in remembrance that you ſhould take hart, & conſidering the weightines of the cauſe, not to truſt too much to your owne iudgement, neither be wiſe aboue that is meete to be wiſe: and if peraduenture your fall haue proceeded not vpon want of conſideration, but through humane infirmity, & for feare of puniſhment and impriſonment, yet doe not preferre a temporall liberty to the libertie of the glory of the Sonnes of God: neither for eſcaping a light and momentanie tribulation, loſe an

eternall weight of glory, which tribulation it ſelf doth worke in you. You haue fought a good fight a long time, you haue well neere finiſhed your courſe; ſo many yeres haue you kept the faith: doe not therefore loſe the reward of ſuch labours; do not depriue your ſelfe of that crown of righteouſneſſe which ſo long agone is prepared for you, Doe not make the faces of ſo many yours both brethren and children aſhamed. Vpon you at this time are fixed the eyes of all the Church: yea alſo, you are made a ſpectacle to the world, to Angels, to men; Do not ſo carry your ſelf in this your laſt acte, that you leaue nothing but laments to your friends, and ioy to your enemies. But rather on the contrary, which we aſſuredly hope, & for which we continually power forth prayers to God, diſplay gloriouſly the banner of faith, and make to reioyce the Church which you haue made heauie; ſo ſhall you not onely merite pardon at Gods hands, but a crowne. Farewell. Quite you like a man, and let your heart be ſtrengthened. From Rome. the 28. day of September, 1607.
                     
                     
                        
                           Your very Reuerendſhips brother and ſeruant in Chriſt, Robert Bellarmine Cardinall.
                        
                     
                  
                  
                     
                     THE ANSWERE to the Cardinals Letter.
                     
                        AND now that I am to enter into the fielde againſt him by refuting his Letter, I muſt firſt vſe this proteſtation; That no deſire of vaine glory by matching with ſo learned a man, maketh mee to vndertake this taske; but onely the care & conſcience I haue, that ſuch ſmooth Circes charmes and guilded pilles, as full of exterior eloquence, as of in ward vntruthes, may not haue that publike paſſage through the world without an anſwere: whereby my reputation might vniuſtly be darkened, by ſuch cloudy and foggy miſts of vntruthes and falſe imputations, the hearts of vnſtayed and ſimple men be miſ-led, & the trueth itſelfe ſmothered.
                     But before I come to the particular anſwere of this Letter, I muſt here deſire the

world to wonder with me,A great miſtaking of the ſtate of the Queſtion and caſe in hand. at the committing of ſo groſſe an errour by ſo learned a man: as that hee ſhould haue pained himſelfe to haue ſet downe ſo elaborate a letter, for the refutation of a quite miſtaken queſtion. For it appeareth, that our Engliſh Fugitiues, of whoſe inward ſocietie with him he ſo greatly vaunteth, haue ſo faſt hammered in his head the Oath of Supremacie, which hath euer bin ſo great a ſcarre vnto them, as he thinking by his letter to haue refuted the laſt Oath, hath in place thereof onely paid the Oath of Supremacie, which was moſt in his head: as a man that being earneſtly caried in his thoughts vpon another matter, then he is preſently in doing, will often name the matter or perſon hee is thinking of, in place of the other thing he hath at that time in hand.
                     
                        The difference betweene the Oath of Supremacie, and this of Allegiance.For, as the Oath of Supremacie was deuiſed for putting a difference betweene Papiſts, and them of our profeſsion: ſo was this Oath, which he would ſeeme to impugne, ordained for making a difference between the ciuilly obedient Papiſts, & the

peruerſe diſciples of the powder-Treaſon. Yet doth all his letter runne vpon an Inuectiue againſt the Compulſion of Catholiques to deny the authoritie of Saint Peters Succeſſors; and in place thereof to acknowledge the Succeſſors of King Henry the eight. For, in King Henry the eights time was the Oath of Supremacie firſt made: by him were Thomas Moore and Roffenſis put to death, partly for refuſing of it. From his time til novv haue al the Princes of this land profeſsing this Religion, ſucceſsiuely in effect maintained the ſame and in that Oath only is contained the Kings abſolute povver, to be iudge ouer all perſons, aſvvel Ciuil as Eccleſiaſtical; excluding al forraine povvers and Potentates to be iudges vvithin his Dominions: vvheras this laſt made Oath containeth no ſuch matter, onely medling vvith the ciuil obedience of ſubiects to their Soueraigne, in meere temporall cauſes.
                     And that it may the better appeare, that vvhereas by name he ſeemeth to condemne the laſt Oath; yet indeed his vvhole Letter runneth vpon nothing, but vpon the condemnation

of the Oath of Supremacie: I haue here thought good to ſet downe the ſaide Oath, leauing it then to the diſcretion of euery indifferent reader to iudge, whether hee doeth not in ſubſtance onely anſwere to the Oath of Supremacie, but that he giueth the child a wrong name.
                     
                        I A B. doe vtterly teſtifie and declare in my Conſcience, that the Kings Highneſſe is the onely Supreame Gouernour of this Realme, and all other his Highneſſe Dominions and Counties, as well in all Spirituall or Eccleſiaſticall things or cauſes, as Temporall: And that no forraine Prince, Perſon, Prelate, State or Potentate, hath or ought to haue any Iuriſdiction, Power, Superioritie, Preeminence or Authoritie Eccleſiaſticall or Spirituall within this Realme. And therefore, I do vtterly renounce and forſake all forreine Iuriſdictions, Powers, Superiorities and authorities; and do promiſe that from hencefoorth I ſhall beare faith and true Allegiance to the Kings Highneſſe, his Heires and lawfull Succeſsors: and to my power ſhall aſsiſt and defend all iuriſdictions, Priuiledges, Pre
                           •
                        minences and Authorities graunted or belonging to

the Kings Highneſſe, his Heires and Succeſſours, or vnited and annexed to the Imperiall Crowne of the Realme: So helpe mee God: and by the Contents of this booke.
                     And that the iniuſtice, as well as the errour of his groſſe miſtaking in this point, may yet be more clearely diſcouered; I haue alſo thought good to inſert here immediatly after the Oath of Supremacie, the contrary Concluſions to all the points and Articles, whereof this other late Oath doeth conſiſt: whereby it may appeare, what vnreaſonable and rebellious points hee would driue my Subiects vnto, by refuſing the whole body of that Oath, as it is conceiued. For he that ſhall refuſe to take this Oath, muſt of neceſſitie hold all, or ſome of theſe propoſitions following.
                     That I, King IAMES, am not the lawfull  King of this Kingdome, and of all other my Dominions.
                     That the Pope by his owne authoritie  may depoſe me. If not by his owne authoritie, yet by ſome other authoritie of the Church, or of the Sea of Rome. If not by

ſome other authoritie of the Church & Sea of Rome, yet by other meanes with others helpe, he may depoſe me.
                     
                         That the Pope may diſpoſe of my Kingdomes and Dominions.
                     
                         That the Pope may giue authoritie to ſome forren Prince to inuade my Dominions.
                     
                         That the Pope may diſcharge my Subiects of their Allegiance and Obedience to me.
                     
                         That the Pope may giue licence to one, or more of my Subiects to beare armes againſt me.
                     
                         That the Pope may giue leaue to my Subiects to offer violence to my Perſon, or to my Gouernement, or to ſome of my Subiects.
                     
                         That if the Pope ſhall by ſentence excommunicate or depoſe me, my Subiects are not to beare Faith and Allegiance to me.
                     
                         If the Pope ſhall by Sentence excommunicate or depoſe mee, my Subiects are not bound to defend with all their power my Perſon and Crowne.
                     
                         If the Pope ſhall giue out any Sentence

of Excommunication or Depriuation againſt me, my Subiects by reaſon of that ſentence are not bound to reueale all Conſpiracies and Treaſons againſt mee, which ſhal come to their hearing and knowledge.
                     That it is not hereticall and deteſtable to  hold, that Princes being excommunicated by the Pope, may be either depoſed or killed by their Subiects, or any other.
                     That the Pope hath power to abſolue my  Subiects from this Oath, or from ſome part thereof.
                     That this Oath is not adminiſtred to my  Subiects, by a full and lawfull authoritie.
                     That this Oath is to be taken with Equiuocation, mental euaſion, or ſecret reſeruation: and not with the heart and good will, ſincerely in the true faith of a Chriſtian man.
                     Theſe are the true and naturall branches of the body of this Oath. The affirmatiue of all which negatiues, doe neither concerne in any caſe the Popes Supremacie in ſpiritual cauſes: nor yet were euer concluded,Touching the pretended Councel of Lateran. See Plat. In vita Innocen. III.
                         and defined by any complete generall Councell to belong to the Popes authoritie; and their

owne ſchoole Doctors are at irreconciliable oddes and iarres about them.
                     And that the world may yet farther ſee ours and the whole States ſetting downe of this Oath, did not proceed from any new inuention of our owne,The Oath of Allegiance confirmed by the authoritie of ancient Councels. but as it is warranted by the word of GOD: ſo doeth it take the example from an Oath of Allegiance decreed a thouſand yeeres agone, which a famous Councel then, together with diuers other Councels, were ſo farre from condemning (as the Pope now hath done this Oath) as I haue thought good to ſet downe their owne words here in that purpoſe: whereby it may appeare that I craue nothing now of my Subiects in this Oath, which was not expreſly and carefully commanded then, by the Councels to be obeyed without exception of perſons. Nay, not in the very particular point of equiuocation, which I in this Oath was ſo carefull to haue eſchewed: but you ſhall here ſee the ſaid Councels in their Decrees,The ancient Councels prouided for Equiuocation as carefull to prouide for the eſchewing of the ſame; ſo as almoſt euery point of that Action, and this of ours ſhall be found to

haue relation and agreeance one with the other, ſaue only in this, that thoſe ould Councels were carefull and ſtrait in commanding the taking of the ſame:The difference between the ancient Councels, and the Pope counſelling of the Catholikes. whereas by the contrary, he that novv vanteth himſelfe to bee head of all Councels, is as carefull and ſtrait in the prohibition of all men from the taking of this Oath of Allegiance.
                     The vvordes of the Councell bee theſe. Heare our Sentence.
                     
                     
                        Whoſoeuer of vs,
                        Concil. Toletan. 4 can 47. Ann. 633.
                         
                        or of all the people thorowout all Spaine, ſhall goe about by any meanes of conspiracie or practiſe, to violate the Oath of his fidelitie, which he hath taken for the preſeruation of his Countrey, or of the Kings life; or who ſhall attempt to put violent hands vpon the King; or to depriue him of his kingly power; or that by tyrannicall preſumption would vſurpe the Soueraigntie of the Kingdome: let him bee accurſed in the ſight of God the Father, and of his Angels; and let him be made and declared a ſtranger from the Catholike Church, which he hath prophaned by his periurie, & an aliant from the company of all Chriſtian people; together with all the complices of his impietie: becauſe it

behooueth all thoſe that bee guiltie of the like offence, to vnder-lie the like puniſhment. Which ſentence is three ſeuerall times together, and almoſt in the ſame wordes, repeated in the ſame Canon. After this, the Synode deſired, That this Sentence of theirs now this third time rehearſed, might be confirmed by the voyce and conſent of all that were preſent. Then the whole Clergie and people anſwered, Whoſoeuer ſhal cary himſelfe preſumptuouſly againſt this your definitiue ſentence, let them be Anathema maranatha, that is, let them be vtterly destroyed at the Lords comming, and let them and their complices haue their portion with Iudas Iſcarioth. Amen.
                     
                     And in the fift Concil. Toletan. 5. Can. 7. anno. 636.
                         Councell, there it is decreed, That this Acte touching the Oath of Allegiance, ſhall bee repeated in euery Councell of the Biſhops of Spaine. The Decree is in theſe wordes: In conſideration that the mindes of men are eaſily inclined to euill and forgetfulneſſe, therefore this moſt holy Synode hath ordeined; and doeth enact, That in euery Councell of the Biſhops of Spaine, the Decree of the generall 
                        Synod. Toletan 4. vniuerſalis, & magna Synodus dicta, Syn. T
                              •
                           l 5. ca. 2.
                         
                        Councell which was made for the ſafetie of our Princes, ſhall be with

an audible voyce proclaimed & pronounced, after the concluſion of all other things in the Synode: that ſo it being often ſounded in their eares, at least by continuall remembrance, the mindes of wicked men being terrified might bee reformed, which by obliuion & facilitie [to euill] are brought to preuaricate.
                     
                     And in the ſixt Concil. Tolet. 6. Can. 18 Anno 638.
                         Councell, We doe proteſt before God, and all the orders of Angels, in the preſence of the Prophets and Apostles, and all the company of Martyrs, and before all the Catholike Church, and aſſemblies of the Chriſtians; That no man ſhall goe about to ſeeke the deſtruction of the King: No man ſhall touch the life of the Prince; No man ſhall depriue him of the Kingdome; No man by any tyrannicall preſumption ſhall vſurpe to himſelfe the ſoueraigntie of the Kingdome; No man by any Machination ſhall in his aduerſitie aſſociate to himſelfe any packe of conſpirators againſt him; And that if any of vs ſhalbe preſumptuous by raſhneſſe in any of theſe caſes, let him be ſtrickē with the anatheme of God, and reputed as condemned in eternall iudgement without any hope of recouery.
                     
                     And in the tenth Concil. Tolet. 10 Can. 2. Aera. 694.
                         Councell (to omit diuers

others held alſo at Toledo) it is ſaid; That if any religious man, euen from the Biſhop to the loweſt Order of the Church-men or Monkes, ſhall be found to haue violated the generall Oathes made for the preſeruation of the Kings perſon, or of the nation and Countrey with a profane minde; forthwith let him be depriued of all dignitie, and excluded from all place and honour. The occaſion of the Decrees made for this Oath, was, That the Chriſtians were ſuſpected for want of fidelitie to their Kings; and did either equiuocate in taking their Oath, or make no conſcience to keepe it, when they had giuen it: as may appeare by ſundry ſpeeches in the Concil. Toletan. 4. cap. 74.
                         Councell, ſaying, There is a generall report, that there is that perfidiouſnes in the mindes of many poeple of diuerſe Nations, that they make no conſcience to keepe the Oath and fidelitie that they haue ſworne vnto their Kings: but doe diſsemble a profeſsion of fidelitie in their mouthes, when they hold an impious perfidiouſnes in their minds. And Concil. Tolet 4. cap 74.
                         againe, They ſweare to their Kings, and yet doe they preuaricate in the fidelitie which they haue promiſed: Neither do they feare the volume of Gods iudgement,

by the which the curſe of God is brought vpon them, with great threatning of puniſhments, which doe ſweare lyingly in the Name of God. To the like effect ſpake they in the Councel of Concil. A. quiſgran ſub Ludou. Pio, & Greg. 4. Can. 12. anno 836.
                         
                        Aquiſgran: If any of the Biſhops, or other Church-man of inferiour degree, hereafter thorow feare or couetouſnes, or any other perſwaſion, ſhall make defection from our Lord the Orthodoxe Emperour Lodowicke, or ſhall violate the Oath of fidelitie made vnto him, or ſhall with their peruerſe intention adhere to his enemies; let him by this Canonicall and Synodall ſentence be depriued of whatſoeuer place hee is poſſeſsed of.
                     
                     And now to come to a particular anſwere of his letter. Firſt as concerning the ſweete memory hee hath of his old acquaintance with the Arch-prieſt; it may indeed be pleaſing for him to recount: but ſure I am, his acquaintance with him and the reſt of his ſocietie, our Fugitiues (whereof he alſo vanteth himſelfe in his preface to the Reader in his booke of Controuerſies) hath prooued ſowre to vs and our State. For ſome of ſuch Prieſts and Ieſuits, as were the greateſt Traitours

and fomenters of the greateſt conſpiracies againſt the late Queen, gaue vp father Robert Bellarmine for one of their greateſt authorities and oracles.Campian and Hart. See the conference in the Tower. And therefore I doe not enuie the great honor he can win, by his vaunt of his inward familiaritie with an other Princes traitours and fugitiues: whom vnto if he teach no better maners then hitherto he hath done, I thinke his fellowſhip are little beholding vnto him.
                     And for deſiring him to remember him in his prayers at the altar of the Lord: if the Arch-prieſts prayers prooue no more profitable to his ſoule, then Bellarmines counſel is like to proue profitable, both to the ſoule and body of Blackwel (if he would follow it) the author of this letter might very wel be without his prayers.
                     Now the firſt meſſenger that I can finde, which brought ioyfull newes of the Archprieſt to Bellarmine, was he that brought the newes of the Arch-prieſts taking, and firſt appearance of Martyrdome. A great ſigne ſurely of the Cardinals mortification, that he was ſo reioyced to heare of the apprehenſion,

impriſonment and appearance of putting to death of ſo old and deare a friend of his. But yet apparantly he ſhould firſt haue bene ſure, that he was onely to be puniſhed for cauſe of Religion, before hee had ſo triumphed vpon the expectation of his Martyrdome. For firſt,The Cardinals charitie. by what rule of charitie was it lawfull for him to iudge me a perſecutour, before proofe had bene made of it by the ſaid Arch-prieſtes condemnation and death? What could hee know, that the ſaid Arch-prieſt was not taken vpon ſuſpicion of his guiltineſſe in the Powder-Treaſon? What certaine information had he then receiued vpon the particulars, whereupon hee was to be accuſed? And laſt of all, by what inſpiration could he foretell whereupon hee was to bee accuſed? For at that time there was yet nothing layed to his charge. And if charitie ſhould not be ſuſpicious, what warrant had he abſolutely to condemne mee of vſing perſecution and tyrannie, which could not be but emplied vpon me, if Blackwel was to be a Martyr? but ſurely it may iuſtly be ſaid of Bellarmine in this caſe, that our Sauiour

CHRIST ſaith of all worldly and carnall men, who thinke it enough to loue their Mat. 5.43. friends and hate their enemies; the limits of the Cardinals charitie extending no farther, then to them of his owne profeſsion. For what euer he added in ſuperfluous charitie to Blackwel, in reioycing in the ſpeculation of his future Martyrdome; he detracted as much vniuſtly and vncharitably from me, in accounting of me thereby as of a bloody Perſecutour. And whereas this ioy of his was interrupted by the next meſſenger, that brought the newes of the ſaid Arch-prieſt his failing in his conſtancie, by taking of this Oath; he needed neuer to haue bene troubled, either with his former ioy or his ſecond ſorrow, both being alike falſly grounded. For as it was neuer my intention to lay any thing vnto the ſaid Arch-prieſts charge, as I haue neuer done to any for cauſe of conſcience; ſo was Blackwels conſtancie neuer brangled by taking of this Oath; It being a thing which he euer thought lawfull before his apprehenſion, and whereunto hee perſwaded all Catholikes to giue obedience;

like as after his apprehenſion, he neuer made doubt or ſtop in it; but at the firſt offering it vnto him, did freely take it, as a thing moſt lawfull; neither meanes of threatning or flatterie being euer vſed vnto him, as himſelfe can yet beare witneſſe.
                     And as for the temperature and modification of this Oath; except that a reaſonable and lawfull matter is there ſet downe in reaſonable & temperate words, agreeing thereunto: I know not what he can meane, by quarelling it for that fault. For no temperatnes nor modifications in words therein, can iuſtly be called the Deuils craft, when the thing it ſelfe is ſo plaine, and ſo plainely interpreted to all them that take it; as the onely troubleſome thing in it all, bee the words vſed in the end thereof, for eſchewing aequiuocation and mentall reſeruation. Which new Catholique doctrine, may farre iuſtlier bee called the Deuils craft, then any plaine and temperate words, in ſo plaine and cleare a matter. But what ſhal we ſay of theſe ſtrange countrey clownes, whom of with the Satyre we may iuſtly complaine, that they blovv

both hote and cold out of one mouth? For Luther and our bolde and free ſpeaking Writers are mightily railed vpon by them, as hot brained fellovves, and ſpeakers by the Deuils inſtinct: and novv if vve ſpeake moderately and temperately of them, it muſt bee tearmed the Deuils craft. And therefore we may iuſtly complaine vvith CHRIST, that when we Matth. 11.17 mourne, they wil not lament: and when vve pipe, they vvill not dance. But neither Iohn Baptiſt his ſeueritie, nor CHRIST his meekeneſſe and lenitie can pleaſe them, vvho build but to their owne Monarchie vpon the ground of their ovvn Traditions; and not to CHRIST vpon the ground of his Word and infallible trueth.
                     But vvhat can bee meant by alleadging, that the craft of the Deuill herein, is onely vſed for ſubuerſion of the Catholique faith, and euerſion of S. Peters Primacie; had need bee commented anevv by Bellarmine himſelfe. For in all this Letter of his, neuer one vvord is vſed, to proue that by any part of this Oath the primacy of S. Peter is any vvay medled vvith, except Maſter Bellarmine his

bare alledging; which without prouing it by more cleare demonſtration, can neuer ſatiſfie the conſcience of any reaſonable man. For (for ought that I know) heauen and earth are no farther aſunder, then the profeſson of a temporall obedience to a temporall King, is different from any thing belonging to the Catholique faith, or Supremacie of S. Peter. For as for the Catholique faith;No deciſion of any point of Religion in the Oath of Allegiance. can there bee one word found in all that Oath, tending or ſounding to matter of Religion? Doeth he that taketh it, promiſe there to beleeue, or not to beleeue any article of Religion? Or doeth he ſo much as name a true or a falſe Church there? And as for S. Peters Primacie; I know no Apoſtles name that is therein named, except the name of IAMES, it being my Chriſten name: though it pleaſe him not to deigne to name me in all the Letter, albeit, the contents thereof concerne me in the higheſt degree. Neither is there any mention at all made therein, either diſertis verbis, or by any other indirect meanes, either of the Hierarchie of the Church, of S. Peters ſucceſsion, of the Sea Apoſtolike, or of

any ſuch matter: but that the Author of our Letter doeth brauely make mention of S. Peters ſucceſsion, bringing it in compariſon with the ſucceſsion of Henry the eight. Of which vnapt and vnmannerly ſimilitude, I wonder hee ſhould not bee much aſhamed. For as to King Henries ſucceſſour (which he meaneth by mee) as I, I ſay, neuer did, nor will preſume to create any article of fayth, or to bee Iudge thereof; but to ſubmit my exemplary obedience vnto them, in as great humilitie as the meaneſt of the land: ſo if the Pope could bee as well able to proue his either Perſon all or Doctrinall Succeſsion from S. Peter, as I am able to proue my lineall deſcent from the Kings of England and Scotland; there had neuer been ſo long adoe, nor ſo much ſturre kept about this queſtion in Chriſtendome; neither had Bellar. de Rom. Pont. lib. 4. cap. 6. Ibid. lib. 2. ca 12
                         M. Bellarmine himſelfe needed to haue beſtowed ſo many ſheetes of paper De ſummo Pontifice, in his great bookes of Controuerſies: and when all is done, to conclude with a morall certitude, and a piè credēdum: bringing in the Idem. ibidem lib. 2. cap. 14.
                         Popes, that are parties in this cauſe, to bee

his witneſſes: and yet their hiſtoricall narration muſt be no article of faith. And I am without vantrie ſure, that I doe farre more neerely imitate the worthy actions of my Predeceſſors, then the Popes in our age can be well proued to be ſimiles Petro, eſpecially in curſing of Kings, and ſetting free their Subiects from their Allegiance vnto them.
                     But now we come to his ſtrongeſt argument; which is, That he would alledge vpon me a Panick terrour, as if I were poſſeſſed with a needleſſe feare. For,
                        The Cardinals weighieſt Argument. ſaith the Cardinall, from the beginning of the Churches firſt infancie, euen to this day, where was it euer heard, that euer a Pope either commanded to be killed, or allowed the ſlaughter of any Prince whatſoeuer, whether he were an Hereticke, an Ethnike or Perſecutor? But firſt, wherefore doth he here wilfully, and of purpoſe omit the reſt of the points mentioned in that Oath, for depoſing, degrading, ſtirring vp of arms or rebelling againſt them, vvhich are as vvell mentioned in tha
                           •
                         Oath, as the killing of them? as being all of one conſequence againſt a King, no Subiect being ſo ſcrupulous,

as that hee will attempt the one, and leaue the other vnperformed if he can. And yet ſurely I cannot blame him for paſsing it ouer, ſince he could not otherwiſe haue eſchewed the direct belying of himſelfe in tearmes, which hee now doeth but in ſubſtance and effect. For Bellar. de Rom. Pont. lib. 5. cap. 8. & lib. 3. cap. 16.
                         as for the Popes depoſing and degrading of Kings, hee maketh ſo braue vaunts and bragges of it in his former bookes, as he could neuer with ciuil honeſty haue denied it here.
                     But to returne to the Popes allowing of killing of Kings, I know not with what face hee can ſent ſo ſtout a deniall vpon it againſt his owne knowledge. How many Emperors did the Pope raiſe warre againſt in their owne bowels? Who as they were ouercome in battaile, were ſubiect to haue bene killed therein; which I hope the Pope could not but haue allowed, when hee was ſo farre inraged at Gotfrid. Vite
                              •
                           b. Helmod. Cuſpinian. 
                        Henry the fift for giuing buriall to his fathers dead corps, after the Paſcal. 2. 
                        Pope had ſtirred him vp to rebell againſt his father, and procured his ruine. But leauing theſe old Hiſtories to Bellarmines owne bookes

that doe moſt authentically cite them, as I haue already ſaid; let vs turne our eyes vpon our owne time, and therein remember what a Panegyrik See the Oration of Sixtus Quintus, made in the Conſiſtory vpon the death of Henry the 3. oration was made by the Pope, in praiſe and approbation of the Frier and his fact, that murthered king Henry the third of France who was ſo farre from either being Heretike, Ethnike or Perſecutor in their account, that the ſaid Popes owne wordes in that oration are, That a true Frier hath killed a counterfeit Frier. And beſides that vehement oration and congratulation for that fact; how neere it ſcaped, that the ſaid Frier was not canonized for that glorious acte, is better knowen to Bellarmine and his followers, then to vs here.
                     But ſure I am, if ſome Cardinals had not beene more wiſe and circumſpect in that errand, then the Pope himſelfe was, the Popes owne Kalender of his Saints would haue ſufficiently proued Bellarmine a liar in this caſe. And to draw yet nerer vnto our ſelues; how many practiſes and attempts were made againſt the late Queenes life, which were directly enioyned to thoſe Traitours by their

Confeſſors, and plainely authorized by the Popes allowance? For verification whereof there needes no more proofe, then that neuer Pope either then or ſince, called any Church-man in queſtion for medling in thoſe treaſonable conſpiracies; nay, the Cardinals owne S. Sanderus mentioned in his letter could well verifie this trueth, if he were aliue; and who will looke his bookes, will find them filled with no other doctrine then this. And what difference there is betweene the killing or allowing the ſlaughter of Kings, and the ſtirring vp and approbation of practiſes to kil them; I remit to Bellarmines owne iudgement. It may then very clearely appeare, how ſtrangely this Authours paſſion hath made him forget himſelfe, by implicating himſelfe in ſo ſtrong a contradiction againſt his owne knowledge and conſcience, againſt the witneſſe of his former bookes, and againſt the practiſe of our owne times. But who can wonder at this contradiction of himſelfe in this point, when his owne great Volumes are ſo filled with contradictions? which when either he, or any other

ſhall euer be able to reconcile, I wil then beleeue that he may eaſily reconcile this impudent ſtrong deniall of his in his letter, of any Popes medling againſt Kings, with his owne former bookes, as I haue alreadie ſaid.
                     And that I may not ſeeme to imitate him in affirming boldly that which I no wayes proue; I will therefore ſend the Reader to looke for witneſſes of his contradictions, in ſuch places heere mentioned in his owne booke. In his booke, of Bellar de Iuſtif. lib. 5. cap. 7.
                         Iuſtification, there he affirmeth, That for the vncertaintie of our owne proper righteouſnes, and for auoiding of vaine glory, it is moſt ſure and ſafe, to repoſe our whole confidence in the alone mercie and goodnes of God; Contrary to all his fiue bookes de Iuſtificatione.
                         Which propoſition of his, is directly contrary to the diſcourſe, and current of all his fiue bookes de Iuſtificatione, wherein the ſame is conteined.
                     
                        God doeth not encline a man to euill, neither 
                        Bellar. de amiſ. gra. & ſ
                              •
                           at. pecca. lib. 2. cap. 13.
                         
                        naturally or morally.
                     
                     Preſently after he affirmeth the contrary, That God doeth not encline to euill naturally, but 
                        Ibidem paulò pòſt. 
                        morally.
                     
                     All the Fathers teach conſtantly, That
                        
                        Bellar. de cleicis, lib. 1. cap. 
                              
                                 •
                              4.
                        
                        Biſhops do ſucceede the Apoſtles, and Priestes the ſeuentie diſciples.
                     
                     Elſevvhere he affirmeth the contrary, That 
                        Bellar. de P
                              •
                           nt. lib. 4 cap. 
                              
                                 •
                              5.
                         
                        Biſhops do not properly ſucceed the Apoſtles.
                     
                     
                        That 
                        Bellar. de 
                              •
                           ont. lib. 1. cap. 
                              
                                 •
                              2.
                         
                        Iudas did not beleeue
                     
                     Contrary, That 
                        B
                              •
                           llar. de 
                              •
                           uſtif. lib. 3. cap. 14.
                         
                        Iudas was iuſt and certainely good.
                     
                     
                        The keeping of the 
                        Bellar. de gra & lib. arbit. lib. 5. cap. 5.
                         
                        Law according to the ſubſtance of the worke, doeth require that the Commandement be ſo kept, that ſinne be not committed, and the man bee not guiltie for hauing not kept the Commandement.
                     
                     Contrary,Eodem lib. 
                              •
                           ap. 9.
                         
                        It is to bee knowen, that it is not all one, to doe a good morall worke, and to keepe the Commandement according to the ſubstance of the worke. For the Commandement may be kept according to the ſubstance of the worke, euen with ſinne; as if one ſhould reſtore to his friend the thing committed to him of truſt, to the end that theeues might afterward take it from him.
                     
                     
                        Bell. de Pont. lib. 4. cap. 3.
                        Peter did not looſe that faith, whereby the heart beleeueth vnto iuſtification.
                     
                     Contrary,Bell. de Iuſt. 
                              •
                           ib. 3. cap. 14.
                         
                        Peters ſinne was deadly.
                     
                     
                        Bell. de Rom. Pontif. lib. 3. 
                           
                              •
                           ap. 14.
                        
                        Antichriſt ſhall bee a Magician, and after

the maner of other Magicians ſhall ſecretly worſhip the Deuill.
                     
                     
                        Ibid. ex ſen
                           
                              •
                           ent. Hypol. & 
                              •
                           yril. & cap. 12. eiuſdem 
                              •
                           ibri.Contrary, He ſhall not admit of idolatrie: he ſhall hate idoles, and reedifie the Temple.
                     
                     
                        By the words of 
                        Bellar. lib. 1. 
                           
                              •
                           e miſſa. cap. 27
                         
                        Conſecration the true and ſolemne oblation is made.
                     
                     Contrary, The ſacrifice doeth not conſiſt in the words: but in the 
                        Bellar. de 
                              •
                           ſſ lib. 2. cap. 2.
                         
                        oblation of the thing it ſelfe.
                     
                     
                        Bellar. de inim. Chriſt. 
                              ••
                           b. 4. cap. 5.
                        
                        That the ende of the world cannot bee knowen.
                     
                     
                        Bellarm. de Pont. lib. 3. cap. 17.
                        Contrary, After the death of Antichriſt, there ſhall bee but fiue and fourtie daies till the ende of the world.
                     
                     
                        Bellarm. de 
                              •
                           on. lib 3. cap. 3.
                        
                        That the tenne Kings ſhall burne the ſcarlet Whoore, that is Rome.
                     
                        Bellarm. ibid.Contrary, Antichriſt ſhall hate Rome, and fight againſt it, and burne it.
                     
                     
                        Bellarm. de Pont. lib. 2. cap. 31.
                        
                        The name of vniuerſall Biſhop may be vnderſtood two wayes; one way, that hee which is ſaid to be vniuerſal Biſhop, may be thought to be the onely Biſhop of all Chriſtian cities; ſo that all others are not indeed Biſhops, but only Vicars to him, who is called vniuerſal Biſhop: in which ſenſe, the Pope is not vniuerſall Biſhop.
                     
                     
                        Contrary, All ordinary 
                        Bellar. de Pontif. lib. 2 cap. 24.
                         
                        iuriſdiction of Biſhops doeth deſcend immediatly from the Pope; and is in him, and from him is deriued to others. Which few places I haue onely ſelected amongſt many the like, that the diſcret and iudicious Reader may diſcerne ex vngue Leonem. For when euer hee is preſſed with a weightie obiection, he neuer careth, nor remembreth how his ſolution and anſwere to that, may make him gaineſay his owne doctrine in ſome other places, ſo it ſerue him for a ſhift to put off the preſent ſtorme withall.
                     But now to returne to our matter againe: Since Popes, ſaith hee, haue neuer at any time medled againſt Kings, wherefore, I pray you, ſhould onely the King of England bee afraid of that, whereof neuer Chriſtian King is, or was afraid? Was neuer Chiſtian Emperour or King afraid of the Popes? How then were theſe miſerable Emperours toſt and turmoiled, and in the end vtterly ruined by the Popes: for proofe whereof I haue already cited Bellarmines owne bookes? Was not the Henry 4. Emperour afraid, who Abbas Vrſpergen. Lamb. Scaffin. Anno 1077. Plat. in vit. Greg. 7.
                         waited barefooted

in the froſt and ſnow three dayes at the Popes gate, before hee could get entrie? Was not the Frederick Babaroſſa. Emperour alſo afraide,Naucler. gener 4
                                 •
                              . Iacob. Bergom. in Supplem chron. Alſonſ. Ciacon. in vit. Alex. 3.
                         who was driuen to lie agroofe on his belly, and ſuffer another Pope to tread vpon his necke? And was not another Henry. 6. Emperour afraide, R H
                              •
                           ueden in Rich. 1. Ranulph in Polychronico. lib. 7.
                         who was conſtrained in like manner to indure a third Pope to beat off from his head the Imperiall Crowne with his foote? Was not Abbaes Vrſper. ad Ann. 1191. Nauc. gen. 40. Cuſpin. in Philippo. 
                        Philip afraid, being made Emperour againſt Pope Innocentius the thirds good liking, when he brake out into theſe wordes, Either the Pope ſhal take the Crowne from Philip, or Philip ſhal take the Miter from the Pope? whereupon the Pope ſtirred vp Ottho againſt him, who cauſed him to be ſlaine; and preſently went to Rome, and was crowned Emperour by the Pope, though afterward the Pope 
                        Abbas Vrſper depoſed him too. Was not the Emperour Matth Pariſ in Henr. 3. Petrus de Vineis Epiſt. lib. 1. & 2. & Cuſpin. in Freder. 2.
                         
                        Fredericke afraide, when Innocentius the fourth excommunicated him, depriued him of his crowne, abſolued Princes of their Oath of fidelitie to him, and in Apulia corrupted one to giue him poiſon? whereof the Emperour recouering, hee hired his baſtard

Sonne Manfredus to poyſon him; wherof he died. What did Vita 
                              •
                           rederici Germaincè conſcriptae. 
                        Alexander the third write to the Soldan? That if he would liue quietly, he ſhould by ſome ſleight murther the Frederick Barbaroſſa. Emperour; and to that ende ſent him the Emperours picture. And did not Paul Iouius Hiſtor. lib. 2. Cuſpinian. in Baiazet. 11. Guicciard. lib. 2.
                         
                        Alexander the ſixt take of the Turke Baiazetes two hundred thouſand crownes to kill his brother Gemen; or as ſome call him, Si
                              •
                           imus, whom hee held captiue at Rome? Did hee not accept of the conditions to poyſon the man, and had his pay? Was not our Houeden pag. 308. Matth. Parlſ. in Henric. II. Walſinga. in Hypodig. Neuſtriae Ioan. Capgraue. 
                        Henry the ſecond afraide after the ſlaughter of Thomas Becket; that beſides his going barefooted in Pilgrimage, was whipped vp and downe the Chapter-houſe like a ſchooleboy, and glad to eſcape ſo too? Had not this French King his great Grandfather King Iohn reaſon to bee afraid, when the Gometius de rebus geſt. Fran. Ximenij Archiepiſ. Tolet lib. 5.
                         
                        Pope gaue away his kingdome of Nauarre to the King of Spaine, whereof he yet poſſeſſeth the beſt halfe? Had not this King, his Succeſſour reaſon to be afraid, when he was forced to begge ſo ſubmiſsiuely the relaxation of his Excommunication, as hee was content

likewiſe to ſuffer his Ambaſſadour to be whipped at Rome for penance? And had not the late Queene reaſon to looke to herſelfe, when ſhe was excommunicated by Pius Quintus, her Subiects looſed from their fidelity and allegiance toward her, her Kingdome of Ireland giuen to the King of Spaine, and that famous fugitiue diuine, honoured with the like degree of a red hat as Bellarmine is, was not aſhamed to publiſh in print an Card. Allens Anſwere to Stan. let. Anno. 1587. Apologie for Stanlies Treaſon, maintaining, that by reaſon of her excommunication and hereſie, it was not onely lawfull for any of her Subiects, but euen they were bound in conſcience to depriue her of any ſtrength, which lay in their power to doe? And whether it were armies, townes, or fortreſſes of hers which they had in their hands they were obliged to put them in the King of Spaine her enemies hands, ſhee no more being the right owner of any thing? But albeit it be true, that wiſe men are mooued by the examples of others dangers to vſe prouidence and caution, according to the olde prouerbe, Tum tua res agitur, paries cùm proximus

ardet: yet was I much neerlie ſummoned to vſe this caution, by the practiſe of it in mine owne perſon.
                     Firſt, by the ſending forth of theſe Bulles, whereof I made mention already, for debarring me from entrie vnto this Crowne, and Kingdome. And next after my entry, and full poſſeſsion thereof, by the horrible Powder-Treaſon, which ſhould haue bereft both me and mine, both of crowne and lif
                           •
                        . And howſoeuer the Pope wil ſeeme to cleare himſelfe of any allowance of the ſayd Powder-Treaſon; yet can it not be denyed, that his principall miniſters here, and his chiefe Mancipia the Ieſuites, were the plaine practiſers thereof: for which the principall of them hath died confeſsing it, and other haue fled the Countrey for the crime; yea, ſome of them gone into Italy: and yet neither theſe that fled out of this countrey for it, nor yet Baldwine, who though he then remained in the Lowe-countreyes, was of counſell in it, were euer called to account for it by the Pope: much leſſe puniſhed for medling in ſo ſcandalous and enormous buſineſſe. And

now what needs ſo great wonder and exclamation, that the onely King of England feareth: And what other Christian King doeth, or euer did feare, but he? As if by the force of his rhetoricke he could make me and my good Subiects to miſtruſt our ſenſes, denie the Sunne to ſhine at midday, and not with the ſerpent to ſtop our eares to his charming, but to the plaine and viſible veritie it ſelfe. And yet for all this wonder, hee can neuer proue me to be troubled with ſuch a Panick terrour. Haue I euer importuned the Pope with any requeſt for my ſecuritie? Or haue I either troubled other Chriſtian Princes my friends & allies, to intreat for me at the Popes hand? Or yet haue I begged from them any aide or aſsiſtance for my farther ſecuritie? No. All this wondred-at feare of mine, ſtretcheth no further, then wiſely to make diſtinction betweene the ſheepe and goats in my owne paſture. For ſince, what euer the Popes part hath bene in the Powder-treaſon; yet certaine it is, that all theſe caitife monſters did to their death maintaine, that onely zeale of Religion mooued them to that

horrible attempt: yea, ſome of them at their death, would not craue pardon at GOD or King for their offence: exhorting other of their followers to the like conſtancie. Had not wee then, and our Parliament great reaſon, by this Oath to ſet a marke of diſtinction betweene good Subiects and bad? Yea, between Papiſts, though peraduenture zealous in their Religion, yet otherwiſe ciuilly honeſt and good ſubiects, and ſuch terrible firebrands of hell, as would maintaine the like maximes, which theſe powder-men did? Nay, could there bee a more gracious part in a King, ſuppoſe I ſay it, toward ſubiects of a contrary Religion, then by making them to take this Oath, to publiſh their honeſt fidelitie in temporall things to mee their Soueraigne, and thereby to wipe off that imputation and great ſlander which was laid vpon the whole profeſſors of that Religion, by the furious enterpriſe of theſe Powder-men?
                     And wheras for illuſtration of this ſtrong argument of his, hee hath brought in for a ſimilitude the hyſtorie of Nazianzenus in Iulian. inuectiuâ primâ. 
                        Iulian the Apoſtata his dealing with the Chriſtians, when as

he ſtraited them, either to commit idolatrie, or to come within the compaſſe of treaſon: I would wiſh the authour to remember, that although a ſimilitude may bee permitted claudicare vno pede;The diſproportion of the Cardinals ſimilitude. yet this was a very ill choſen ſimilitude, which is lame both of feet and hands, and euery member of the body. For I ſhall in few words prooue, that it agreeth in no one point, ſaue one, with our purpoſe, which is, that Iulian was an Emperour, and I a King. Firſt, Iulian was an Apostata, one that had renounced the whole Chriſtian faith, which hee had once profeſſed, and became an Ethnike againe, or rather an Atheiſt: whereas I am a Chriſtian, who neuer changed that Religion, that I dranke in with my milke: nor euer, I thanke God, was aſhamed of my profeſsion. Iulian dealt againſt Chriſtians onely for the profeſsion of Chriſtes cauſe: I deale in this cauſe with my Subiects, onely to make a diſtinction betweene true Subiects, and falſe hearted traitours. Iulians end was the ouerthrow of the Chriſtians: my onely end is, to maintaine Chriſtianitie in a peaceable gouernement.

                        Iulians drift was to make them commit idolatrie: my purpoſe is to make my Subiects to make open profeſsion of their naturall Alleagiance, and ciuill obedience. Iulians meanes whereby hee went about it, was by craft, and inſnaring them before they were aware: my courſe in this is plaine, cleare, and void of all obſcuritie: neuer refuſing leaue to any that are required to take this Oath, to ſtudie it at leiſure, and giuing them all the interpretation of it they can craue. But the greateſt diſsimilitude of all, is in this: that Iulian preſſed them to commit idolatrie to idoles and images: but as well I, as all the Subiects of my profeſsion are ſo farre from guilt in this point, as wee are counted heretiques by you, becauſe we will not commit idolatrie. So as, in the maine point of all, is the greateſt contrarietie. For, Iulian perſecuted the Chriſtians becauſe they would not commit idolatrie; and yee count me a perſecutour, becauſe I will not admit idolatrie. So as to conclude this point, this olde ſentence may well be applied to Bellarmine, in vſing ſo vnapt a ſimilitude,

                           
                           Perdere quos vult Iupiter, hos dementat.
                        
                     
                     And therefore his vncharitable concluſion doeth not rightly follow: That it ſeemeth vnto him, that ſome ſuch thing ſhould be ſubtilly or fraudulently included in this Oath; as if no man can deteſt treaſon againſt the King, or profeſſe ciuill ſubiection, except hee renounce the Primacie of the Apoſtolike Sea. But how hee hath ſuckt this apprehenſion out at his fingers ends, I cannot imagine: for ſure I am, as I haue oft ſaid, hee neuer goeth about to proue it: and to anſwere an improbable imagination, is to fight againſt a vaniſhing ſhadow. It cannot bee denied indeed, that many ſeruants of CHRIST, as wel Prieſts, as others, haue endured conſtantly all ſorts of torments, and death, for the profeſsion of CHRIST: and therefore to all ſuch his examples, as he bringeth in for verifying the ſame, I neede not to giue him any other anſwere, ſaue onely to remember him, that he playeth the part of a ſophiſter in all theſe his examples of the conſtancie of Martyrs: euer taking Controuerſum pro confeſſo, as if this our caſe were of the ſame nature.
                     
                        But yet that the Reader may the better diſcouer, not onely how vnaptly his ſimilitudes are applied, but likewiſe how diſhoneſtly hee vſeth himſelfe in all his citations: I haue thought good to ſet downe the very places themſelues cited by him, together with a ſhort deduction of the true ſtate of thoſe particular caſes: whereby, how little theſe examples can touch our caſe; nay, by the contrary, how rightly their true ſenſe may bee vſed, as our owne weapons to be throwen backe vpon him that alleadgeth them, ſhall eaſily appeare. And firſt, for 
                           2. Macchabees cap. 6. verſ
                              •
                            
                           18.
                         
                        Eleazar: If the Arch-prieſt his ground of refuſing the Oath, were as good as Eleazars was, to forbeare to eate the ſwines fleſh, it might not vnfitly be applyed by the Cardinall to his purpoſe.An anſwere to the Cardinal
                              •
                            example of Eleazar.
                         For as Eleazar was a principall Scribe, ſo is he a principall Prieſt: As Eleazars example had a great force in it, to animate the yonger Scribes to keepe the Law, or in his colourable eating it, to haue taught them to diſſemble: ſo hath the Arch-prieſts, either to make the inferiour Prieſts to take the Oath, or to refuſe it: but the ground

failing, the building cannot ſtand. For what exampl
                           •
                         is there in all the Scripture, in which diſobedi
                           •
                        nce to the Oath of the King, or want of allegiance is allowed? If the Cardinal would remember, that when the Church maketh a law (ſuppoſe to forbid fleſh on certaine dayes) hee that refuſeth to obey it, incurreth the iuſt cenſure of the Church: If a man then ought to die rather then to break the leaſt of Gods Ceremoniall Lawes, and to pine and ſtarue his bodie, rather then to violate the Church his poſitiue Law: will he not giue leaue to a man to redeeme his ſoule from ſinne, and to keepe his body from puniſhment, by keeping a Kings politique law, and by giuing good example in his perſon, raiſe vp a good opinion in me of like Allegiance in the inferiours of his Order? This application, as I take it, would haue better fitted this example.
                     But let me remember the Cardinall of another1. Sam. 14.15. Oath inioyned by a King to his people, whereby hee indaungered his owne life, and hazarded the ſafety of the whole army, when hee made the people ſweare in the

morning not to taſte of any meate vntill night: which Oath he exacted ſo ſtrictly, that his eldeſt ſonne, and heiere appa
                           •
                        ant Ionathan for breaking of it, by taſting a little hony of the top of his rod, though he heard not when the King gaue that Oath, had wel nigh died for it. And ſhall an Oath giuen vpon ſo vrgent an occaſion as this was, for the apparant ſafety of me and my poſterity, forbidding my people to drinke ſo deepely in the bitter cup of Antichriſtian fornications, but that they may keepe ſo much hony in their hearts, as may argue them ſtill eſpouſed to me their Soueraigne in the maine knot of true allegiance; ſhall this law, I ſay, by him be condemned to hell for a ſtratagem of Satan? I ſay no more, but GODS lot in the Oath of Sauls, and Bellarmines verdict vpon this Oath of ours, ſeeme not to be caſt out of one lap.
                     Now to his example of 
                           Theodorit. lib. 4 cap. 19. An anſwere to the Card. example of S. Baſil 
                        Baſil, which is (as hee ſayeth) ſo fit for his purpoſe. Firſt, I muſt obſerue, that if the Cardinall would leaue a common and ordinary tricke of his in all his Citations, which is, to take what

makes for him, and leaue out what makes againſt him; and cite the Authours ſenſe, as well as his Sentence, wee ſhould not bee ſo much troubled with anſwering the ancients which he alleadgeth. To inſtance it in this very place: if he had continued his allegation one line further, hee ſhould haue found this place out of Theodoret, of more force to haue moued Blackwel to take the Oath, then to haue diſſwaded him from it. For in the very next words it followeth, Imperatoris quidem amicitiam magni ſe péndere, cum pietate; quâ remotâ, pernicioſam eſſe dicere. But that it may appeare, whether of vs haue greateſt right to this place, I will in few wordes ſhew the Authours drift.
                     The Emperour Valens being an Arrian, at the perſwaſion of his wife, when hee had depriued all the Churches of their Paſtours, came to Caeſarea, where Theodorit. lib 4. cap. 19.
                         S. Baſill was then Biſhop, who, as the Hiſtory reporteth, was accounted the Light of the world. Before he came, he ſent his 
                           Modeſtus as Nazianzen vpon the death of Baſil calleth him in his oration. deputy to worke it, that S. Baſill ſhould hold fellowſhip with Eudoxius (which Looke cap. 12. eiuſdem libr.
                         
                        Eudoxius was Biſhop of Conſtantinople,
                        
and the principall of the Arrian faction) or if he would not, that he ſhould put him to baniſhment. Now when the Emperours Deputie came to Ceſarea, hee ſent for Baſil, intreated him honourably, ſpake pleaſingly vnto him, deſired he would giue way to the time, neither that hee would hazard the good of ſo many Churches tenui exquiſitione dogmatis: promiſed him the Emperours fauour, and himſelfe to be mediatour for his good. But S. Baſill anſwered, Theſe intiſing ſpeeches were fit to be vſed to children, that vſe to gape after ſuch things: but for them that were throughly inſtructed in Gods word, they could neuer ſuffer any ſyllable thereof to be corrupted. Nay, if need required, they would for the maintenance thereof, refuſe no kinde of death. Indeed the loue of the Emperour ought to be greatly eſteemed with pietie; but pietie taken away, it was pernicious.
                     
                     This is the truth of the hiſtory. Now compare the caſe of Baſill with the Arch-prieſts: Baſill was ſolicited to become an Arrian: the Arch-prieſt not once touched for any article of faith. Baſill would haue obeyed

the Emperour, but that the word of GOD for bade him: this man is willed to obey, becauſe the word of GOD commandeth him. Baſill highly eſteemed the Emperours fauour, if it might haue ſtood with pietie: the Archprieſt is exhorted to reiect it, though it ſtand with true godlineſſe in deed, to embrace it.The Cardi. aſſimilating of the Arch pr. caſe to S. Peters, and Marcellinus, conſidered· But that hee may lay load vpon the Arch-prieſt, it is not ſufficient to exhort him to courage and conſtancie by Eleazars and Baſils examples; but hee muſt be vtterty caſt downe with the comparing his fall to S. Peters, and Marcellinus: which two mens caſes were the moſt feareful, conſidering their perſons and places, that are to be found, or read of either in all the books of diuine Scripture, or the volumes of Eccleſiaſticall hiſtories; the one denying the onely true God, the other our Lord & Sauiour IESVS CHRIST: the one ſacrificing to idols, with the profane heathen: the other forſwearing his Lord and Maſter, with the hard-hearted Iewes. Vnleſſe the Cardinall would driue the Archprieſt to ſome horrour of conſcience, and pit of deſpaire, I know not what hee can

meane by this compariſon. For ſure I am, all that are not intoxicated with their cup, cannot but woonder to heare of an Oath of Allegiance to a naturall Soueraigne, to bee likened to an Apoſtats denying of God, and forſwearing of his Sauiour.
                     But to let paſſe the Diſdiapaſon of the caſes (as his ill-fauoured coupling S. Peter the head of their Church, with an apoſtate Pope) I maruaile he would remember this example of 
                           Looke Platina in vita Marcellini. 
                        Marcellinus, ſince his brother Cardinall Baronius, and the late edition of the Councels by Concil. Tom. 1. pag. 222. Looke Baronius. Ann. 302. num. 96.
                         
                        Binnius ſeeme to call the credite of the whole hiſtory into queſtion, ſaying, That it might plainely be refuted, and that it is probably to be ſhewed, that the ſtory is but obreptitious, but that he would not ſwarue from the common receiued opinion.
                     And if a man might haue leaue to coniecture; ſo would his Cardinalſhip too, if it were not for one or two ſentences in that Councell of Sinueſſa,
                        
                           See Tom. 1. Concil. in Act. Concil. Sinueſ. ſan. which ſerued for his purpoſe: namely that, Prima ſedes à nemine iudicatur: And, Iudica cauſam tuam: noſtrâ ſententià non condemnaberis. But to what

purpoſe a great Councel (as he termes it) of three hundred Biſhops and others, ſhould meete together, who before they met, knew they could doe nothing; when they were there, did nothing, but like Cuckowes, ſing ouer and ouer the ſame ſong: that Prima ſedes à nemine iudicatur: and ſo after three dayes ſitting (a long time indeed for a great and graue Councell) brake ſo bluntly vp: and yet, that there ſhould be ſeuenty two witneſſes brought againſt him, and that they ſhould ſubſcribe his excommunication, and that at his owne mouth he tooke the Anathema maranatha: how theſe vntoward contradictions ſhal be made to agree, I muſt ſend the Cardinall to Venice, to Padre Paulo, who in his Apol. Pat. Paul aduerſus oppoſit. Card. Bellar. Apologie againſt the Cardinals oppoſitions, hath handled them very learnedly.
                     But from one Pope, let vs paſſe to another:An anſwere to the place alledged out of S. Gregory. (for, what a principall article of faith and religion this Oath is, I haue alreadie ſufficiently proued.) Why he called S. Greg. lib. 11. cap. 42.
                         
                        Gregory our Apoſtle, I know not, vnleſſe perhaps it be, for that he ſent Beda Eccleſi. Hiſt. gen. Ang. lib. 1. cap. 25.
                         
                        Auguſtine the Monke,

and others with him into England, to cōuert vs to the faith of Chriſt, wherein I wiſh the Popes his ſucceſſours would follow his patterne. For albeit he ſent them by diuine reuelation (as he ſaid) into England vnto King Ethelbert; yet when they came, they exerciſed no part of their function, but by the Kings leaue and permiſsion. So did King Beda Eccleſiaſt. Hiſt. gen. Ang. iib. 1. cap. 4
                         
                        Lucius ſend to Eleutherius his predeceſſor, and hee ſent him diuers Biſhops, who were all placed by the Kings authoritie. Theſe conuerted men to the faith, and taught them to obey the King. And if the Popes in theſe dayes would but inſiſt in theſe ſteps of their forefathers, then would they not intertaine Princes fugitiues abroad, nor ſend them home, not onely without my leaue, but directly againſt the lawes, with plots of treaſon and doctrine of rebellion, to drawe Subiects from their obedience to mee their naturall King: nor be ſo cruell to their owne Mancipia, as returning them with theſe wares, put either a State in iealouſie of them; or them in hazard of their owne liues. Now to our Apoſtle (ſince the Cardinall will haue

him ſo called) I perſwade my ſelfe I ſhould doe a good ſeruice to the Church in this my labour, if I could but reape this one fruit of it, to moue the Cardinal to deale faithfully with the Fathers, and neuer to alledge their opinions againſt their owne purpoſe. For, this letter of Gregorius was written to Iohn Biſhop of Greg. lib. 11. cap. 42.
                         
                        Palermo in Sicily, to whom he granted vſum pallij, to be worne in ſuch times, & in ſuch order as the Prieſts in the Ile of Sicily, and his predeceſſours were wont to vſe: and withall giueth him a caueat: that the reuerence to the Apoſtolike Sea, be not diſturbed by the preſumption of any: for then the ſtate of the members doth remaine ſound, when the head of the Faith is not bruiſed by any iniury, and the authoritie of the Canons alwayes remaine ſafe and ſound.
                     
                     Now let vs examine the words. The epiſtle was written to a Biſhop, eſpecially to grant him the vſe of the Pall; a ceremony and matter indifferent. As it appeareth, the Biſhop- of Rome tooke it well at his hands, that hee would not preſume to take it vpon him without leaue from the Apoſtolique Sea, giuing him that admonition which foloweth in the

words alledged out of him: which doctrine we are ſo far frō impugning, that we altogether approue & allow of the ſame, that whatſoeuer ceremonie for order is thought meet by the Chriſtian Magiſtrat, and the Church, the ſame ought inuiolably to bee kept: and where the head & gouernour in matters of that nature are not obeyed, the members of that Church muſt needs run to helliſh confuſion. But that Gregory by that terme, caput fidei, held himſelfe the head of our faith, and the head of all Religion, cannot ſtand with the courſe of his doctrine and writings. For firſt, whē an Iohn of Conſtantinople. See Greg. lib. 4. Epiſt. 32. other would haue had this ſtile to be called Vniuerſalis Epiſcopus, hee ſayd, 
                           Lib. 6. Epiſt. 30. 
                        I doe confidently auouch, that whoſoeuer calleth himſelfe, or deſireth to be called Vniuerſall Biſhop, in this aduancing of himſelfe, is the forerunner of the Antichriſt. Which notwithſtanding was a ſtile far inferiour to that of Caput fidei. And when it was offered to himſelfe, the wordes of S. Gregorie be theſe, refuſing that title: Greg. lib. 4. Epiſt. 32. & 36.
                         
                        None of my predeceſſors [Biſhops of Rome,] euer conſented to vſe this prophane name [of vniuerſall Biſhop.] None of

my predeceſsors euer tooke vpon him this name of ſingularity, neither conſented to vſe it, We the Biſhops of Rome, do not ſeek, nor yet accept this glorious title, being offered vnto vs. And now, I pray you, would he that refuſed to be called vniuerſall Biſhop, be ſtiled Caput fidei, vnles it were in that ſenſe, as I haue expreſſed? which ſenſe if he will not admit, giue mee leaue to ſay that of Gregorie, which himſelfe ſaith of Bellar. de Rom. Pont. lib. 2. cap. 10.
                         
                        Lyra, Minus cautè locutus est: or which hee elſwhere ſaith of Chryſoſtome, 
                        Idem. lib. 2. de Miſſa cap. 10.
                         
                        Locutus eſt per exceſſum. To redeeme therefore our Apoſtle out of his hands, & to let him remain ours, & not his in this caſe; it is very true that he ſaith in that ſenſe he ſpake it. Whē ye go about to diſturbe, diminiſh, or take away the authoritie or Supremacie of the Church, which reſteth on the head of the King, within his dominions, ye cut off the head & chiefe gouernor therof, & diſturb the ſtate & members of the whole body. And for a concluſiō of this point, I pray him to think, that we are ſo well perſwaded of the good minde of our Apoſtle S. Gregory to vs, that we deſire no other thing to bee ſuggeſted to the Pope and his

Cardinals, then our Apoſtle S. Gregory deſired Greg. lib. 7. Epiſt. 1.
                         
                        Sabinian to ſuggeſt vnto the Emperour and the State in his time. His words be theſe: One thing there is, of which I would haue you ſhortly to ſuggeſt to your most noble Lord and Maſter: That if I his ſeruant would haue had my hand in ſlaying of the Lombards, at this day the nation of the Lombards had neither had king, nor dukes, nor earles, and had bin diuided aſunder in vtter confuſion: but becauſe I feare God, I dread to haue my hand in the blood of any man.
                     
                     
                        An anſwere to the authoritie out of Leo.
                        And thus hauing anſwered to S. Gregory, I come to another Pope, his Apoſtle, S. Leo. And that hee may ſee, I haue not in the former citations, quarelled him like a Sophiſter for contentiō ſake, but for finding out of the trueth, I do grant, that the authorities out of Leo trimus in die aſs
                              •
                           m
                              •
                           . ſu
                              •
                           e ad Pontif. ſ
                              •
                           rmone 3. Leo Epiſt 89. ad Epiſt. Vien. Idem ibid. cap. 2
                         
                        Leo, are rightly alleadged all three, the wordes truely ſet downe, together with his true intent and purpoſe: but withall, let mee tell him, and I appeale vnto his owne conſcience whether I ſpeake not truely, that what Tullie ſaid to Cicero in Hor. 
                        Hortenſius, when hee did immoderately praiſe eloquence, that he would haue lift her vp to Heauen, that himſelfe

might haue gone vp with her; So his S. Leo lift vp S. Peter with praiſes to the sky, that he being his For ſo he calleth himſelfe in ſerm. 1. in die aſsum.
                         heire, might haue gone vp with him. For his S. Leo was a great Orator, who by the power of his eloquence redeemed Rome from fire, when both Ex
                              •
                           reuiario Romano. 
                        Attilas and Genſericus would haue burnt it.
                     Some fruits of this rhetorick he beſtowed vpon S. Peter, ſaying, The Lord 
                        
                           Epiſt. 89. 
                        did take Peter into the fellowſhip of the indiuiſible vnitie: which words being coupled to the ſentence alleadged by the Cardinall (That hee hath no part in the diuine Mysterie, that dare depart from the ſoliditie of Peter) ſhould haue giuen him, I thinke, ſuch a ſcarre, as hee ſhould neuer haue dared to haue taken any aduātage by the words immediatly preceding, for the benefit of the Church of Rome, and the head therof; ſince thoſe which immediatly folow, are ſo much derogatory to the diuine Maieſtie. And againe, My 
                        
                           Epiſt. 52. 
                        writings be ſtrengthened by the authoritie and merit of my Lord moſt bleſſed S. Peter. We 
                        
                           Epiſt. 89. 
                        beſeech you to keepe the things decreed by vs through the inſpiration of God, and the Apoſtle moſt bleſſed S. Peter. If
                        
                        In ſerm. 2. in die anniuer. aſſum. ſuae. 
                        any thing be well done, or decreed by vs; If any thing be obtained of Gods mercy by daily praiers, it is to be aſcribed to S. Peters works and merits, whoſe power doth liue, & authority excell in his owne Sea. He 
                        Ser. 3. in die anni. aſſump. ſuae. 
                        was ſo plentifully watered of the very fountaine of all graces, that whereas he receiued many things alone, yet nothing paſſeth ouer to any other, but hee was partaker of it. And in a word, he was ſo deſirous to extoll S. Peter, That a meſſenger from him was an 
                        
                           Epiſt. 24. 
                        embaſsage from S. Peter:
                           Epiſt. 4. 
                        any thing done in his preſence, was in S. Peters preſence. Neither did he vſe all this Rhetoricke without purpoſe: for at that time the Patriarch of Conſtantinople cōtended with him for Primacie. And in the Councell of Concil. Ch
                              •
                           lced. Act. 16. & c
                              •
                           n. 28.
                         
                        Chalcedon, the Biſhops ſixe hundred and more, gaue equall authority to the Patriarch of that Sea, and would not admit any priuiledge to the Sea of Rome aboue him; but went againſt him. And yet he that gaue ſo much to Peter, tooke nothing from Caeſar; but gaue him both his Titles and due, giuing the power of calling a Councell to the Emperour; as it may appeare by theſe one or two places following of many. If it

may pleaſe your 
                        Epiſt. 9. Theodoſio. 
                        godlineſſe to vouchſafe at our ſupplication to condeſcend, that you wil command a Councell of Biſhops to bee holden within Italy. and writing vnto the Biſhop of Conſtantinople. Becauſe the moſt clement 
                        Epiſt. 16. Flauiano. 
                        Emperor, carefull of the peace of the Church, will haue a Councell to be holden; albeit it euidently appeare, the matter to be handled doeth in no caſe stand in need of a Councell. And againe, Albeit 
                        Epiſt. 17. Theodoſio. 
                        my occaſions wil not permit me to be preſent vpon the day of the Councell of Biſhops, which your godlineſſe hath appointed. So as by this it may well appeare, that he that gaue ſo much to Peter, gaue alſo to Caeſar his due and prerogatiue. But yet he playeth not faire play in this, that euen in all theſe his wrong applied arguments and examples, he produceth no other witneſſes, but the parties themſelues; bringing euer the Popes ſentences for approbation of their owne authoritie.
                     Now indeed for one word of his in the middeſt of his examples, I cannot but greatly cōmend him; that is, that Martyrs ought to indure all ſorts of tortures and death, before they ſuffer one ſyllable to be corrupted of the

Law of God. Which leſſon, if hee and all the reſt of his owne profeſsion would apply to themſelues, then would not the Sacrament be adminiſtred ſub vnâ ſpecie, directly contrary to Chriſtes inſtitution, the practiſe of the Apoſtles and of the whole Primitiue Church for many hundred yeeres: then would not the priuate Maſſes bee in place of the Lordes Supper: then would not the words of the Bellar. de ſacra Euchariſt. lib 4. cap. 14.
                         Canon of the Maſſe be oppoſed to the words of S. Paul and S. Luke, as our Aduerſary himſelfe confeſſeth, and cannot reconcile them: nor then would not ſo many hundreths other traditions of men be ſet vp in their Church, not only as equall, but euen preferred to the word of God. But ſure in this point I fear I haue miſtaken him: for I thinke he doth not meane by his Diuina Dogmata, the word of the God of heauen, but onely the Canons and Lawes of his Dominus Deus Papa: otherwiſe all his Primacie of the Apoſtolike Sea would not be ſo much ſticken vpon, hauing ſo ſlender ground in the word of God.
                     And for the great feare he hath, that the

ſuddennes of the apprehenſion, the bitternes of the perſecution, the weakneſſe of his age, and other ſuch infirmities might haue bene the cauſe of the Arch-prieſts fall; in this, I haue already ſufficiently anſwered him; hauing declared, as the trueth is, and as the ſaid Blackwel himſelfe wil yet teſtifie, that he took this Oath freely of himſelfe, without any inducement therunto, either Precebus or Minis.
                        Some of Sanders his worthy ſayings remembred.
                     
                     But amongſt all his citations, he muſt not forget holy Sanderus and his Vi
                              •
                           ibilis Monarchia, whoſe perſon and actions I did already a little touch. And ſurely who will with vnpartiall eyes read his bookes, they may well thinke, that he hath deſerued wel of his Engliſh Roman-Church; but they can neuer thinke, but that he deſerued very ill of his Engliſh Soueraigne and State. Witneſſe his owne books; whereout I haue made choice to ſet downe here theſe few ſentences following, as flowers pickt out of ſo worthy a garland. Sand. de viſib. monar. lib. 6. cap. 4.
                         Eliſabeth Queene of England, doth exerciſe the Prieſtly act of teaching and preaching the Goſpel in England, with no leſſe authority then Chriſt himſelf, or Moſes euer did.

The ſupremacy of a 
                        Sand. de clau. Dauid lib. 6. cap. 1.
                         
                        woman in Church matters, is from no other, then from the Deuill. And of all things in generall, thus he ſpeaketh, The 
                        Sand. de viſib. Monar. lib. 2. cap. 4.
                         
                        King that wil not inthrall himſelfe to the Popes authority, he ought not to be tolerated; but his Subiects ought to giue all diligence, that another may be choſen in his place aſſoone as may be. A King that is an 
                        Ibidem. 
                        Heretike, ought to be remoued from the kingdome that he holdeth ouer Chriſtians; and the Biſhops ought to endeuour to ſet vp another, aſſoone as poſsibly they can. Wee doe constantly 
                        Ibidem. 
                        affirme, that all Chriſtian Kings are ſo far vnder Biſhops and Priestes in all matters appertaining to faith, that if they ſhall continue in a falt against Chriſtian Religion after one or two admonitions, obſtinately, for that cauſe they may and ought to be depoſed by the Biſhops from their temporal authority they hold ouer Chriſtiās. 
                        Ibid
                              •
                           m. 
                        Biſhops are ſet ouer temporall kingdomes, if thoſe kingdomes do ſubmit themſelues to the faith of Chriſt. We doe iuſtly 
                        Sand. de clau. Dauid. lib. 5. cap. 2.
                         
                        affirme, that all Secular power, whether Regall, or any other is, of Men. The 
                        Ibidem. 
                        anoynting which is powred vpon the head of the King by the Prieſt, doeth declare that he is inferiour to the Prieſt. It is altogether

againſt the will of 
                        Sand. de c
                              •
                           a. Dauid lib. 5. cap. 4.
                         CHRIST, that Chriſtian Kings ſhould haue ſupremacie in the Church.
                     
                     And whereas for the crowne and concluſion of all his examples,The Cardinals paice of Martyrs weighed. he reckoneth his two Engliſh martyrs, Moore and Roffenſis, who died for that one moſt weighty head of doctrine, as he alleadgeth, refuſing the Oath of Supremacie; I muſt tel him, that he hath not bene well informed in ſome materiall points, which doe very neerly concerne his two ſaid martyrs. For it is cleare and apparantly to be prooued by diuers Records, that they were both of them committed to the Tower about a yeere before either of them was called in queſtion vpon their liues, for the Popes Supremacie; And that partly for their backwardneſſe in the point of the eſtabliſhment of the Kings ſucceſsion, wherunto the whole Realme had ſubſcribed, and partly for that one of them, to wit, Fiſher, had had his hand in the matter of the holy Called Elizabeth Barton. See the Act of Parliament. mayd of Kent, he being for his concealement of that falſe prophets abuſe, found guiltie of miſpriſion of treaſon. And as theſe were the principall cauſes of their impriſonment (the King reſting

ſecure of his Supremacie, as the Realme ſtood then affected, but eſpecially troubled for ſetling the crowne vpon the iſſue of his ſecond marriage) ſo was it eaſily to be conceiued, that being thereupon diſcontented, their humors were therby made apt to draw them by degrees, to further oppoſition againſt the King and his authoritie, as indeed it fell out. For in the time of their being in priſon, the Kings lawfull authoritie in caſes Eccleſiaſticall being publiſhed and promulged, as wel by a generall decree of the Clergie in their Synode, as by an Act of Parliament made thereupon; they behaued themſelues ſo peeuiſhly therein, as the old coales of the Kings anger being thereby raked vp of new, they were againe brought in queſtion; as wel for this one moſt weighty head of doctrine of the Pope his ſupremacy, as for the matter of the Kings marriage and ſucceſsion, as by the confeſsion of one of themſelues, euen Thomas Moore,
                        Hiſtor. aliquot Mar
                              •
                           num nostri ſeculi, Ann. 1550.
                         is euident. For being condemned, he vſed theſe wordes at the barre before the Lords, Non ignoro cur me morti adiudicaueritis; videlicet ob id, quod nunquam voluerim

aſſentiri in negotio matrimonij Regis. That is, I am not ignorant why you haue adiudged me to death: to wit, for that I would neuer conſent in the buſines of the new marriage of the King. By which his owne confeſsion it is plaine, that this great martyr himſelfe tooke the cauſe of his owne death, to be only for his being refractary to the King in this ſaid matter of Marriage and ſucceſsion; which is but a very fleſhly cauſe of martyrdome, as I conceiue.
                     And as for Roffenſis his fellow Martyr (who could haue bene content to haue taken the Oath of the Kings Supremacy, with a certaine modification, which Moore refuſed) as his impriſonment was neither onely, nor principally for the cauſe of Supremacy, ſo died he but a halting and a ſingular Martyr or witnes for that moſt waightie head of doctrine; the whole Church of England going at that time, in one current and ſtreame as it were againſt him in that argument, diuerſe of them being of farre greater reputation for learning and ſound iudgement, then euer he was. So as in this point we may wel arme our ſelues with the Cardinals own reaſon, where

hee giueth amongſt other notes of the true Church, Vniuerſalitie for one, we hauing the generall and Catholike concluſion of the whole Church of England, on our ſide in this caſe, as appeareth by their booke ſet out by the whole Conuocation of England, called, The inſtitution of a Chriſtian man; the ſame matter being likewiſe very learnedly handled by diuers particular learned men of our Church, as by Steuen Gardiner in his booke de vera obedientia, with a preface of Biſhop Boners adioyned to it, De ſummo & abſoluto Regis Imperio, publiſhed by M Bekinſaw, De vera differentia Regiae Poteſtatis & Eccleſiaſticae, Biſhop Tonſtals Sermon, Biſhop Longlands Sermon, the letter of Tonſtall to Cardinall Poole, and diuers other both in Engliſh and Latine. And if the bitterneſſe of Fiſhers diſcontentment had not bene fed with his daily ambitious expectation of the Cardinals hat, which came ſo neere as Calis before hee loſt his head to fil it with, I haue great reaſon to doubt, if he would haue conſtantly perſeuered in induring his martyrdome for that one moſt waightie head of doctrine.
                     
                        And ſurely theſe two captaines and ringleaders to martyrdome were but ill folowed by the reſt of their countrymen: for I can neuer reade of any after them, being of any great account, and that not many, that euer ſealed that weighty head of doctrine with their blood in England. So as the true cauſes of their firſt falling in trouble (wherof I haue already made mention) being rightly conſidered vpon the one part; and vpon the other the ſcant number of witneſſes, that with their blood ſealed it; (a point ſo greatly accounted of by our Cardinal) there can but ſmal glory redound therby to our Engliſh nation, theſe onely two, Enoch and Elias, ſeruing for witneſſes againſt our Antichriſtian doctrine.
                     And I am ſure the Supremacie of Kings may,The Supremacy of Kings ſufficiently warranted by the Scriptures. and will euer be better maintained by the word of God (which muſt euer bee the true rule to diſcerne al weighty heads of doctrine by) to be the true and proper office of Chriſtian Kings in their owne dominions, then he wil be euer able to maintaine his annihilating Kings, & their authorities, together with his baſe & vnreuerend ſpeeches of

them wherewith both his former great Volumes, and his late Bookes againſt Venice are filled. In the old Teſtament, Kings were directly 2. Chron. 19.4. Gouernours ouer the Church within their Dominions; 2. Sam. 5.6. purged their corruptions; reformed their abuſes, brought the 1. Chron. 13.12. Arke to her reſting place, the King 2. Sam. 6.16. dancing before it; 1. Chron. 28.6 built the Temple; 2. Chron. 6. dedicated the ſame, aſsiſting in their owne perſons to the ſanctification thereof; 2. King. 22.11. made the booke of the Law new-ſound, to be read to the people; Nehe. 9.38. Dauid. Salomon. renewed the couenant betweene God and his people; 2. King. 18.4. bruſed the braſen Serpent in pieces, which was ſet vp by the expreſſe cōmandement of God, and was a figure of Chriſt; deſtroyed 1· Kings 15.12. all Idols, and falſe gods; made 2. Chron. 
                              •
                           7.8. a publike reformation, by a Commiſsion of Secular men and Prieſts mixed for that purpoſe; depoſed 1 Kings 2.27. the hie Prieſt, and ſet vp another in his place: and generally, ordered euery thing belonging to the Church-gouerment, their Titles and Prerogatiues giuen them by God, agreeing to theſe their actions. They are called the 
                        2. Sam. 7.14. 
                        Sonnes of the moſt High, nay, Gods 
                        Pſal. 82.6. & Exod. 22.8. 
                        themſelues; The 
                        1. Sam. 24.1
                              •
                           
                         
                        Lords

anoynted; Sitting 
                        2. Chro. 9.8 
                        in Gods throne; His 
                        2. Chron. 6.15. 
                        ſeruants; The Angels 
                        2. Sam. 14.20 
                        of God; According to his 
                        1. Sam. 13.14 
                        hearts deſire; The light 
                        2. Sam. 21.17 
                        of Iſrael; The 
                        Iſa. 49.23. 
                        nurſing fathers of the Church, with innumerable ſuch ſtiles of honor, wherwith the old Teſtament is filled; wherof our aduerſary can pretend no ignorance. And as to the new Teſtament, Euery ſoule is commaunded to be ſubiect vnto them, euen for 
                        Rom. 13.5. 
                        conſcience ſake. All men 1. Tim. 2.2. muſt bee prayed for; but especially Kings, and thoſe that are in Authority, that vnder them we may lead a godly, peaceable and an honeſt life.
                     
                     
                        The 
                        Rom. 13.4 
                        Magiſtrate is the miniſter of God to doe vengeance on him that doth euill, & reward him that doeth well. Ye muſt obey all higher powers, but 
                        1. Pet. 2.13. 
                        eſpecially Princes, and thoſe that are ſupereminent. Giue euery man his due, feare 
                        Rom. 13.7. 
                        to whom feare belongeth, and honour to whome honour. Giue 
                        Matth. 22.21. 
                        vnto Caeſar what is Caeſars, and to God what is Gods. 
                        Iohn 18.36. 
                        Regnum meum non est huius mundi. 
                        Luke 12 14 
                        Quis me conſtituit Iudicem ſuper vos? 
                        Luke 22.25. 
                        Reges gentium dominantur eorum, vos autem non ſic. If theſe examples, ſentences, titles, and prerogatiues, and innumerable other in the old and new Teſtament, do not warrant

Chriſtian Kings, within their owne dominions, to gouerne the Church, as well as the reſt of their people, in being Cuſtod es vtriuſ
                              
                                 
                              
                              que
                            Tabulae, not by making new articles of faith, (which is the Popes office, as I ſaide before) but by cōmanding obedience to be giuen to the word of God, by reforming the religion according to his preſcribed will, by aſsiſting the ſpiritual power with the temporal ſword, by reforming of corruptions, by procuring due obedience to the Church, by iudging and cutting off all friuolous queſtions and Schiſmes, as Euſeb. lib. 3. de vita Conſtaetini. 
                        Constantine did; and finally, by making decorum to bee obſerued in euery thing, & eſtabliſhing orders to be obſerued in al indifferent things for that purpoſe, which is the only intent of our Oath of Supremacy: If this Office of a King, I ſay, doe not agree with the power giuen him by Gods word, let any indifferent man voyd of paſsion, iudge. But how theſe honourable offices, ſtyles, and prerogatiues giuen by God to Kings in the old & new Teſtament, as I haue now cited, can agree with the braue ſtiles and titles that Bellarmine giueth thē, I can hardly conceiue.
                     
                        1. That Kings are rather ſlaues then Lords.
                        
                           1. De la
                              •
                           cis. cap. 7.
                        
                     
                     2. That they are not only ſubiects to Popes,
                        
                           2. De Pont. lib. 1. cap. 7.
                         
                        to Biſhops, to Prieſts, but euen to Deacons.
                     
                     3.3. Ibidem.
                         That an Emperour muſt content himſelfe to drinke, not onely after a Biſhop, but after a Biſhops Chaplen.
                     
                     4.
                           4. Ibidem, & de cler. cap. 28.
                         That Kings haue not their authority nor office immediatly from God, nor his Lawe, but onely from the Law of Nations.
                     
                     5.
                           5. De P. nt. lib 3. cap. 16.
                         That Popes haue degraded many Emperours, but neuer Emperour degraded the Pope; nay, euen 
                        De Rom. Pont lib 5. cap. 8.
                         
                        Biſhops, that are but the Popes vaſſals, may depoſe Kings, and abrogate their lawes.
                     
                     6.
                           6. De laicis. cap 8.
                         That Church-men are ſo farre aboue Kings, as the ſoule is aboue the body.
                     
                     7.
                           7. De Pont. lib 5. cap. 18.
                         That Kings may be depoſed by their people, for diuers reſpects.
                     
                     8. But Popes can by no meanes bee depoſed:
                        
                           8. De Pont. lib. 2. cap. 26.
                         
                        for no fleſh hath power to iudge of them.
                     
                     9. That obedience due to the Pope,
                        
                           9. De Pont. lib. 4 cap. 15.
                         
                        is for conſcience ſake.
                     
                     10. But the obedience due to Kings,
                        
                           10 De Clericis cap. 28.
                         
                        is onely for certaine reſpects of order and policie.
                     
                     11.
                           11. Ibidem. That theſe very Church-men that are borne, and inhabite in Soueraigne Princes countreys,

are notwithſtanding not their Subiects, and cannot be iudged by them, although they may iudge them.
                     
                     
                        
                           12. Ibidem.12. And, that the obedience that Churchmen giue to Princes, euen in the meaneſt and meere temporall things, is not by way of any neceſſary ſubiection, but onely out of diſcretion, and for obſeruation of good order and cuſtome.
                     
                     Theſe contrarieties betweene the booke of God, and Bellarmines books, haue I heere ſet in oppoſition ech to other, Vt ex contrarijs iuxta ſe poſitis, veritas magis eluceſcere poſsit. And thus farre I dare boldly affirme, that whoſoeuer will indifferently weigh theſe irreconciliable contradictions here ſet downe, wil eaſily confeſſe, that CHRIST is no more contrary to Beliall, light to darkeneſſe, and heauen to hell, then Bellarmines eſtimation of Kings, is to Gods.
                     Now as to the concluſion of his letter, which is onely filled with ſtrong and pithy exhortations, to perſwade and confirme Blackwell to the patient and conſtant induring of Martyrdome, I haue nothing to anſwere, ſaue by way of regrate; that ſo many

good ſentences drawen out of the Scripture, ſo well and ſo handſomely packed vp together ſhould bee ſo ill and vntruely applied. But an euill cauſe is neuer the better for ſo good a cloake; and an ill matter neuer amended by good words: And therefore I may iuſtly turne ouer that craft of the deuill vpon himſelfe, in vſing ſo holy-like an exhortation to ſo euill a purpoſe. Only I could haue wiſhed him, that hee had a little better obſerued his decorum herein, in not letting ſlip two or three prophane wordes amongſt ſo many godly mortified Scripture ſentences. For in all the Scripture, eſpecially in the new Teſtament, I neuer read of Pontifex Maximus. And the Pope muſt be content in that ſtile to ſucceed according to the Lawe and inſtitution of Numa Pompilius, and not to S. Peter, who neuer heard nor dreamed of ſuch an office.
                     And for his Caput fidei, which I remembred before, the Apoſtles (I am ſure) neuer gaue that ſtile to any, but to CHRIST. So as theſe ſtiles, wherof ſome were neuer found in Scripture, and ſome were neuer applied

but to CHRIST in that ſenſe, as he applieth it, had bene better to haue beene left out of ſo holy and mortified a letter.
                     To conclude then this preſent diſcourſe, I heartily wiſh all indifferent readers of the Breues and Letter, not to iudge by the ſpeciouſnes of the words, but by the weight of the matter; not looking to that which is ſtrongly alledged, but iudiciouſly to conſider what is iuſtly prooued; And for all my own good and naturall Subiects, that their hearts may remaine eſtabliſhed in the trueth; that theſe forraine inticements may not ſeduce them from their natall and naturall duetie; and that all, aſwell ſtrangers, as naturall Subiects, to whoſe eyes this diſcourſe ſhall come, may wiſely and vnpartially iudge of the Veritie, as it is nakedly here ſet downe, for clearing theſe miſts and cloudes of calumnies, which were iniuſtly heaped vpon mee; for which ende onely I heartily pray the courteous Reader to be perſwaded, that I tooke occaſion to publiſh this diſcourſe.
                  
               
            
         
      
   