
      
         
            
            
            A
REMONSTRANCE
OF
THE MOST GRATIOVS KING
IAMES I.
KING OF GREAT BRITTAINE,
FRANCE, and IRELAND,
Defender of the Faith, &c. FOR THE RIGHT OF KINGS, AND THE
independance of their Crownes. AGAINST AN ORATION OF
the moſt Illuſtrious Card. of PERRON,
pronounced in the Chamber of the
third Eſtate. Ian. 15. 1615.
            Tranſlated out of his Maieſties French Copie.
            PRINTED BY CANTRELL LEGGE,
Printer to the Vniuerſitie of Cambridge.
1616.
         
         
            
            
            THE PREFACE.
            
               I Haue no humour to play the
Curious in a forraine Commonwealth,
or, vnrequeſted, to carrie
any hand in my neighbours affaires.
It hath more congruitie
with Royall dignity, wherof God
hath giuen me the honour, to preſcribe Lawes at
home for my Subiects, rather then to furniſh forraine
Kingdoms and people with counſels. Howbeit,
my late entire affection to K. Henrie IV.
of happy memorie, my moſt honoured brother, and
my exceeding ſorrow for the moſt deteſtable parricide
acted vpon the ſacred perſon of a King, ſo
complete in all heroicall and Princely vertues; as
alſo the remembrance of my owne dangers, incurred
by the practiſe of conſpiracies flowing from
the ſame ſource, hath wrought me to ſympathize

with my friends in their grieuous occurrents: no
doubt ſo much more daungerous, as they are leſſe
apprehended and felt of Kings themſelues, euen
when the danger hangeth ouer their owne heads.
Vpon whome, in caſe the power and vertue of my
aduertiſments be not able effectually to worke, at
leaſt many millions of children and people yet vnborne,
ſhall beare me witnes, that in theſe daungers
of the higheſt nature and ſtraine, I haue not
bin defectiue: and that neither the ſubuerſions of
States, nor the murthers of Kings, which may
vnhappily betide hereafter, ſhal haue ſo free paſſage
in the world for want of timely aduertiſment
before. For touching my particular, my reſt is vp,
that one of the maynes for which God hath advanced
me vpon the loftie ſtage of the ſupreme
Throne, is, that my words vttered from ſo eminent
a place for Gods honour moſt ſhamefully traduced
and vilified in his owne Deputies and
Lieutenants, might with greater facilitie be conceiued.
            Now touching France; faire was the hope
which I conceiued of the States aſſembled in Parliament
at Paris. That calling to minde the murthers
of their Noble Kings, and the warres of

the League which followed the Popes fulminations,
as when a great ſtorme of haile powreth down
after a thunder-cracke, and a world of writings
addreſſed to iuſtifie the parricides & the dethronings
of Kings, would haue ioyned heads, hearts,
and hands together, to hammer out ſome apt and
wholſome remedie againſt ſo many fearefull attempts
and practiſes. To my hope was added no
little ioy, when I was giuen to vnderſtand the
third Eſtate had preferred an Article or Bill,
the tenor and ſubſtance whereof was concerning
the meanes whereby the people might be vnwitched
of this pernicious opinion; That Popes
may toſſe the French King his Throne like
a tennis ball, and that killing of Kings is an
act meritorious to the purchaſe of the
crowne of Martyrdome. But in fine, the proiect
was encountred with ſucceſſe cleane contrary
to expectation. For this Article of the third Eſtate,
like a ſigh of libertie breathing her laſt, ſerued
only ſo much the more to inthrall the Crowne,
and to make the bondage more grieuous and ſenſible
then before. Euen as thoſe medicines which
worke no eaſe to the patient, doe leaue the diſeaſe
in much worſe tearmes: ſo this remedie inuented

and tendred by the third Eſtate, did onely exaſperate
the preſent maladie of the State: for
ſo much as the operation and vertue of the
wholeſome remedie was ouermatched with peccant
humours, then ſtirred by the force of
thwarting and croſsing oppoſition. Yea much
better had it beene, the matter had not beene
ſtirred at all, then after it was once on foote
and in motion, to giue the Truth leaue to lie
gaſping and ſprawling vnder the violence of
a forraine faction. For the opinion by which
the Crownes of Kings are made ſubiect vnto
the Popes will and power, was then avowed
in a moſt Honourable Aſſemblie by the averment
of a Prelate in great authoritie, and of
no leſſe learning. He did not plead the cauſe
as a priuate perſon, but as one by repreſentation
that ſtood for the whole bodie of the Clergie.
Was there applauded, and ſeconded with
approbation of the Nobilitie. No reſolution
taken to the contrarie, or in barre to his plea.
After praiſes and thankes from the Pope,
followed the printing of his eloquent harangue
or Oration, made in full Parliament: a ſet diſcourſe,
maintaining Kings to be depoſeable by

the Pope, if he ſpeake the word. The ſaide Oration
was not onely printed with the Kings
priuiledge, but was likewiſe addreſſed to me
by the author and Orator himſelfe; who preſuppoſed
the reading thereof would forſooth driue
me to ſay, Lord Cardinall, in this high ſubiect
your Honour hath ſatisfied me to the
full. All this poyſed in the ballance of equall
iudgement, why may not I truly and freely affirme,
the ſaid Eſtates aſſembled in Parliament
haue ſet Royall Maieſtie vpon a doubtfull
chance, or left it reſting vpon vncertain tearmes:
and that now, if the doctrine there maintained
by the Clergie ſhould beare any pawme, it may
lawfully be doubted, who is King in France?
For I make no queſtion, he is but a titular King
that raigneth onely at an others diſcretion, and
whoſe Princely head the Pope hath power to
bare of his Regall Crowne. In temporall matters,
how can one be Soveraigne, that may be fleeced
of all his temporalties by any ſuperiour power?
But let men at a neere ſight marke the pith
and marrowe of the Article propoſed by the
third Eſtate, and they ſhall ſoone perceiue the
skilfull Architects thereof aymed onely to make

their King a true and reall King, to be recogniſed
for Soueraigne within his own Realme, and that
killing their King might no longer paſſe the muſter
of works acceptable to God.
            But by the vehement inſtance and ſtrong current
of the Clergie and Nobles, this was borne
down as a pernicious Article, as a cauſe of ſchiſme,
as a gate which openeth to all ſorts of hereſies: yea
there it was maintained tooth and nayle, that in
caſe the doctrine of this Article might go for currant
doctrine, it muſt follow, that for many ages
paſt in ſequence, the Church hath bin the kingdome
of Antechriſt, and the ſynagogue of Satan.
The Pope vpon ſo good iſſue of the cauſe, had reaſon,
I trow, to addreſſe his letters of triumph vnto
the Nobilitie and Clergie, who had ſo farre approoued
themſelues faithfull to his Holines; and
to vaunt withall, that he had nipped Chriſtian
Kings in the Crowne, that he had giuen them
checke with mate, through the magnanimous reſolution
of this couragious Nobilitie, by whoſe
braue making head the third Eſtate had bin ſo
valiantly forced to giue ground. In a ſcornefull
reproach he qualified the Deputies of the third
Eſtate, nebulones ex foece plebis, a ſort or a

number of knaues,
               I haue receiued aduertiſement frō diuers parts, that in the Popes letters to the Nobilitie theſe words were extant, howſoeuer they haue beene left out in the impreſſion, & raſed out of the copies of the ſaid letters. 
               the very dregges of the
baſe vulgar, a packe of people preſuming
to perſonate well affected Subiects and
men of deepe vnderſtanding, and to read
their maſters a learned lecture. Now it is no
wonder, that, in ſo good an office and loyall carriage
towards their King, the third Eſtate hath
outgone the Clergie. For the Clergie denie themſelues
to haue any ranke among the Subiects of
the King: they ſtand for a Soueraigne out of the
kingdome, to whome as to the Lord Paramount
they owe ſuit and ſeruice: they are bound to aduance
that Monarchie, to the bodie whereof they
properly appertaine as parts or members, as elswhere
I haue written more at large. But for the
Nobilitie, the Kings right arme, to proſtitute
and ſet as it were to ſale the dignitie of their
King, as if the arme ſhould giue a thruſt vnto
the head; I ſay for the Nobilitie to hold and maintaine
euen in Parliament, their King is liable to
depoſition by any forraine power or Potentate,
may it not paſſe among the ſtrangeſt miracles and
rareſt wonders of the world? For that once granted,
this conſequence is good and neceſſarie; That
in caſe the King, once lawfully depoſed, ſhal ſtand

vpon the defenſiue and hold out for his right, he
may then lawfully be murthered. Let me then
here freely profeſſe my opinion, and this it is: That
now the French Nobilitie may ſeeme to haue ſome
reaſon to diſrobe themſelues of their titles, and to
transferre them by reſignation vnto the third Eſtate.
For that bodie of the third Eſtate alone
hath carried a right noble heart: in as much
as they could neither be tickled with promiſes, nor
terrified by threatnings, from reſolute ſtanding
to thoſe fundamentall points & reaſons of State,
which moſt concerne the honor of their King, and
the ſecuritie of his perſon.
            Of all the Clergie, the man that hath moſt abandoned,
or ſet his owne honour to ſale, the man
to whome France is leaſt obliged, is the Lord
Cardinall of Perron: a man otherwiſe inferiour
to few in matter of learning, and in the grace of a
ſweete ſtyle. This man in two ſeuerall Orations,
whereof the one was pronounced before the Nobilitie,
the other had audience before the third Eſtate,
hath ſet his beſt wits on worke, to draw that
doctrine into all hatred and infamie, which teacheth
Kings to be indepoſeable by the Pope. To
this purpoſe he tearmes the ſame doctrine, a breeder

of ſchiſmes, a gate that openeth to make way,
and to giue entrance vnto all hereſies; in briefe, a
doctrine to be held in ſo high a degree of deteſtation,
that rather then he and his fellow-Biſhops will
yeild to the ſigning thereof, they will be contented
like Martyrs to burne at a ſtake. At which reſolution,
or obſtinacie rather in his opinion, I am in
a manner amaſed, more then I can be mooued for
the like brauado in many other: for as much as
he was many yeares together, a follower of the late
King, euen when the King followed a contrarie
Religion, and was depoſed by the Pope: as alſo becauſe
not long before, in a certaine Aſſemblie holden
at the Iacobins in Paris, he withſtood the
Popes Nuntio to his face, when the ſaid Nuntio
laboured to make this doctrin, touching the Popes
temporall Soueraigntie, paſſe for an Article of
faith. But in both Orations, he ſingeth a contrarie
ſong, and from his owne mouth paſſeth ſentence
of condemnation againſt his former courſe and
profeſsion. I ſuppoſe, not without ſolide iudgement:
as one that herein hath well accommodated
himſelfe to the times. For as in the raigne of the
late King, he durst not offer to broach this doctrine
(ſuch was his fore-wit:) ſo now he is bold

to proclaime and publiſh it in Parliament vnder
the raigne of the ſaid Kings ſonne: whoſe tender
yeares and late ſucceſſion to the Crowne, do make
him lie the more open to iniuries, and the more facill
to bee circumuented. Such is nowe his after
wiſedome.
            Of theſe two Orations, that made in preſence
of the Nobility he hath, for feare of incurring the
Popes diſpleaſure, cautelouſly ſuppreſſed. For
therein hee hath beene ſomewhat prodigall in affirming
this doctrine, maintained by the Clergie,
to be but problematicall; and in taking vpon him
to auouch, that Catholikes of my Kingdome are
bound to yeeld me the honour of obedience. Wheras
on the other ſide he is not ignorant, how this
doctrine of depoſing Princes and Kings the Pope
holdeth for meerely neceſſarie, and approoueth
not by any meanes allegiance to be performed vnto
me by the Catholikes of my Kingdome. Yea if
credit may be giuen vnto the abridgement of his
other Oration publiſhed, wherein he parallels the
Popes power in receiuing honours in the name of
the Church, with the power of the Ʋenetian
Duke in receiuing honours in the name of that
moſt renowned Republike; no meruaile that when

this Oration was diſpatched to the preſſe, hee
commaunded the ſame to be gelded of this clauſe
and other like, for feare of giuing his Holineſſe
any offenſiue diſtaſt.
            His pleaſure therefore was and content withall,
that his Oration imparted to the third Eſtate,
ſhould bee put in print, and of his courteſie hee
vouchſafed to addreſſe vnto mee a copy of the
ſame. Which after I had peruſed, I forthwith
well perceiued, what and how great diſcrepance
there is betweene one man that perorateth
from the ingenuous and ſincere diſpoſition of a
ſound heart, and an other that flaunteth in flouriſhing
ſpeech with inward checkes of his owne
conſcience. For euery where he contradicts himſelfe,
and ſeemes to bee afraid leaſt men ſhould
picke out his right meaning.
            Firſt,In 12. ſeuerall paſſages the L. Card. ſeemeth to ſpeake againſt his owne conſcience. he graunts this Queſtion is not hitherto
decided by the holy Scriptures, or by the Decrees
of the auncient Church, or by the analogie of other
Eccleſiaſticall proceedings: and neuertheleſſe
he confidently doth affirme, that whoſoeuer
maintaine this doctrine to be wicked and abhominable,
Pag. 85. that Popes haue no power to put Kings by
their ſupreame Thrones, they teach men to beleeue,

there hath not beene any Church for many
ages paſt, and that indeede the Church is the very
Synagogue of Antechriſt.
            Secondly, hee exhorts his hearers to hold this
doctrine at leaſt for problematicall, and not neceſſarie:
and yet herein he calls them to all humble
ſubmiſſion vnto the iudgement of the Pope
and Clergie, by whome the cauſe hath beene alreadie
put out of all queſtion, as out of all hunger
and cold.
            Thirdly, he doth auerre, in caſe this Article
be authorized, it makes the Pope in good conſequence
to bee the Antechriſt:Pag. 99. and yet he graunts
that many of the French are tolerated by the
Pope to diſſent in this point from his Holineſſe;
prouided, their doctrine be not propoſed as neceſſarie,
and materiall to faith. As if the Pope in any
ſort gaue toleration to hold any doctrine contrarie
to his owne, and moſt of all that doctrine
which by conſequence inferres himſelfe to
be the Antechriſt.
            Fourthly, he proteſteth forwardneſſe to vndergoe
the flames of Martyrdome, rather then to
ſigne this doctrine, which teacheth Kings Crowns
to ſit faſter on their heads, then to be ſtirred by

any Papal power whatſoeuer: and yet ſaith withall,
the Pope winketh at the French, by his toleration
to hold this dogmatical point for problematicall.
And by this meanes, the Martyrdome that
he affecteth in this cauſe, will prooue but a problematicall
Martyrdome, whereof queſtion might
growe very well, whether it were to be muſtered
with grieuous crimes, or with phreneticall paſſions
of the braine, or with deſerued puniſhments.
            Fiftly, hee denounceth Anathema, diſchargeth
maledictions like haile-ſhot, againſt parricides
of Kings: and yet elſewhere he layes himſelfe
open to ſpeake of Kings onely ſo long as they
ſtand Kings. But who doth not know that a King
depoſed is no longer King? And ſo that limme
of Satan, which murthered Henrie III. then
vn-king'd by the Pope, did not ſtabbe a King to
death.
            Sixtly, he doth not allowe a King to be made
away by murder: and yet hee thinkes it not
much out of the way, to take away all meanes
whereby hee might be able to ſtand in defence of
his life.
            Seuenthly,Pag. 95. 97. he abhorreth killing of Kings by

appoſted throat-cutting, for feare leaſt bodie and
ſoule ſhould periſh in the ſame inſtant: and yet he
doth not miſlike their killing in a pitcht field, and
to haue them ſlaughtered in a ſet battaile. For
he preſuppoſeth, no doubt out of his charitable
mind, that by this meanes the ſoule of a poore
King ſo diſpatched out of the way ſhall inſtantly
flie vp to heauen.
            Eightly, hee ſaith a King depoſed retaineth
ſtill a certaine internall habitude and politike
impreſſion, by vertue and efficacie whereof hee
may, being once reformed and become a new man,
be reſtored to the lawfull vſe and practiſe of Regality.
Whereby hee would beare vs in hand,
that when a forraine Prince hath inuaded and
rauenouſly ſeiſed the Kingdome into his hands,
he will not onely take pitty of his predeceſſor to
ſaue his life, but will alſo prooue ſo kind-hearted,
vpon ſight of his repentance, to reſtore his kingdome
without fraude or guile.
            Ninthly, he ſaith euery where in his Diſcourſe,
that he dealeth not in the cauſe, otherwiſe
then as a problematicall diſcourſer, and without
any reſolution one way or other: and yet with
might and maine he contends for the opinion,

that leaues the States and Crownes of Kings
controulable by the Pope: refutes obiections, propounds
the authoritie of Popes and Councils, by
name the Lateran Councill vnder Innocent III.
as alſo the conſent of the Church. And to croſſe
the Churches iudgment, is, in his opinion to bring
in ſchiſme, and to leaue the world without a
Church for many hundred yeares together: which
(to my vnderſtanding) is to ſpeake with reſolution,
and without all heſitation.
            Tenthly, he acknowledgeth none other cauſe of
ſufficient validitie for the depoſing of a King,
beſides hereſie, apoſtaſie, and infidelitie: neuertheles
that Popes haue power to diſplace Kings
for hereſie and apoſtaſie, he prooueth by examples
of Kings whom the Pope hath curbed with
depoſition, not for hereſie, but for matrimoniall
cauſes, for ciuill pretences, and for lacke of capacitie.
            Eleuenthly, he alledgeth euerie where paſſages,
as well of holy Scripture as of the Fathers
and moderne hiſtories; but ſo impertinent, and
with ſo little truth, as hereafter we ſhall cauſe
to appeare, that for a man of his deepe learning
and knowledge, it ſeemeth not poſſible ſo to

ſpeake out of his iudgement.
            Laſtly, whereas all this hath beene hudled and
heaped together into one maſſe, to currie with the
Pope: yet he ſuffereth diuerſe points to fall from
his lips, which may well diſtaſt his Holineſſe in
the higheſt degree. As by name, where he prefers
the authoritie of the Councill before that of the
Pope, and makes his iudgement inferiour to the
iudgement of the French; as in fit place hereafter
ſhall be ſhewed. Againe, where he repreſenteth
to his hearers the decrees of Popes and Councils
alreadie paſſed concerning this noble ſubiect: and
yet affirmes that he doth not debate the queſtion,
but as a Queſtioniſt, and without reſolution.
As if a Cardinall ſhould be afraid to be poſitiue,
and to ſpeake in peremptory ſtraines, after
Popes and Councils haue once decided the Queſtion.
Or as if a man ſhould perorate vpon
hazard, in a cauſe for the honour whereof he
would make no difficulty to ſuffer Martyrdome.
Adde hereunto, that his Lordſhippe hath alwaies
taken the contrary part heretofore, and
this totall muſt needs ariſe, that before the third
Eſtate, his lippes looked one way, and his conſcience
another.
            
               
All theſe points, by the diſcourſe which is to
followe, and by the ripping vp of his Oration
(which by Gods aſſiſtance J will vndertake) tending
to the reproach of Kings, and the ſubuerſion
of Kingdomes, I confidently ſpeake it, ſhall be
made manifeſt. Yet doe I not conceiue it can any
way make for my honour, to enter the liſts againſt a
Cardinall. For J am not ignorant how far a Cardinals
Hat, commeth vnder the Crowne & Scepter
of a King. For wel I wot vnto what ſublimity
the Scripture hath exalted Kings, when it ſtyles
them Gods: Whereas the dignitie of a Cardinall
is but a late vpſtart inuention of man;In the Preface to my Apologie. as I haue
elſwhere prooued. But I haue imbarqued my ſelfe
in this action, mooued thereunto; firſt by the
common intereſt of Kings in the cauſe it ſelfe:
Then by the L. Cardinal, who ſpeaketh not in this
Oration as a priuate perſon, but as one repreſenting
the body of the Clergie and Nobilitie, by
whom the cauſe hath beene wonne, and the garland
borne away from the third Eſtate. Againe,
by mine owne particular: becauſe he is pleaſed to
take me vp for a ſower of diſſention, and a perſecutor,
vnder whom the Church is hardly able to
fetch her breath; yea, for one by whome the Catholikes

of my Kingdome are compelled to endure
all ſorts of puniſhment: and withall he tearmes
this Article of the third Eſtate, a monſter with a
fiſhes tayle that came ſwimming out of England.
Laſt of all, by the preſent ſtate of France; becauſe
Fraunce beeing nowe reduced to ſo miſerable
tearmes, that it is nowe become a crime for a
Frenchman to ſtand for his King; it is a neceſſary
duty of her neighbours to ſpeake in her cauſe, and
to make triall whether they can put life into the
truth now dying, and readie to bee buried by the
power of violence, that it may reſound and ring
againe from remote regions.
            I haue no purpoſe once to touch many prettie
toyes which the ridges of his whole booke are ſowed
withall. Such are his allegations of Pericles,
Ageſilaus, Ariſtotle, Minos, the Druides, the
French Ladies, Hannibal, Pindarus, and Poeticall
fables. All reſembling the red and blew flowers
that peſter the corne when it ſtandeth in the
fields, where they are more noyſome to the growing
croppe, then beautifull to the beholding eye.
Such pettie matters, nothing at all beſeemed the
dignity of the Aſſembly, and of the maine ſubiect,
or of the Orator himſelfe. For it was no Decorum
               
to enter the Stage with a Pericles in his
mouth, but with the ſacred Name of God: nor
ſhould he haue marſhalled the paſſage of a Royal
Poet, after the example of an heathen Oratour.
            Neither will I giue any touch to his conceit of
the Romane conqueſts,Pag. 4. which the L. Cardinall
beſtoweth in the liſt of Gods graces and temporall
bleſſings, as a recompence of their zeale to the ſeruice
and worſhip of Idols. As if God were a recompencer
of wickednes, or as if the forcible eiecting
of tenants out of their frames and other
poſſeſsions, might bee reckoned among the bleſſings
of God.
            Nor to that of the Mileſian Ʋirgins,Pag. 7. & 8 dragged
ſtarre-naked after they were dead; which the L.
Cardinall drawes into his diſcourſe for an example
of the eternall torments denounced by the
Lawes Eccleſiaſticall, to be inflicted after this
life.
            Nor to his expoſition of the word Problematicall:
               Pag. 13. where he giueth to vnderſtand that by
Problematicall, he meaneth ſuch things as are of
no neceſſitie to matter of faith; and in caſe men
ſhall beleeue the contradictorie of the ſaid points,

they are not bound for ſuch beleefe, to vndergoe
the ſolemne curſe of the Church, and the loſſe of
communion.Ariſt. 1. top. cap 4. 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , ſound both one thing. 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , prouided the word 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                   or vtrùm, do ſtand before, as, Vtrùm homo ſit animal.
                Whereas Ariſtotle, of whom all
Schooles haue borrowed their tearmes, hath
taught vs that euery propoſition is called a Probleme,
when it is propounded in a formall doubt,
though in it proper nature it containes a neceſſary
truth, concerning the matter thereof. As for example,
to ſay in forme of queſtion, Whether is
there but one God? or, Whether is man a
creature indued with reaſon? By which examples
it is plaine, that propoſitions in problematically
forme, doe not forgoe the neceſſitie of their
nature; and that many times the contradictorie
binds the beleeuers therof to Anathema and loſſe
of communion. There is a confuſed heape or bundle
of otherlike toyes, which my purpoſe is to paſſe
ouer in ſilence, that I may now come to caſt anchor,
as it were in the very bottome and ſubſtance of
the cauſe.
         
         
            
            
            
               
                  HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE
               
            
         
      
      
         
            
            A
REMONSTRANCE
OF
THE MOST GRATIOVS
King of Great BRITTAINE, FRANCE,
and IRELAND, Defender of the
Faith, &c.
FOR THE RIGHT OF KINGS, AND
the independencie of their Crownes:
AGAINST AN ORATION OF
the moſt Illuſtrious Cardinall of PERRON,
pronounced in the Chamber of the third Eſtate.
The 15. of Ianuar. 1615.
            
            
               THE L. Cardinall euen in the firſt paſſage
of his Oration, hath laid a firme
foundation, That Eccleſiaſtics in France are more
deepely obliged to the King, then the Nobilitie,
and third Eſtate. His reaſon: Becauſe the Clergie
do ſweetly enioy their dignities and promotions,
with all their infinite wealth, of the
Kings meere grace, without all danger, and
with faire immunities; whereas the other two
Orders hold their offices by a chargeable and
burdenſome title or tenure, euen to the great

expence of their blood, & of their ſubſtance.
But ſee now, how looſe and weake a frame he
hath erected and pinned together, vpon his
firme and ſolide foundation: Ergo, the third
Eſtate is to lay all care to prouide remedies
againſt appoſted cut-throats, vpon the Clergy:
& the ſaid remedies (as he boldly affirms)
muſt be deriued from the laws of conſcience,
which may carry an effectuall acting or operatiue
efficacie vpon the ſoule, & nor from ciuil
or temporall puniſhments. Now this conſequence
limpeth like a lame creple after the
premiſes. For it is no vſuall & common matter,
to ſee men that are deepeſt in obligation,
performe their duties and couenants with
moſt fidelity. Againe, were it graunted the
Clergie had wel hitherto demonſtrated their
carefull watching ouer the life and honour of
their Prince; yet is it not for ſpirituall puniſhments
thundred by Eccleſiaſtics, to bind the
hands of the ciuill Magiſtrate, nor to ſtop the
current of temporall puniſhments: which ordinarily
doe carrie a greater force and vertue
to the bridling of the wicked, then the
apprehenſion of Gods iudgement.
            
               
The third Eſtate therefore, by whom all
the Officers of France are properly repreſented,
as to whome the adminiſtration of
iuſtice and protection of the Kings rights
and Honour doth appertaine, can deſerue
no blame in carrying ſo watchfull an eye,
by their wholeſome remedie to prouide
for the ſafetie of the King, and for the dignitie
of his Crowne. For if the Clergie ſhall
not ſtand to their tackle, but ſhrinke when
it commeth to the puſh of their dutie; who
ſhall charge themſelues with carefull foreſight
and preuention of miſchiefes? Shall
not the people? Now, haue not all the calamities,
which the third Eſtate haue ſought
prouidently to preuent; haue they not all
ſprung from the Clergie, as from their proper
and naturall fountaine? From whence
did the laſt ciuill warres, wherein a world
of blood was not more profuſely then prodigiouſly
and vnnaturally ſpilt, and wherein
the parricide of King Henrie III. was impiouſly
and abominably committed: from
whence did thoſe bloodie warres proceed,
but from the depoſing of the ſaid King by

the Head of the Church? Were they not
Prelats, Curats, and Confeſſours; were they
not Eccleſiaſtics, who partly by ſeditious
preachments, and partly by ſecret confeſſions,
powred many a jarre of oyle vpon this
flame? Was not he that killed the forenamed
King, was not he one of the Clergie?
Was not Guignard a Ieſuit? Was not Iohn
Chaſtel brought vp in the ſame ſchoole?
Did not Ravaillac that monſter of men, vpon
interrogatories made at his examination;
among the reſt, by whom he had been
ſo diabolically tempted and ſtirred vp to
his moſt execrable attempt and act of extreme
horror: did not the referre his examiners
to the Sermons made the Lent next
before, where they might be ſatisfied concerning
the cauſes of his abominable vndertaking
and execution? Are not Bellarmine,
Eudaemonoiohannes, Suarez, Becanus,
Mariana, with ſuch other monſters,
who teach the doctrine of parricides, vphold
the craft of Ianus-like equiuocations
in Courts of Iuſtice, and in ſecret confeſſions:
are they not all Clerics? are not all

their bookes approoued and allowed, as it
were by a corporation or groſſe companie
of Doctors, with their ſignes manuel to the
ſaide bookes? What were the heads, the
chiefe promoters, the complices of the
powder-conſpiracie in my Kingdom? were
they not Eccleſiaſtics? Hath not Faux by
name, a confederate of the ſame demned
crew; hath not he ſtoutly ſtood to the gunners
part, which then he was to act in that
moſt dolefull Tragedie, with aſſeueration
of a conſcience well aſſured and ſetled, touching
the lawfulnes of his enterpriſe? Did
he not yeild this reaſon? to wit, becauſe he
had beene armed with inſtruction of muſket
proofe in the caſe, before he made paſſage
ouer from the Low Countries? Is it
not alſo the generall beleefe of that Order,
that Clerics are exempted from the condition
of Subiects to the King? Nay, is it not
confeſſed by the L. Cardinall himſelfe,Pag. 7. that
King-killers haue ingaged themſelues to
vndertake the deteſtable act of parricide
vnder a falſe credence of Religion, as beeing
inſtructed by their ſchoolemaſters in

Religion? And who were they but Eccleſiaſticall
perſons? All this preſuppoſed as
matter of truth, I draw this concluſion:
Howſoeuer no ſmal number of the French
Clergie may perhaps beare the affection of
louing Subiects to their King, and may not
ſuffer the Clericall character to deface the
impreſſion of naturall allegiance; yet, for ſo
much as the Order of Clerics is dipped in
a deeper die, and beareth a worſe tincture
of daungerous practiſes then the other Orders;
the third Eſtate had beene greatly
wanting to their excellent prouidence and
wiſdome, if they ſhould haue relinquiſhed
and transferred the care of deſignements
and proiects for the life of their King, and
the ſafetie of his Crowne, to the Clergie alone.
Moreouer, the Clergie ſtandeth
bound to referre the iudgment of all matters
in controuerſie, to the ſentence of the
Pope, in this cauſe beeing a partie, and one
that pretendeth Crownes to depend vpon
his Mitre. What hope then might the third
Eſtate conceiue, that his Holineſſe would
paſſe againſt his own cauſe, when his iudgment

of the controuerſie had been ſundrie
times before publiſhed and teſtified to the
world? And whereas the plot or modell of
remedies proiected by the third Eſtate, and
the Kings Officers, hath not prooued ſortable
in the euent: was it becauſe the ſaid remedies
were not good and lawfull? No verily:
but becauſe the Clergie refuſed to become
contributors of their duty & meanes
to the grand ſeruice. Likewiſe, for that after
the burning of bookes, addreſſed to iuſtifie
rebellious people, traytors, and parricides
of Kings; neuertheleſſe the authors
of the ſaid bookes are winked at, and backt
with fauour. Laſtly, for that ſome wretched
parricides drinke off the cuppe of publike
iuſtice; whereas to the firebrands of ſedition,
the ſowers of this abominable doctrine,
no man ſaith ſo much as blacke is
their eye.
            It ſufficiently appeareth, as I ſuppoſe, by
the former paſſage, that his Lordſhip exhorting
the third Eſtate to refer the whole
care of this Regall cauſe vnto the Clergie,
hath tacked his frame of weake ioynts and

tenons to a very worthy but wrong foundation.
Pag. 9. Howbeit, he laboureth to fortifie
his exhortation with a more weak & feeble
reaſon. For to make good his proiect he affirmes,
that matters and maximes out of all
doubt & queſtion, may not be ſhuffled together
with points in controuerſy. Now his
rules indubitable are two: The firſt, It is
not lawfull to murther Kings for any cauſe
whatſoeuer. This he confirmeth by the example
of Saul (as he ſaith) depoſed from his
Throne, whoſe life or limbs Dauid neuertheleſſe
durſt not once hurt or wrong for
his life. Likewiſe he confirmes the ſame by
a Decree of the Council held at Conſtance.Conc. Conſtan. Seſſ. 15.
His other point indubitable. The Kings of
France are Soueraignes in all Temporall
Soueraigntie, within the French Kingdome,
and hold not by fealtie either of the
Pope, as hauing receiued or obliged their
Crownes vpon ſuch tenure and condition,
or of any other Prince in the whole world.
Which point, neuertheleſſe he takes not for
certen and indubitable, but onely according
to humane and hiſtoricall certentie.

Now a third point he makes to be ſo full of
controuerſie, and ſo farre within the circle
of diſputable queſtions, as it may not be
drawne into the ranke of claſſicall and authenticall
points, for feare of making a certen
point doubtfull, by ſhuffling and jumbling
therewith ſome point in controuerſie.
Now the queſtion ſo diſputable, as he
pretendeth, is this. A Chriſtian Prince
breakes his oath ſolemnly taken to God,
both to liue and to die in the Catholique
Religion. Say this Prince turnes Arrian, or
Mahometan, fals to proclaime open warre,
and to wage battel with Ieſus Chriſt. Whether
may ſuch a Prince be declared to haue
loſt his Kingdome, and who ſhall declare
the Subiects of ſuch a Prince to be quit of
their oath of allegiance? The L. Cardinall
holds the affirmatiue, and makes no bones
to maintaine, that all other parts of the Catholique
Church, yea the French Church
euen from the firſt birth of her Theologicall
Schooles, to Calvins time and teaching,
haue profeſſed that ſuch a Prince may
be lawfully remooued from his Throne by

the Pope, and by the Council: and ſuppoſe
the contrarie doctrine were the very Quinteſſence
or ſpirit of truth, yet might it not
in caſe of faith be vrged and preſſed otherwiſe
then by way of problematicall diſceptation.
That is the ſumme of his Lordſh▪
ample diſcourſe. The refuting whereof, I
am conſtrained to put off, and referre vnto
an other place; becauſe he hath ſerued vs
with the ſame diſhes ouer & ouer againe.
There we ſhall ſee the L. Cardinall maketh
way to the diſpatching of Kings after depoſition:
that Saul was not depoſed, as he
hath preſumed: that in the Council of Conſtance
there is nothing to the purpoſe of
murthering Soueraigne Princes: that his
Lordſhip, ſuppoſing the French King may
be depriued of his Crowne by a ſuperiour
power, doth not hold his liege Lord to be
Soueraigne in France: that by the poſition
of the French Church from age to age, the
Kings of France are not ſubiect vnto any
cenſure of depoſition by the Pope: that his
Holineſſe hath no iuſt and lawful pretence
to produce, that any Chriſtian King holds

of him by fealtie, or is obliged to doe the
Pope homage for his Crowne.
            Well then, for the purpoſe: he dwelleth
onely vpon the third point pretended queſtionable,
and this he affirmeth: If any ſhall
condemne, or wrappe vnder the ſolemne
curſe, the abettors of the Popes power to
vnking lawfull and Soueraigne Kings; the
ſame ſhall runne vpon fowre dangerous
rocks of apparant incongruities and abſurdities.
            
               
                   Firſt, he ſhall offer to force and intangle
the conſciences of many deuout perſons:
For hee ſhall bind them to beleeue and
ſweare that doctrine, the contrary whereof
is beleeued of the whole Church, and hath
beene beleeued by their predeceſſors.
               
                   Secondly, he ſhall ouerturne from top
to bottome the ſacred authoritie of holy
Church, and ſhall ſet open a gate vnto all
ſorts of hereſie, by allowing lay-perſons a
bold libertie to be iudges in cauſes of religion
and faith. For what is that degree of
boldneſſe, but open vſurping of the Prieſthood;
what is it but putting of prophane

hands into the Arke; what is it but laying of
vnholy fingers vpon the holy Cenſor for
perfumes?
               
                   Thirdly, he ſhal make way to a ſchiſme,
not poſſible to be put by and auoided by
any humane prouidence. For this doctrine
beeing held and profeſſed by all other Catholicks;
how can we declare it repugnant
vnto Gods word; how can we hold it impious;
how can we accompt it deteſtable, but
we ſhall renounce communion with the
head and other members of the Church;
yea, we ſhall confeſſe the Church in all ages
to haue been the Synagogue of Satan,
and the ſpouſe of the Deuill?
               
                   Laſtly, by working the eſtabliſhment of
this Article, which worketh an eſtabliſhment
of Kings Crownes; He ſhall not onely
worke the intended remedy for the danger
of Kings, out of all the vertue and efficacie
thereof, by weakening of doctrine
out of all controuerſie, in packing it vp with
a diſputable queſtion; but likewiſe in ſtead
of ſecuring the life and eſtate of Kings, hee
ſhall draw both into farre greater hazards,

by the trayne or ſequence of warres, and other
calamities which vſually waite and attend
on ſchiſmes.
            
            The L. Cardinall ſpends his whole diſcourſe
in confirmation of theſe foure heads,
which we now intend to ſift in order, and
demonſtratiuely to prooue that all the ſaid
inconueniences are meere nullities, matters
of imagination, and built vpon falſe
preſuppoſitions. But before we come to
the maine, the reader is to be informed and
aduertiſed, that his Lordſhip ſetteth a falſe
gloſſe vpon the queſtion; and propounds
the caſe not onely contrary to the truth of
the ſubiect in controuerſie, but alſo to the
Popes owne minde and meaning. For he
reſtrains the Popes power to depoſe Kings
onely to caſes of hereſie, Apoſtaſie, and
perſecuting of the Church; whereas Popes
extend their power to a further diſtance.
They depoſe Princes for infringing, or in any
ſort diminiſhing the priuiledges of
Monaſteries: witneſſe Gregorie the firſt
in the pretended charter graunted to the
Abbay of S. Medard at Soiſſons, the ſaid

charter beeing annexed to his Epiſtles in
the rere. The ſame he teſtifieth in his Epiſtle
to Senator, by name the 10. of the eleuenth
booke. They depoſe for naturall
dulneſſe and lacke of capacitie, whether inbred
and true indeed, or onely pretended
and imagined: witneſſe the glorious vaunt
of Gregorie VII. that Childeric King of
France was hoyſted out of his Throne by
Pope Zacharie, Not ſo much for his wicked
life,
               Cauſ. 15. Can. Alius. Qu. 6. 
               as for his vnablenes to beare the weightie
burden of ſo great a Kingdome. They depoſe
for collating of Benefices and Prebends:
witneſſe the great quarrells and ſore contentions
between Pope Innocent III. and
Iohn King of England: as alſo betweene
Philip the Faire and Boniface VIII. They
depoſe for adulteries and matrimoniall
ſuites: witneſſe Philip. 1. for the repudiating
or caſting off his lawfull wife Bertha,
and marrying in her place with Bertrade
wife to the Earle of Aniou. Finally, faine
would I learne into what hereſie or degree
of Apoſtaſie,Paul. Aemil. in Phil. 3. either Henrie IV. or Freder.
Barbaroſſa, or Frederic 2. Emperours were

fallen, when they were ſmitten with Papall
fulminations euen to the depriuation of
their Imperiall Thrones. What? was it for
hereſie or Apoſtaſie that Pope Martin IV.
bare ſo hard a hand againſt Peter King of
Arragon, that he acquitted and releaſed the
Arragonnois from their oath of allegiance
to Peter their lawfull King? Was it for hereſie
or Apoſtaſie, for Arrianiſme or Mahumetiſme,
that Lewis XII. ſo good a
King and Father of his Countrey, was put
downe by Iulius the II? Was it for hereſie
or Apoſtaſie, that Sixtus 5. vſurped a
power againſt Henrie III. euen ſo farre as
to denounce him vn-kingd; the iſſue
whereof was the parricide of that good
King, and the moſt wofull deſolation of a
moſt flouriſhing Kingdome? But his Lordſhip
beſt liked to worke vpon that ground,
which to the outward ſhew & appearance,
is the moſt beautifull cauſe that can be alledged
for the diſhonouring of Kings by
the weapon of depoſition: making himſelfe
to beleeue that he acted the part of an Orator
before perſonages not much acquainted

with auncient and moderne hiſtories,
and ſuch as little vnderſtood the ſtate of the
queſtion then in hand. It had therefore
beene a good warrant for his Lordſhip, to
haue brought ſome authentical inſtrument
from the Pope, whereby the French might
haue beene ſecured, that his Holineſſe renounceth
all other cauſes auouchable for
the degrading of Kings; and that he will
henceforth reſt in the caſe of hereſie, for the
turning of Kings out of their free-hold: as
alſo that his Holineſſe by the ſame or like
inſtrument, might haue certified his pleaſure,
that he will not hereafter make himſelfe
iudge, whether Kings be tainted with
damnable hereſie, or free from hereticall
infection. For that were to make himſelfe
both iudge and plaintiffe, that it might be
in his power to call that doctrine heretical,
which is pure orthodoxe: and all for this
ende, to make himſelfe maſter of the Kingdome,
and there to ſettle a Succeſſor, who
receiuing the Crowne of the Popes free
gift and graunt, might be tyed thereby to
depend altogether vpon his Holines. Hath

not Pope Boniface VIII. declared in his
proud letters all thoſe to be heretickes, that
dare vndertake to affirme, the collating of
Prebends appertaineth to the King? It was
that Popes groſſe error, not in the fact, but
in the right. The like crime forſooth was
by Popes imputed to the vnhappie Emperour
Henrie IV. And what was the iſſue of
the ſaid imputation? The ſonne is inſtigated
thereby to rebell againſt his father, and
to impeach the interment of his dead
corps, who neuer in his life had beate his
braines to trouble the ſweet waters of Theologicall
fountaines.Annal. Boio. It is recorded by Auentine,
Lib. 3. that Biſhop Virgilius was declared
heretique,Iuuanen. for teaching the poſition of Antipodes.
Epiſcop. The Bull Exurge, marching in
the rere of the laſt Lateran Council, ſets
downe this poſition for one of Luthers hereſies,
Optima poenitentia nova vita. 
               A new life is the beſt repentance. Among
the crimes which the Council of Conſtance
charged Pope Iohn XXIII. withall, one
was this:Conc. Conſtan. Seſſ. 2. that hee denied the immortalitie
of the ſoule, and that ſo much was publiquely,
manifeſtly, and notoriouſly knowne. Now if the

Pope ſhall bee carried by the ſtreame of
theſe or the like errors, and in his hereticall
prauitie ſhall depoſe a King of the contrary
opinion, I ſhall hardly bee perſwaded, the
ſaid King is lawfully depoſed.
            
               The firſt Inconvenience
examined.
               
                  THE firſt inconuenience growing (in
the Cardinall his conceit) by entertaining
the Article of the third Eſtate
(whereby the Kings of France are declared
to be indepoſeable by any ſuperiour
power ſpirituall or temporall) is this: It offereth
force to the conſcience, vnder the penaltie
of Anathema, to condemne a doctrine beleeued and
practiſed in the Church, in the continuall current
of the laſt eleuen hundred yeares. In theſe
words he maketh a ſecret confeſſion, that
in the firſt fiue hundred yeeres, the ſame
doctrin was neither apprehended by faith,
nor approoued by practiſe. Wherein, to

my vnderſtanding, the L. Cardinall voluntarily
giueth ouer the ſuite. For the Church
in the time of the Apoſtles, their diſciples,
and ſucceſſors, for 500. yeares together,
was no more ignorant what authoritie the
Church is to challenge ouer Emperours
and Kings, then at any time ſince in any
ſucceeding age: in which as pride hath ſtill
flowed to the height of a full Sea, ſo puritie
of religion and manners hath kept for the
moſt part at a lowe water-marke. Which
point is the rather to be conſidered, for that
during the firſt 500. yeres, the Church groned
vnder the heauy burthen, both of heathen
Emperours, and of hereticall Kings;
the Viſigot Kings in Spaine, and the Vandals
in Affrica. Of whoſe diſpleaſure the
Pope had ſmall reaſon or cauſe to ſtand in
any feare, beeing ſo remote from their dominions,
and no way vnder the lee of their
Soueraigntie.
               But let vs come to ſee, what aide the L.
Cardinall hath amaſſed and piled together
out of later hiſtories: prouided wee ſtill
beare in mind, that our queſtion is not of

popular tumults, nor of the rebellion of
ſubiects making inſurrections out of their
owne diſcontented ſpirits and brain-ſicke
humors, nor of lawfull Excommunications,
nor of Canonicall cenſures and reprehenſions;
but onely of a iuridicall ſentence
of depoſition, pronounced by the Pope, as
armed with ordinary and lawfull power to
depoſe, againſt a Soueraigne Prince.
               Now then;Exampl. 1. pag. 18. Evag. hiſt. The L. Cardinall ſets on, and
giues the firſt charge with Anaſtaſius the
Emperour,Eccleſ. lib. 3. cap. 32. whome Euphemius Patriarke
of Conſtantinople would neuer acknowledge
for Emperour: (that is to ſay, would
neuer conſent he ſhould be created Emperour
by the help of his voice or ſuffrage)
except he would firſt ſubſcribe to the Chalcedon
Creed: notwithſtanding the great
Empreſſe and Senate ſought by violent
courſes and practiſes to make him yeeld.
And when afterward the ſaid Emperour,
contrary to his oath taken, played the relaps
by falling into his former hereſie, and
became a perſecutor; he was firſt admoniſhed,
and then excommunicated by Symmachus

Biſhop of Rome. To this the L.
Cardinall addes, that when the ſaid Emperour
was minded to choppe the poiſon of
his hereticall aſſertions into the publique
formes of diuine ſeruice, then the people
of Conſtantinople made an vproare againſt
Anaſtaſius their Emperour; and one of his
Commanders by force of armes, conſtrained
him to call backe certaine Biſhops
whome he had ſent into baniſhments before.
               In this firſt example the L. Cardinall
by his good leaue, neither comes cloſe to
the queſtion, nor ſalutes it a farre off. Euphemius
was not Biſhop of Rome: Anaſtaſius
was not depoſed by Euphemius; the
Patriarch onely made no way to the creating
of Anaſtaſius. The ſuddaine commotion
of the baſe multitude makes nothing,
the rebellion of a Greeke Commaunder
makes leſſe, for the authorizing of the Pope
to depoſe a Soueraigne Prince. The Greek
Emperour was excommunicated by Pope
Symmachus: who knowes whether that be
true or forged? For the Pope himſelfe is

the onely witneſſe here produced by the
Lord Cardinall vpon the point: and who
knowes not how falſe, how ſuppoſitious,
the writings and Epiſtles of the auncient
Popes are iuſtly eſteemed? But graunt it a
truth; yet Anaſtaſius excommunicated by
Pope Symmachus, is not Anaſtaſius depoſed
by Pope Symmachus. And to make a
full anſwer, I ſay further, that excommunication
denounced by a forraine Biſhop, againſt
a party not beeing within the limits
of his iuriſdiction, or one of his owne flock,
was not any barre to the party from the
communion of the Church, but onely a
kind of publication, that he the ſaid Biſhop
in his particular, would hold no further
communion with any ſuch party.
               For proofe whereof, I produce the Canons
of the Councils held at Carthage. In
one of the ſaid Canons it is thus prouided
and ordained;
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     .
                  Nomocan. Affric. Can. 77. 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     
                   If any Biſhop ſhall wilfully
abſent himſelfe from the vſual and accuſtomed
Synodes, let him not be admitted to
the communion of other Churches, but let
him onely vſe the benefit and libertie of his owne

Church. In an other of the ſame Canons
thus;Can. 81. eiuſd. Nomo. 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     . If a Biſhop ſhall inſinuate himſelfe
to make a conueiance of his Monaſterie,
and the ordering thereof vnto a Monke of
any other Cloiſter; let him be cut off, let him
bee ſeparated from the communion with other
Churches, and content himſelfe to liue in the
communion of his owne flocke. In the ſame ſenſe
Hilarius Biſhop of Poictiers excommunicated
Liberius Biſhop of Rome,Anathema tibi à me Liberi. Faber. in frag. Hilarij. for ſubſcribing
to the Arrian Confeſſion. In the ſame
ſenſe, Iohn Biſhop of Antioch excommunicated
Caeleſtine of Rome, and Cyrill of
Alexandria, Biſhops; for proceeding to ſentence
againſt Neſtorius, without ſtaying
his comming to anſwer in his owne cauſe.
In the ſame ſenſe likewiſe, Victor Biſhop of
Rome did cut off all the Biſhops of the
Eaſt, not from the communion of their
owne flocks, but from communion with
Victor and the Romane Church. What reſemblance,
what agreement, what proportion,
betweene this courſe of excommunication,
and that way of vniuſt fulmination
which the Popes of Rome haue vſurped againſt

Kings, but yet certaine long courſes
of time after that auncient courſe?
               And this may ſtand for a full anſwer
likewiſe to the example of Clotharius.Exampl. 2. This
auncient King of the French, fearing the
cenſures of Pope Agapetus, erected the territorie
of Yuetot vnto the title of a Kingdome,
by way of ſatisfaction for murdering
of Gualter, Lord of Yuetot. For this
example the L. Cardinall hath ranſackt records
of 900. yeeres antiquitie and vpward;
in which times it were no hard peice
of worke to ſhewe, that Popes would not
haue any hand, nor ſo much as a finger in
the affaires and acts of the French Kings.
Gregorie of Tours that liued in the ſame
age, hath recorded many acts of exceſſe,
and violent iniuries done againſt Biſhops
by their Kings, and namely againſt Praetextatus
Biſhop of Roan; for any of which
iniurious prankes then plaied, the Biſhop
of Rome durſt not reproue the ſaid Kings
with due remonſtrance. But ſee here the
words of Gregory himſelfe to King Chilperic:
If any of vs, O King, ſhall ſwarue from

the path of iuſtice, him thou haſt power to puniſh:
But in caſe thou ſhalt at any time tranſgreſſe the
lines of equitie, who ſhall once touch thee with
reproofe? To thee we ſpeake, but are neuer heeded
and regarded, except it be thy pleaſure: and
be thou not pleaſed, who ſhal challenge thy greatnes,
but he that iuſtly challengeth to be iuſtice it
ſelfe? The good Biſhop, notwithſtanding
theſe humble remonſtrances, was but
roughly entreated, and packt into exile,
beeing baniſhed into the Iſle of Gernſeye.
But I am not minded to make any deepe
ſearch or inquiſition, into the titles of the
Lords of Yuetot: whoſe honourable priuiledges
and titles are the moſt honourable
badges and cognizances of their anceſtors,
and of ſome remarquable ſeruice
done to the Crowne of France: ſo farre I
take them to differ from a ſatisfaction for
ſinne. And for the purpoſe I onely affirme,
that were the credit of this hiſtorie beyond
all exception, yet makes it nothing to the
preſent queſtion, wherein the power of depoſing,
and not of excommunicating, ſupreme
Kings is debated. And ſuppoſe the

King by charter granted the ſaid priuiledges
for feare of excommunication; how is
it prooued thereby, that Pope Agapetus
had lawfull and ordinarie power to depriue
him of his Crowne? Nay, doubtleſſe it was
rather a meanes to eleuate and aduance the
dignitie of the Crowne of France, and to
ſtyle the French King, a King of Kings, as
one that was able to giue the qualitie of
King, to all the reſt of the Nobles and Gentrie
of his Kingdome. Doth not ſome part
of the Spaniſh Kings greatneſſe, conſiſt in
creating of his Great?
               In the next place followeth Gregorie I.
who in the 10. Epiſtle of the 11. booke,Exam. 3. pag. 22.
confirming the priuiledges of the Hoſpital
at Auguſtodunum in Bourgongne, prohibiteth
all Kings and Prelates whatſoeuer,
to infringe or diminiſh the ſaid priuiledges,
in whole or in part. His formall and
expreſſe words be theſe: If any King, Prelate,
Iudge, or any other ſecular perſon, informed
of this our conſtitution, ſhall preſume to go or do
contrary thereunto, let him be caſt downe from
his power and dignitie. I anſwer; the Lord

Cardinal here wrongs himſelfe very much,
in taking imprecations for Decrees. Might
not euen the meaneſt of the people vſe the
ſame tenour of words, and ſay? If any ſhall
touch the life, or the moſt ſacred Maieſtie
of our Kings, be he Emperour, or be hee
Pope, let him be accurſed; let him fall from
his eminent place of authoritie, let him loſe
his dignity; let him tumble into beggarie,
diſeaſes, and all kinds of calamities? I forbeare
to ſhewe how eaſie a matter it is for
Monkes, to forge titles after their owne
humour, and to their owne liking, for the
vpholding and maintaining of their priuiledges.
As for the purpoſe, the ſame Gregorie
citeth in the end of his Epiſtles an other
priuiledge, of the like ſtuffe and ſtamp
to the former, granted to the Abbey of S.
Medard at Soiſſons. It is fenced with a like
clauſe to the other. But of how great vntruth,
and of how little weight it is, the very
date that it beareth makes manifeſt
proofe: For it runnes, Dated the yeare of
our Lords Incarnation 593. the 11. Indiction;
whereas the 10. Indiction agreeth to

the yeare 593. Beſides, it was not Gregories
manner to date his Epiſtles according
to the yeare of the Lord. Againe, the ſaid
priuiledge was ſigned by the Biſhops of Alexandria
and Carthage, who neuer knew
(as may wel be thought) whether any ſuch
Abbey of S. Medard, or citie of Soiſſons,
was euer built in the world. Moreouer, they
ſigned in the thickeſt of a crowde as it were
of Italian Biſhops. Laſtly, he that ſhall read
in this Gregories Epiſtles, with what ſpirit
of reuerence and humilitie hee ſpeaketh of
Emperours, will hardly beleeue that euer
he armed himſelfe with authoritie to giue
or to take away Kingdomes. He ſtyles himſelfe

                     Epiſt. 6. l. 3 Ego autem indignus pietatis 
                           •
                        uae ſeruus. 
                     Ego verò haec Dominis meis loquens, quid ſum niſi pul vis & vermis? Ibid.
                     Ego quidem 
                           ••
                        ſſioni ſubiectus, &c. Ep. 61. l. 2.
                   
                  the Emperours vnworthie ſeruant: preſuming
to ſpeake vnto his Lord, when hee knowes
himſelfe to bee but duſt and a very worme. Hee
profeſſeth ſubiection vnto the Emperours commaunds,
euen to the publiſhing of a certaine Law
of the Emperours, which in his iudgement ſomewhat
iarred and iuſtled with Gods Lawe:  as elſewhere
I haue ſpoken more at large.
               The L. Cardinall next bringeth vpon
the ſtage Iuſtinian 2. He,Examp. 4. beeing in ſome

choller with Sergius Biſhop of Rome, becauſe
he would not fauour the erroneous
Synode of Canſtantinople, would haue
cauſed the Biſhop to bee apprehended by
his Conſtable Zacharias. But by the Romane
Militia, (that is, the troupes which
the Emperour then had in Italie) Zacharias
was repulſed and hindered from his deſigne,
euen with opprobrious & reproachfull
tearmes. His Lordſhip muſt haue my
ſhallownes excuſed, if I reach not his intent
by this allegation; wherein I ſee not one
word of depoſing from the Empire, or of
any ſentence pronounced by the Pope.
               Here are now 712. yeares expired after
the birth of Ieſus Chriſt: in all which long
tract of time, the L. Cardinal hath not light
vpon any inſtance, which might make for
his purpoſe with neuer ſo little ſhew. For
the example of the Emperour Philippicus,Examp. 5.
by the Cardinal alledged next in ſequence,
belongeth to the yeare 713. And thus lies
the hiſtorie: This Emperour Philippicus
Bardanes, was a profeſſed enemie to the
worſhipping of Images, and commanded

them to be broken in peices. In that verie
time the Romane Empire was ouerthrown
in the Weſt, and ſore ſhaken by the Saracens
in the Eaſt. Beſide thoſe miſeries, the
Emperour was alſo incumbred with a ciuil
and inteſtine warre. The greateſt part of
Italie was then ſeized by the Lombards,
and the Emperour in Italie had nothing
left ſaue onely the Exarchat of Rauenna,
and the Dutchie of Rome, then halfe abandoned
by reaſon of the Emperours want
of forces. Pope Conſtantine gripes this occaſion
whereon to ground his greatneſſe,
and to ſhake off the yoke of the Emperour
his Lord: Vndertakes againſt Philippicus
the cauſe of Images: By a Council declares
the Emperour heretique▪ Prohibites
his reſcripts or coine to be receiued, and to
goe currant in Rome: Forbids his Imperiall
ſtatue to bee ſet vp in the Temple, according
to auncient cuſtome: The tumult
groweth to a height: The Pope is principall
promoter of the tumult: In the heate
of the tumult the Exarche of Rauenna looſeth
his life. Here ſee now the mutinie of a

ſubiect againſt his Prince, to pull from him
by force and violence a citie of his Empire.
But who ſeeth in all this any ſentence of
depoſition from the Imperial dignity? Nay,
the Pope then miſſed the cuſhion, and was
diſappointed vtterly of his purpoſe. The
cittie of Rome ſtood firme, and continued
ſtill in their obedience to the Emperour.
               About ſome 12. yeeres after,Examp. 6. the Emperour
Leo Iſauricus (whome the Lord of
Perron calleth Iconoclaſt) falles to fight it
out at ſharpe, and to proſecute worſhippers
of Images with all extremitie. Vpon
this occaſion, Pope Gregorie 2. then treading
in the ſteps of his predeceſſor, when
he perceiued the citie of Rome to be but
weakly prouided of men or munition, and
the Emperour to haue his hands full in other
places, found ſuch meanes to make
the citie riſe in rebellious armes againſt the
Emperour, that he made himſelfe in ſhort
time maſter thereof. Thus far the L. Card.
wherunto my anſwer for ſatisfaction is; that
degrading an Emperour from his Imperiall
dignitie, and reducing a citie to reuolt

againſt her Maſter, that a man at laſt may
carrie the peice himſelfe, and make himſelfe
Lord thereof, are two ſeuerall actions
of ſpeciall difference. If the free-hold of the
citie had beene conueied to ſome other by
the Pope depriuing the Emperour, as proprietarie
thereof, this example might haue
challenged ſome credit at leaſt in ſhew: but
ſo to inuade the citie to his owne vſe, and
ſo to ſeize on the right and authority of another,
what is it but open rebellion, and
notorious ambition? For it is farre from
Eccleſiaſticall cenſure, when the ſpirituall
Paſtor of ſoules forſooth, pulles the cloake
of a poore ſinner from his backe by violence,
or cuts his purſe, and thereby appropriates
an other mans goods to his priuate
vſe. It is to be obſerued withall, that when
the Emperours were not of ſufficient
ſtrength, and Popes had power to beard
and to braue Emperours, then theſe Papall
practiſes were firſt ſet on foot. This Emperour
notwithſtanding, turned head and
peckt againe: his Lieutenant entred Rome,
and Gregorie 3. ſucceſſor to this Gregorie

2. was glad to honour the ſame Emperour
with ſtyle and title of his Lord: witnes two
ſeueral Epiſtles of the ſaid Gregory 3. written
to Boniface, and ſubſcribed in this
forme:Data 10. 
                  Dated the tenth Calends of December:
                  Cal. Decem Imperante Dom. pijſſimo Auguſto Leone, à Deo coronato, magno Imp. anno decimo Imperij eius. 
                  In the raigne of our moſt pious and religious
Lord, Anguſtus Leo, crowned of God, the
great Emperour, in the tenth yeare of his
raigne.
               
               The L. Cardinall with no leſſe abuſe alleadgeth
Pope Zacharie, by whome the
French, as he affirmeth, were abſolued of
the oath of allegiance,Examp. 7. wherein they ſtood
bound to Childeric their King. And for
this inſtance, he ſtandeth vpon the teſtimonie
of Paulus Aemilius, and du Tillet, a
paire of late writers. But by authors more
neere that age wherein Childeric raigned,
it is more truely teſtified, that it was a free
and voluntarie act of the French, onely aſking
the aduiſe of Pope Zacharie, but requiring
neither leaue nor abſolution. Ado
Biſhop of Vienna, in his Chronicles hath it
after this manner: The French, following the
Counſell of Embaſſadors, and of Pope Zachary,

elected Pepin their King, and eſtabliſhed him in
the Kingdome. Trithemius in his abridgement
of Annals, thus: Childeric, as one vnfit
for gouernement, was turned out of his Kingdome,
with common conſent of the Eſtates and
Peeres of the Realme, ſo aduiſed by Zacharie
Pope of Rome. Godfridus of Viterbe in the
17. part of his Chronicle; and Guaguin in
the life of Pepin, affirme the ſame. And was
it not an eaſie matter to worke Pepin by
counſell to lay hold on the Kingdome,
when he could not be hindered from faſtening
on the Crowne, and had already ſeizd
it in effect, howſoeuer he had not yet attained
to the name of King? Moreouer, the
rudeneſſe of that Nation, then wanting
knowledge and Schooles either of diuinitie,
or of Academicall ſciences, was a kind
of ſpurre to make them runne for counſell
ouer the mountaines: which neuertheleſſe
in a cauſe of ſuch nature, they required not
as neceſſary, but onely as decent and for
faſhion ſake. The Pope alſo for his part was
well appaied, by this meanes to drawe Pepin
vnto his part; as one that ſtood in ſome

need of his aide againſt the Lombards; and
the more, becauſe his Lord the Emperour
of Conſtantinople was then brought ſo
low, that he was not able to ſend him ſufficient
aide, for the defence of his territories
againſt his enemies. But had Zacharie (to
deale plainely) not ſtood vpon the reſpect
of his owne commoditie, more then vpon
the regard of Gods feare; he would neuer
haue giuen counſel vnto the ſeruant, vnder
the pretended colour of his Maſters dull
ſpirit, ſo to turne rebell againſt his Maſter.
The Lawes prouide Gardians, or ouerſeers,
for ſuch as are not well in their wits;
they neuer depriue and ſpoile them of their
eſtate: they puniſh crimes, but not diſeaſes
and infirmities by nature. Yea, in France
it is a very auncient cuſtome, when the
King is troubled in his wittes to eſtabliſh a
Regent, who for the time of the Kings diſability,
may beare the burden of the Kingdomes
affaires. So was the practiſe of that
State in the caſe of Charles 6. when he fell
into a phrenſie; whome the Pope notwithſtanding
his moſt grieuous and ſharpe fits,

neuer offered to degrade. And to be ſhort,
what reaſon, what equity will beare the
children to be puniſhed for the fathers debilitie?
Yet ſuch puniſhment was laid vpon
Childerics whole race and houſe; who
by this practiſe were all diſinherited of the
Kingdome. But ſhall wee now take ſome
viewe, of the L. Cardinals excuſe for this
exemplarie fact?Pag. 25. The cauſe of Childerics
depoſing, (as the L. Cardinal ſaith) did neerly
concerne and touch Religion. For Childerics
imbecillitie brought all France into
danger, to ſuffer a moſt wofull ſhipwracke
of Chriſtian religion, vpon the barbarous
and hoſtile inuaſion of the Saracens. Admit
now this reaſon had beene of iuſt weight
and value, yet conſideration ſhould haue
been taken, whether ſome one or other of
that Royallſtemme, and of the Kings owne
ſucceſſors neereſt of blood, was not of better
capacitie to rule and mannage that
mightie State. The feare of vncertaine and
accidentall miſchiefe, ſhould not haue driuen
them to ſlie vnto the certain miſchiefe
of actuall and effectuall depoſition. They

ſhould rather haue ſet before their eies the
example of Charles Martel, this Pepins father;
who in a farre more eminent danger,
when the Saracens had already maſtered,
and ſubdued a great part of France, valiantly
encountred, and withall defeated the Saracens;
ruled the Kingdome vnder the
title of Steward of the Kings houſe, the
principall Officer of the Crowne; without
affecting or aſpiring to the Throne for all
that great ſteppe of aduantage, eſpecially
when the Saracens were quite broken, and
no longer dreadfull to the French Nation.
               In our owne Scotland, the ſway of the
Kingdome was in the hand of Walles, during
the time of Bruſe his impriſonment in
England, who then was lawfull heire to the
Crowne. This Walles or Vallas had the
whole power of the Kingdome at his beck
and command. His edicts and ordinances
to this day ſtand in full force. By the deadly
hatred of Bruſe his mortall enemie, it
may be coniectured, that hee might haue
beene prouoked and inflamed with deſire
to truſſe the Kingdome in his talants. And

notwithſtanding all theſe incitements, hee
neuer aſſumed or vſurped other title to
himſelfe, then of Gouernour or Adminiſtrator
of the Kingdome. The reaſon. Hee
had not beene brought vp in this newe doctrine
and late diſcipline, whereby the
Church is endowed with power to giue
and to take away Crownes. But now (as
the L. Cardinall would beare the world in
hand) the ſtate of Kings is brought to a very
dead lift. The Pope forſooth muſt ſend
his Phiſitians, to know by way of inſpection
or ſome other courſe of Art, whether
the Kings braine be crackt or found: and in
caſe there be found any debility of wit and
reaſon in the King, then the Pope muſt remooue
and tranſlate the Crowne, from the
weaker braine to a ſtronger: and for the acting
of the ſtratageme, the name of Religion
muſt be pretended. Ho, theſe heretikes
beginne to crawle in the Kingdome:
order muſt bee taken they be not ſuffered
by their multitudes and ſwarmes, like locuſts
or caterpillars to peſter and poiſon
the whole Realme. Or in a caſe of matrimonie,

thus: Ho, marriage is a Sacrament:
touch the Order of Matrimonie, and Religion
is wounded. By this deuiſe not onely
the Kings vices, but likewiſe his naturall
diſeaſes and infirmities are fetcht into the
circle of Religion; and the L. Cardinal hath
not done himſelfe right, in reſtraining the
Popes power to depoſe Kings, vnto the cafes
of hereſie, Apoſtaſie, and perſecution of
the Church.
               In the next place followeth Leo III. who
by ſetting the Imperiall Crowne vpon the
head of Charles, abſolued all the ſubiects
in the Weſt, of their obedience to the
Greeke Emperours, if the L. of Perron
might be credited in this example. But indeed
it is crowded among the reſt by a ſlie
tricke, and cleane contrary to the naked
truth of all hiſtories. For it ſhall neuer bee
iuſtified by good hiſtorie, that ſo much as
one ſingle perſon or man (I ſay not one
Country, or one people) was then wrought
or wonne by the Pope, to change his copy
and Lord, or from a ſubiect of the Greeke
Emperours, to turne ſubiect vnto Charlemayne.

Let me ſee but one Towne that
Charlemayne recouered from the Greeke
Emperours, by his right and title to his
Empire in the Weſt: No, the Greeke Emperours
had taken their farwell of the Weſt
Empire long before. And therefore to nick
this vpon the tallie of Pope Leo his Acts,
that hee tooke away the Weſt from the
Greeke Emperour, it is euen as if one
ſhould ſay, that in this age the Pope takes
the Dukedome of Milan from the French
Kings, or the citie of Rome from the Emperours
of Germany, becauſe their predeceſſors
in former ages had beene right
Lords and gouernours of them both. It is
one of the Popes ordinary and ſolemne
practiſes to take away, much after the manner
of his giuing. For as he giueth what he
hath not in his right and power to giue, or
beſtoweth vpon others what is alreadie
their owne: euen ſo he taketh away from
Kings and Emperors the poſſeſſions which
they haue not in preſent hold and poſſeſſion.
After this manner he takes the Weſt
from the Greeke Emperours, when they

hold nothing in the Weſt, and lay no
claime to any citie or towne of the Weſt
Empire. And what ſhall we call this way
of depriuation, but ſpoyling a naked man
of his garments, and killing a man alreadie
dead? True it is, the Imperiall Crowne was
then ſet on Charlemaynes head by Leo the
Pope: did Leo therefore giue him the Empire?
No more then a Biſhop that crownes
a King, at his Royall and ſolemne conſecration
doth giue him the Kingdome. For
ſhal the Pope himſelfe take the Popedome
from the Biſhop of Oſtia as of his gift, becauſe
the crowning of the Pope is an office
of long time peculiar to the Oſtian Biſhop?
It was the cuſtome of Emperours, to be
crowned Kings of Italy by the hands of the
Archbiſhop of Milan: did he therefore giue
the kingdome of Italy to the ſaid Emperours?
And to returne vnto Charlemayne;
If the Pope had conueied the Empire to
him by free and gratious donation, the
Pope doubtleſſe in the ſolemnity of his coronation,
would neuer haue performed
vnto his owne creature, an Emperour of

his owne making, the duties of adoration,
as Ado that liued in the ſame age hath left
it on record:Perfectis laudibus, à pontific
                        •
                      more Principum antiquorum adoratus eſt. 
                  After the ſolemne praiſes ended
(ſaith Ado) the cheife Biſhop honoured him with
adoration, according to the cuſtome of auncient
Princes. The ſame is likewiſe put downe by
Auentine, in the 4. booke of his Annals of
Bauaria.Auentinus Annalium Boiorum lib. 4. poſt haec ab eodem Pontifice vt caeteri veterum Principum, more maiorum adoratus eſt Magnus. The like by the Preſident Fauchet
in his antiquities: and by Mons. Petau
Councellor in the Court of Parliament at
Paris, in his preface before the Chronicles
of Euſebius, Hierome, and Sigebert. It was
therefore the people of Rome that called
this Charles the Great vnto the Imperiall
dignitie, and caſt on him the title of Empeerour.
So teſtifieth Sigebert vpon the
yeere 801.Sigeb. ad an. 801. 
                  All the Romanes with one generall
voice and conſent, ring out acclamations of Imperiall
praiſes to the Emperour, they crowne him
by the hands of Leo the Pope, they giue him the
ſtyle of Caeſar and Auguſtus.
                  Maria. Scotus lib. 3. Marianus Scotus
hath as much in effect:Annalium. 
                  Charles was then called
Auguſtus by the Romanes.
                  Plat. in vita Leon. 3. And ſo Platina.
After the ſolemne ſeruice, Leo declareth and
proclameth Charles Emperour, according to the

publike decree and generall requeſt of the people
of Rome.
                  Auent. Annal. Boio. lib. 4. Imperium transferre iure ſuo in Germanos, Carolum
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      tacito Senatus conſulto plebiſcito
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      d
                        •
                     cernunt. Aventine, and Sigonius in his
4. booke of the Kingdome of Italie witnes
the ſame. Neuertheleſſe to gratifie the L.
Cardinall: Suppoſe Pope Leo diſpoſſeſſed
the Greeke Emperours of the Weſt Empire.
What was the cauſe? what infamous
act had they done? what prophane and irreligious
crime had they committed? Nicephorus
and Irene, who raigned in the
Greeke Empire in Charlemaynes time,
were not reputed by the Pope, or taken for
heretikes. How then? The L. Cardinall
helpeth at a pinch, and putteth vs in minde,
that Conſtantine and Leo, predeceſſors to
the ſaid Emperours, had beene poyſoned
with hereſie, and ſtained with perſecution.
Here then behold an Orthodoxe Prince
depoſed. For what cauſe? for hereſie forſooth,
not in himſelfe but in ſome of his
predeceſſors long before. An admirable
caſe. For I am of a contrary minde, that
he was worthy of double honour, in reſtoring
and ſetting vp the truth againe, which
vnder his predeceſſors had indured oppreſſion,

and ſuffered perſecution. Doubtleſſe
Pope Silueſter was greatly ouerſeene, and
plaied not well the Pope, when he winked
at Conſtantine the Great, and caſt him not
downe from his Imperiall Throne, for the
ſtrange infidelitie and paganiſme of Diocletian,
of Maximian, and Maxentius,
whome Conſtantine ſucceeded in the Empire.
               From this example the L. of Perron paſſeth
to Fulke Archbiſhop of Reims:Examp. 9. pag. 27. by
whome Charles the Simple was threatned
with Excommunication, and refuſing to
continue any longer in the fidelity and allegiance
of a ſubiect. To what purpoſe is
this example? For who can be ignorant,
that all ages haue brought forth turbulent
and ſtirring ſpirits, men altogether forgetfull
of reſpect and obſeruance towards their
Kings, eſpecially when the world finds
them ſhallow and ſimple-witted, like vnto
this Prince? But in this example, where is
there ſo much as one word of the Pope, or
the depoſing of Kings?Examp. 10. pag. 28.
               
               Here the L. Cardinall chops in the example

of Philip 1. King of France, but
mangled, and ſtrangely diſguiſed, as hereafter
ſhall be ſhewed.
               At laſt he leadeth vs to Gregory VII. ſurnamed
Hildebrand,Exam. 11. An. 1076. the ſcourge of Emperours,
the firebrand of warre, the ſcorne of
his age. This Pope, after he had (in the ſpirit
of pride, and in the very height of all audaciouſneſſe)
thundred the ſentence of excommunication
and depoſition, againſt the
Emperour Henry 4. after he had enterpriſed
this act without all precedent example:
after hee had filled all Europe with blood:
this Pope, I ſay, ſunke downe vnder the
weight of his affaires, and died as a fugitiue
at Salerne, ouerwhelmed with diſcontent
and ſorrowe of heart. Here lying at the
point of giuing vp the ghoaſt, calling vnto
him (as it is in Sigebert) a certaine
Cardinall whome hee much fauoured,Sigeb. ad an. 1085.
                  He confeſſeth to God, and Saint Peter, and the
whole Church, that he had beene greatly defectiue
in the Paſtor all charge cōmitted to his care;
and that by the Deuills inſtigation, he had kindled
the fire of Gods wrath and hatred againſt

mankind. Then he ſent his Confeſſor to the Emperour,
and to the whole Church to pray for his
pardon, becauſe hee perceiued that his life was at
an end. Likewiſe Cardinal Benno that liued
in the ſaid Gregories time, doth teſtifie,
That ſo ſoone as he was riſen out of his Chaire to
excommunicate the Emperour from his Cathedrall
ſeate: by the will of God the ſaid Cathedrall
ſeate, new made of ſtrong board or plancke, did
cracke and cleaue into many peices or parts: to manifeſt
how great and terrible ſchiſmes had beene
ſowed againſt the Church of Chriſt, by an excommunication
of ſo dangerous conſequence, pronounced
by the man that had ſit Iudge therein. Now
to bring and alleadge the example of ſuch
a man, who by attempting an act which
neuer any man had the heart or face to attempt
before, hath condemned all his predeceſſors
of cowardiſe, or at leaſt of ignorance;
what is it elſe, but euen to ſend vs to
the ſchoole of mighty robbers, and to ſeeke
to correct and reforme ancient vertues by
late vices.Otho Friſingenſ. in vita Hen. 4. lib. 4. cap. 31. Which Otho Friſingenſis calling
into his owne priuate conſideration, he
durſt freely profeſſe, that he had not reade of

any Emperour before this Henrie the 4. excommunicated
or driuen out of his Imperiall Throne
and Kingdome by the cheife Biſhop of Rome. But
if this quarrell may bee tryed and fought
out with weapons of examples, I leaue any
indifferent reader to iudge what examples
ought in the cauſe to be of cheifeſt authoritie
and weight: whether late examples of
Kings depoſed by Popes, for the moſt part
neuer taking the intended effect; or auncient
examples of Popes actually and effectually
thruſt out of their thrones by Emperous
and Kings.
               The Emperour Conſtantius expelled
Liberius Biſhop of Rome out of the citie,Theo. lib. 2.
baniſhed him as farre as Beroe,Hiſt. cap. 16▪
                   and placed
Foelix in his roome. Indeed Conſtantius
was an Arrian, and therein vſed no leſſe
impious then vniuſt proceeding. Neuertheles
the auncient Fathers of the Church,
do not blame Conſtantius for his hard and
ſharpe dealing with a cheife Biſhop, ouer
whom he had no lawfull power, but onely
as an enemie to the Orthodoxe faith, and
one that raged with extreame rigor of perſecution

againſt innocent beleeuers.
               In the raigne of Valentinian the 1. and
yeare of the Lord 367. the contention between
Damaſus and Vrſicinus competitors
for the Biſhoppricke,Ammia. lib. 27. filled the cittie of
Rome with a bloody ſedition, in which
were wickedly and cruelly murdered 137.
perſons.Decret. diſt. 79. To meete with ſuch turbulent actions,
Honorius made a law extant in the
Decretalls, the words whereof be theſe; If
it ſhall happen henceforth by the temeritie of
competitors, that any two Biſhops be elected to
the See, wee ſtraitly charge and command, that
neither of both ſhall ſit in the ſaid, See. By vertue
of this Law,Platina. the ſame Honorius in the yere
420. expelled Bonifacius and Eulalius,
competitors and Antipopes out of Rome,Sigebertus.
though not long after he reuoked Bonifacius,
and ſettled him in the Papall See.
               Theodoric the Goth King of Italie,Anaſtatius. ſent
Iohn Biſhop of Rome Embaſſador to the
Emperour Iuſtinian,Platina. called him home againe,
Lib. Pontiſi. and clapt him vp in the cloſe priſon,Diaconus.
where hee ſtarued to death. By the ſame
King, Peter Biſhop of Altine was diſpatched

to Rome, to heare the cauſe and examine
the proceſſe of Pope Symmachus,
then indited and accuſed of ſundry crimes.
               King Theodatus about the yeare 537.
had the ſeruice of Pope Agapetus, as his
Embaſſadour to the Emperour Iuſtinian,
vpon a treatie of peace. Agapetus dying
in the time of that ſeruicc, Syluerius is
made Biſhop by Theodatus. Not long after,
Syluerius is driuen out by Beliſarius
the Emperour his Lieutenant, and ſent into
baniſhment. After Syluerius next ſucceedeth
Vigilius, who with currant coine
purchaſed the Popedome of Beliſarius.
The Emperour Iuſtinian ſends for Vigilius
to Conſtantinople, and receiues him there
with great honour. Soone after, the Emperour
takes offence at his freeneſſe in ſpeaking
his mind, commands him to be beaten
with ſtripes in manner to death, and
with a roape about his necke to be drawne
through the city like a theife, as Platina relates
the hiſtorie. Nicephorus in his 26.
booke, and 17. chapter, comes very neere
the ſame relation.
               
                  
The Emperour Conſtantius, in the yere
654. cauſed Pope Martin to be bound with
chains,
                     
                        〈…〉
                      Sigeberius. & baniſhed him into Cherſoneſus,
where he ended his life. The Popes in that
age writing to the Emperors, vſed none but
ſubmiſſiue tearmes, by way of moſt humble
ſupplications; made profeſſion of bowing
the knee before their ſacred Maieſties,
and of executing their commaunds with
entire obedience; payed to the Emperours
twenty pound weight of gold for their Inueſtiture;
which tribute was afterward releaſed
and remitted,Iuſtin. Authent. 123. cap. 3. by Conſtantine the
Bearded, to Pope Agatho, in the yere 679.
as I haue obſerued in an other place.
               Nay further, euen when the power and
riches of the Popes was growne to great
height, by the moſt profuſe and immenſe
munificence of Charlemayne and Lewis
his ſonne; the Emperours of the Weſt did
not relinquiſh and giue ouer the making
and vnmaking of Popes, as they ſaw cauſe.
Pope 'Adrian 1. willingly ſubmitted his
necke to this yoke: and made this Law to
be paſſed in a Council, that in Charlemain

ſhould reſt all right and power for the
Popes election, and for the gouernement
of the Papall See. This Conſtitution is inſerted
in the Decretals, Diſt. 63. Can.Note that in the ſame Diſt. the Cā. of Greg. 4. beginning with Cum Hadrianus ſecundus, is falſe and ſuppoſititious becauſe Greg. 4. wa
                        •
                      Pope long before Hadri. 2. 
                  Hadrianus,
and was confirmed by the practiſe
of many yeeres.
               In the yeare of the L. 963. the Emperour
Otho tooke away the Popedom from
Iohn 13. and placed Leo 8. in his roome.
In like manner, Iohn 14. Gregorie 5. and
Silueſter 2. were ſeated in the Papal Throne
by the Othos.
               The Emperour Henrie 2. in the yeere
1007. depoſed three Popes, namely, Benedict
9. Silueſter 3. and Gregorie 6. whom
Platina doth not ſticke to call,Tria tcterrima monſtra. three moſt
deteſtable and vile monſters. This cuſtome
continued, this practiſe ſtood in force for
diuers ages, euen vntill the times of Gregorie
7. by whome the whole Weſt was
toſſed and turmoiled with lamentable
warres, which plagued the world, and the
Empire by name with intolerable troubles
and miſchiefes. For after the ſaid Gregorian
wars, the Empire fell from bad to worſe,

and ſo went on to decay, till Emperours at
laſt were driuen to begge, and receiue the
Imperiall Crowne of the Pope.
               The Kingdome of France met not with
ſo rude entreatie, but was dealt withall by
courſes of a milder temper. Gregorie 4. about
the yere of the Lord 832. was the firſt
Pope that perſwaded himſelfe to vſe the
cenſure of Excommunication againſt a
King of France. This Pope hauing a hand
in the troubleſome factions of the Realme,
was nothing backward to ſide with the
ſonnes of Lewis, ſurnamed the Courteous,
by wicked conſpiracy entring into a deſperate
courſe and complot againſt Lewis
their owne Father: as witneſſeth Sigebert
in theſe words, Pope Gregorie comming into
France, ioyned himſelfe to the ſonnes againſt the
Emperour their Father.
                  Bo
                        •
                     he
                        •
                     . Decret. Eccleſ. Gallican. lib. 2. tit. 16. But Annals of the
verie ſame times; and he that furbuſhed Aimonius,
a religious of S. Benedicts order, do
teſtifie, that all the Biſhops of France fell
vpon this reſolution; by no meanes to reſt
in the Popes pleaſure, or to giue any place
vnto his deſigne: and contrariwiſe, In

caſe the Pope ſhould proceed to excommunication
of their King, he ſhould returne out of
Fraunce to Rome an excommunicate perſon himſelf.
The Chronicle of S. Denis hath words
in this forme: The Lord Apoſtolicall returned
anſwer, that he was not come into Fraunce for any
other purpoſe, but onely to excommunicate the
King and his Biſhops, if they would be in any
ſort oppoſite vnto the ſonnes of Lewis, or diſobedient
vnto the will and pleaſure of his Holineſſe.
The Prelats enformed hereof made anſwer, that
in this caſe they would neuer yeeld obedience to
the Excommunication of the ſaid Biſhops: becauſe
it was contrarie to the authority and aduiſe
of the auncient Canons.
               
               After theſe times, Pope Nicholas, 1. depriued
King Lotharius of communion (for
in thoſe times not a word of depoſing) to
make him repudiate or quit Valdrada, and
to reſume or take again Thetberga his former
wife. The articles framed by the
French vpon this point, are to be found in
the writings of Hincmarus Archbiſhop
of Reims, and are of this purport; that in
the iudgement of men both learned and

wiſe, it is an ouerruled caſe, that as the King
whatſoeuer he ſhall doe, ought not by his
own Biſhops to be excommunicated, euen
ſo no forraine Biſhop hath power to ſit for
his Iudge: becauſe the King is to be ſubiect
onely vnto God, and his Imperiall authoritie,
who alone had the al-ſufficient power
to ſettle him in his Kingdome. Moreouer,
the Clergie addreſſed letters of anſwer
vnto the ſame Pope, full of ſtinging and
bitter tearms, with ſpeaches of great ſcorne
and contempt, as they are ſet downe by Auentine
in his Annals of Bauaria,Annal. Boio. lib. 4. not forbearing
to call him theife, wolfe, and tyrant.
               
               When Pope Hadrian tooke vpon him
like a Lord, to commaund Charles the
Bald vpon paine of interdiction, that hee
ſhould ſuffer the Kingdome of Lotharius
to be fully and entirely conueied and conferred
vpon Lewis his ſonne; the ſame
Hinemarus, a man of great authoritie and
eſtimation in that age, ſent his letters containing
ſundrie remonſtrances touching
that ſubiect. Among other matters thus he

writeth, The Eccleſiaſtics and Seculars of the
Kingdom aſſembled at Reims, haue affirmed and
now do affirme by way of reproach, vpbrading, &
exprobation, that neuer was the like mandate ſent
before from the See of Rome to any of our predeceſſors.
And a little after: The cheife Biſhops
of the Apoſtolike See, or any other Biſhops of the
greateſt authoritie and holineſſe, neuer withdrew
themſelues from the preſence, from the reuerend
ſalutation, or from the conference of Emperours
and Kings, whether hereticks, or ſchiſmiticks
and Tyrants: As Conſtantius the Arrian, Julianus
the Apoſtata, and Maxmius the tyrant. And
yet a little after; Wherefore if the Apoſtolicke
Lord be minded to ſeeke peace, let him ſeeke it ſo,
that hee ſtirre no brawles, and breed no quarrels.
For we are no ſuch babes to beleeue, that wee can
or euer ſhall attaine to Gods Kingdome, vnleſſe
we receiue him for our King in earth, whom God
himſelfe recommendeth to vs from heauen. It is
added by Hincmarus in the ſame place,
that by the ſaid Biſhops and Lords Temporall,
ſuch threatning words were blowne
forth, as he is afraid once to ſpeake and vtter.
As for the King himſelfe, what reckoning

he made of the Popes mandates, it appeareth
by the Kings owne letters addreſſed
to Pope Hadrianus, as we may reade euery
where in the Epiſtles of Hincmarus.
For there, after King Charles hath taxed
and challenged the Pope of pride, and hit
him in the teeth with a ſpirit of vſurpation,
he breaketh out into theſe words: What hell
hath caſt vp this lawe ſo croſſe and prepoſterous?
what infernall gulph hath diſgorged this law out
of the darkeſt and obſcureſt dennes? a law quite
contrarie and altogether repugnant vnto the beaten
way ſhewed vs in the holy Scriptures, &c.
Yea, he flatly and peremptorily forbids the
Pope, except he meane or deſire to be recompenced
with diſhonour and contempt,
to ſend any more the like mandates, either
to himſelfe, or to his Biſhops.
               Vnder the raigne of Hugo Capetus and
Robert his ſonne, a Council now extant in
all mens hands, was held and celebrated at
Reims by the Kings authority. There Arnulphus
Biſhop of Orleans, then Prolocutor
and Speaker of the Council, calls the
Pope Antichriſt, and lets not alſo to paint

him forth like a monſter: as well for the deformed
and vgly vices of that vnholy See,
which then were in their exaltation, as alſo
becauſe the Pope then won with preſents,
and namely with certaine goodly horſes,
then preſented to his Holineſſe, tooke part
againſt the King, with Arnulphus Biſhop
of Reims, then diſpoſſed of his Paſtorall
charge.
               When Philip 1. had repudiated his wife
Bertha, daughter to the Earle of Holland,
and in her place had alſo taken to wife Bertrade
the wife of Fulco Earle of Aniou yet
being aliue; he was excommunicated, and
his Kingdom interdicted by Vrbanus then
Pope, (though he was then bearded with
an Antipope) as the L. Cardinal here giueth
vs to vnderſtand. But his Lordſhip
hath skipt ouer two principall points recorded
in the hiſtorie. The firſt is, that Philip
was not depoſed by the Pope: whereupon
it is to be inferred, that in this paſſage there
is nothing materiall to make for the Popes
power againſt a Kings Throne and Scepter.
The other point is, that by the cenſures

of the Pope, the courſe of obedience due
to the King before was not interrupted,
nor the King diſauowed, refuſed, or diſclaimed:
but on the contrary, that Iuo of Chartres
taking Pope Vrbanus part, was puniſhed
for his preſumption, diſpoyled of his
eſtate, and kept in priſon: whereof hee
makes complaint himſelfe in his 19. and 20.
Epiſtles. The L. Cardinal beſides, in my
vnderſtanding, for his Maſters honour,
ſhould haue made no words of interdicting
the whole Kingdome. For when the
Pope, to giue a King chaſtiſement, doth interdict
his Kingdome, he makes the people
to beare the puniſhment of the Kings offence.
For during the time of interdiction,
the Church doores through the whole
Kingdome are kept continually ſhut and
lockt vp: publike ſeruice is intermitted in
all places: bels euery where ſilent: Sacraments
not adminiſtred to the people: bodies
of the dead ſo proſtituted and abandoned,
that none dares burie the ſaid bodies
in holy ground. More, it is beleeued,
that a man dying vnder the curſe of the interdict,

(without ſome ſpeciall indulgence
or priuiledge) is for euer damned and adiudged
to eternall puniſhments, as one
that dyeth out of the communion of the
Church. Put caſe then the interdict holdeth
and continueth for many yeares together;
alas, how many millions of poore
ſoules are damned, and goe to hell for an
others offence? For what can, or what may
the faltleſſe and innocent people doe withall,
if the King will repudiate his wife, and
ſhe yet liuing, ioyne himſelfe in matrimonie
to an other?
               The Lord Cardinall after Philip the 1.
produceth Philippus Auguſtus,Examp. 12. who hauing
renounced his wife Ingeberga daughter
to the King of Denmarke, and marrying
with Agnes daughter to the Duke
of Morauia, was by Pope Innocent the
third interdicted himſelfe and his whole
Kingdome. But his Lordſhippe was not
pleaſed to inſert withall, what is auerred
in the Chronicle of Saint Denis: that
Pope Celeſtinus 3. ſent forth two Legats
at once vpon this errand:Bochei. pag. 320. 
                  Who being come into

to the aſſemblie and generall Council of all the
French Prelats, became like dumbe dogs that can
not barke, ſo as they could not bring the ſeruice
which they had vndertaken to any good paſſe, becauſe
they ſtood in a bodily feare of their owne
hydes. Not long after, the Cardinal of Capua
was in the like taking: For he durſt not bring the
Realme within the limits of the interdict, before
he was got out of the limits of the Kingdome.
The King herewith incenſed, thruſt all the Prelates
that had giuen conſent vnto theſe proceedings
out of their Sees, confiſcated their goods,
&c. To the ſame effect is that which wee
reade in Math. Paris. After the Pope had
giuen his Maieſty to vnderſtand by the
Cardinal of Anagnia, that his Kingdome
ſhould be interdicted, vnleſſe hee would
be reconciled to the King of England▪ the
King returned the Pope this anſwer, that he
was not in any ſort afraid of the Popes ſentence,
for as much as it could not bee
grounded vpon any equity of the cauſe:
and added withall, that it did no way appertain
vnto the Church of Rome to ſentence Kings,
eſpecially the King of Fraunce. And this was

done, ſaith Iohannes Tilius Regiſter in
Court of Parliament at Paris, by the counſell
of the French Barons.
               
               Moſt notable is the example of Philip
the Faire, and hits the bird in the right eie.
In the yeere 1032. the Pope diſpatched the
Archbiſhop of Narbona with mandates into
France, commaunding the King to releaſe
the Biſhop of Apamia then detained
in priſon, for contumelious words tending
to the Kings defamation, and ſpoken to the
Kings owne head. In very deede this Pope
had conceiued a ſecret grudge, and no light
diſpleaſure againſt King Philip before:
namely, becauſe the King had taken vpon
him the collation of benefices, and other
Eccleſiaſticall dignities. Vpon which occaſion
the Pope ſent letters to the King of this
tenour and ſtyle: Feare God, and keepe his
commaundements: We would haue thee knowe,
that in ſpirituall and temporall cauſes thou art
ſubiect vnto our ſelfe: that collating of benefices
and prebends doth not in any ſort appertaine to
thy office and place: that, in caſe as keeper of the
ſpiritualties, thou haue the cuſtodie of benefices

and prebends in thy hand when they become void,
thou ſhalt by ſequeſtration reſerue the fruites of
the ſame, to the vſe and benefit of the next incumbents
and ſucceſſors: and in caſe thou haſt
heretofore collated any, we ordaine the ſaid collations
to bee meerely void: and ſo farre as herein
thou haſt proceeded to the fact, we reuoke the ſaid
collations. We hold them for hereticks whoſoeuer
are not of this beleefe. A Legate comes to
Paris, and brings theſe brauing letters: By
ſome of the Kings faithful ſeruants they are
violently ſnatched and pulled out of the
Legates hands: by the Earle of Artois they
are caſt into the fire. The good King anſwers
the Pope, and payes him in as good
coyne as he had ſent. Philip by the grace of
God King of the French, to Boniface calling and
bearing himſelfe the Soueraigne Biſhop, little
greeting or none at all. May thy exceeding ſottiſhneſſe
vnderſtand, that in temporall cauſes we
are not ſubiect vnto any mortall and earthly
creature: that collating of benefices and prebends,
by Regall right appertaineth to our office and
place: that appropriating their fruites when they
become voide, belongeth to our ſelfe alone during

their vacancie: that all collations by vs heretofore
made, or to be made hereafter, ſhall ſtand in force:
that in the validitie and vertue of the ſaid collations,
we will euer couragiouſly defend and maintaine,
all Incumbents and poſſeſſors of benefices
and prebends ſo by vs collated. We hold them all
for ſots and ſenſeleſſe, whoſoeuer are not of this
beleefe. The Pope incenſed herewith excommunicates
the King: but no man dares
publiſh that cenſure, or become bearer
thereof. The King notwithſtanding the
ſaid proceedings of the Pope, aſſembles
his Prelates, Barons, and Knights at Paris:
askes the whole aſſembly, of whome they
hold their Fees, with all other the Temporalties
of the Church. They make anſwer
with one voice, that in the ſaid matters they
diſclaime the Pope, and know none other
Lord beſide his Maieſtie. Meane while the
Pope worketh with Germanie and the
Lowe Countries, to ſtirre them vp againſt
France. But Philip ſendeth William of Nogaret
into Italy. William by the direction
and aide of Sciarra Columnenſis, takes the
Pope at Anagnia, mounts him vpon a

leane ill-fauoured iade, carries him priſoner
to Rome; where ouercome with choller,
anguiſh, and great indignation, hee
takes his laſt leaue of the Popedome and
his life. All this notwithſtanding, the King
preſently after, from the ſucceſſors of Boniface
receiues very ample and gratious
Bulls, in which the memorie of all the former
paſſages and actions is vtterly aboliſhed.
Extrauag. Witneſſe the Epiſtle of Clement 5.
wherein this King is honoured with prayſes,
Meruit. for a pious and religious Prince, and his
Kingdom is reſtored to the former eſtate.
In that age the French Nobilitie carried other
manner of ſpirits, then the moderne
and preſent Nobilitie doe: I meane thoſe
by whome the L. Cardinal was applauded
and aſſiſted in his Oration. Yea, in thoſe
former times the Prelates of the Realme
ſtood better affected towards their King,
then the L. Cardinal himſelfe now ſtandeth:
who could finde none other way to
dally with, and to ſhift off this pregnant
example, but by plaine gloſing, that hereſie
and Apoſtaſie was no ground of that

queſtion, or ſubiect of that controuerſie.
Wherein hee not onely condemnes the
Pope, as one that proceeded againſt Philip
without a iuſt cauſe and good ground; but
likewiſe giues the Pope the lie, who, in his
goodly letters but a little aboue recited,
hath enrowled Philip in the liſt of heretiks.
He ſaith moreouer, that indeed the knot of
the queſtion was touching the Popes pretence,
in challenging to himſelfe the temporall
Soueraingntie of France, that is to
ſay, in qualifying himſelfe King of France.
But indeed and indeede no ſuch matter to
be found. His whole pretence was the collating
of benefices, and to pearch aboue
the King to crowe ouer his Crowne in
Temporall cauſes. At which pretence his
Holineſſe yet aimeth, ſtill attributing and
and challenging to himſelfe plenary power
to depoſe the King. Now if the L. Cardinal
ſhall yet proceede to cauill, that Boniface
8. was taken by the French for an vſurper,
and no lawfull Pope, but for one that crept
into the Papacy by fraud and ſymonie; hee
muſt bee pleaſed to ſet downe poſitiuely

who was Pope, ſeeing that Boniface then
ſate not in the Papall chaire. To conclude,
If hee that creepeth and ſtealeth into the
Papacie by ſymonie, by canuaſes or labouring
of ſuffrages vnder hand, or by bribery,
be not lawfull Pope; I dare bee bold to
profeſſe, there will hardly bee found two
lawfull Popes in the three laſt ages.
               Pope Benedict in the yeare 1408. being
in choller with Charles 6. becauſe Charles
had bridled and curbed the gainefull exactions
and extorſions of the Popes Court,See the treatiſe of Charles du Moulin cō
                     trà paruas Datas, wherein he reporteth a notable Decree of the Court vnder Charles 6.
by which the Realme of France had been
exhauſted of their treaſure, ſent an excommunicatorie
Bull into Fraunce, againſt
Charles the King, and all his Princes. The
Vniuerſitie of Paris made requeſt or motion
that his Bull might be mangled, and
Pope Benedict himſelfe, by ſome called
Petrus de Luna, might be declared heretike,
ſchiſmatike,
                  Theodoric. 
                  and perturber of the peace.
                  N
                        •
                     emenſ. in nemore vnion. Tract. 6. & ſomnium viridarij. The
ſaid Bull was mangled and rent in pieces,
according to the petition of the Vniuerſity,
by Decree of Court vpon the 10. of Iune,
1408. Tenne dayes after, the Court riſing

at eleuen in the morning, two Bul-bearers
of the ſaid excōmuncaitorie cenſure vnderwent
ignominious puniſhment vpon the
Palace or great Hall ſtayres. From thence
were lead to the Lovure in ſuch manner as
they had beene brought from thence before:
drawen in two tumbrells, cladde in
coates of painted linnen, wore paper-mytres
on their heads, were proclaimed with
ſound of trumpet, and euery where diſgraced
with publike deriſion. So little reckoning
was made of the Popes thundering canons
in thoſe daies. And what would they
haue done, if the ſaid Buls had imported
ſentence of depoſition againſt King
Charles?
               The French Church aſſembled at
Tours in the yeere 1510. decreed that Lewis
XII. might with ſafe conſcience contemne
the abuſiue Bulls, and vniuſt cenſures of
Pope Julius the II. and by armes might withſtand
the Popes vſurpations, in caſe hee
ſhould proceed to excommunicate or depoſe
the King. More, by a Council holden
at Piſa, this Lewis declared the Pope to be

fallen from the Popedome, and coyned
crowns with a ſtamp of this inſcription, I wil
deſtroy the name of Babylon. To this the L. of
Perron makes anſwer, that all this was done
by the French, as acknowledging theſe iars
to haue ſprung not from the fountaine of
Religion, but from paſſion of ſtate. Wherin
he condemneth Pope Iulius, for giuing
ſo great ſcope vnto his publike cenſures, as
to ſerue his ambition, and not rather to aduance
Religion. Hee ſecretly teacheth vs
beſides, that when the Pope vndertakes to
depoſe the King of France, then the French
are to ſit as Iudges concerning the lawfulneſſe
or vnlawfulneſſe of the cauſe; and in
caſe they ſhall finde the cauſe to be vnlawfull,
then to diſannull his iudgements, and
to ſcoffe at his thunderbolts.
               Iohn d' Albret King of Nauarre, whoſe
Realme was giuen by the foreſaid Pope to
Ferdinand King of Arragon, was alſo wrapped
and entangled with ſtrict bands of depoſition.
Now if the French had been touched
with no better feeling of affection to
their King, then the ſubiects of Nauarre

were to the Nauarrois; doubtleſſe France
had ſought a newe Lord, by vertue of the
Popes (as the L. Cardinal himſelfe doth acknowledge
and confeſſe) vniuſt ſentence.
But behold, to make the ſaid ſentence againſt
Iohn d' Albret ſeeme the leſſe contrary
to equity, the L. Cardinal pretends,
the Popes donation was not indeede the
principall cauſe,Pag. 5
                        •
                     . howſoeuer Ferdinand
himſelfe made it his pretence. But his Lor.
giues this for the principall cauſe: that Iohn
d' Albret had quitted his alliance made
with condition; that in caſe the Kings of
Nauarre ſhould infringe the ſaid alliance,
and breake the league, then the Kingdome
of Nauarre ſhould returne to the Crowne
of Arragon. This condition, between Kings
neuer made, and without all ſhew of probabilitie,
ſerueth to none other purpoſe
from the Cardinals mouth, but onely to inſinuate
and worke a perrſwaſion in his
King, that he hath no right nor lawfull pretenſion
to the Crowne of Nauarre: and
whatſoeuer hee nowe holdeth in the ſaid
Kingdome of Nauarre, is none of his owne,

but by vſurpation and vnlawfull poſſeſſion.
Thus his Lordſhippe French-borne,
makes himſelfe an Aduocate for the Spaniſh
King, againſt his owne King, and
King of the French: who ſhall bee faine,
as he ought (if this Aduocats plea may take
place) to draw his title and ſtyle of King of
Nauarre out of his Royall titles, and to acknowledge
that all the great endeauours
of his predeceſſors to recouer the ſaid
Kingdome, were diſhonourable and vniuſt.
Is it poſſible, that in the very heart
and head Citie of France, a ſpirit & tongue
ſo licentious can be brooked? What, ſhall
ſo great blaſphemy (as it were) of the Kings
freehold, be powred forth in ſo honourable
an aſſembly, without puniſhment or fyne?
what, without any contradiction for the
Kings right, and on the Kings behalfe? I
may perhaps confeſſe the indignitie might
bee the better borne, and the pretence aledged
might paſſe for a poore excuſe, if it
ſerued his purpoſe neuer ſo little. For how
doth all this touch or come neere the queſtion?
in which the Popes vſurpation in the

depoſing of Kings, and the reſolution of
the French in reſiſting this tyrannicall practiſe,
is the proper iſſue of the cauſe: both
which points are neuer a whit more of the
leſſe conſequence and importance, howſoeuer
Ferdinand in his owne iuſtification
ſtood vpon the foreſaid pretence. Thus
much is confeſſed, and we aske no more:
Pope Iulius tooke the Kingdome from the
one, and gaue it vnto the other: the French
thereupon reſiſted the Pope, and declared
him to bee fallen from the Papacie.
               This noble ſpirit and courage of the
French, in maintaining the dignitie and
honour of their Kings Crownes, bredde
thoſe auncient cuſtomes, which in the ſequence
of many ages haue beene obſerued
and kept in vſe. This for one: That no Legate
of the Pope, nor any of his reſcripts
nor mandates,Pag. 26. are admitted and receiued
in France,Niſi de conſenſu Regis Chriſtianiſſimi. 
                  without licence from the King: and
vnleſſe the Legate impart his faculties to
the Kings Atturney Generall, to be peruſed
and verified in Court of Parliament:
where they are to be tyed by certaine modifications

& reſtrictions, vnto ſuch points
as are not derogatorie from the Kings
right, from the liberties of the Church, and
from the ordinances of the Kingdome.Bochellus.
When Cardinal Balva, contrary to this ancient
forme, entred France in the yeare
1484. and there without leaue of the King
did execute the Office, and ſpeed certaine
Acts of the Popes Legat; the Court vpon
motion made by the Kings Atturney Generall,
decreed a Commiſſion, to be informed
againſt him by two Councellors of
the ſaid Court, and inhibited his further
proceeding to vſe any faculty or power of
the Popes Legate, vpon paine of beeing
proclaimed rebell.
               In the yeare 1561. Iohannes Tanquerellus
Batchelor in Diuinitie, by order of the
Court was condemned to make open confeſſion,
Indiſcretè ac inconſideratè. that hee had indiſcreetly and raſhly
without conſideration defended this propoſition,
The Pope is the Vicar of Chriſt, a Monarke
that hath power both ſpirituall and ſecular, and
he may depriue Princes, which rebel againſt his
cōmandements, of their dignities. Which propoſition,

howſoeuer he proteſted that he had
propounded the ſame onely to be argued,
                  Doctrinaliter tantùm & non iuridicè. 
                  and
not iudicially to be determined in the affirmatiue,
Tanquerellus neuertheleſſe was compelled
openly to recant. Here the L. Cardinal
anſwers; The hiſtorie of Tanquerellus
is from the matter, becauſe his propoſition
treateth neither of hereſie nor of infidelitie:
but I anſwer, the ſaid propoſition
treateth of both, for as much as it maketh
mention of diſobedience to the Pope. For
I ſuppoſe he will not deny, that whoſoeuer
ſhall ſtand out in hereſie, contrary to the
Popes monitorie proceedings, hee ſhall
ſhewe but poore and ſimple obedience to
the Pope. Moreouer, the caſe is cleare by
the former examples, that no Pope will ſuffer
his power to caſt downe Kings, to bee
reſtrained vnto the cauſe of hereſie and infidelitie.
               In the heate of the laſt warres, raiſed by
that holy-prophane League, admonitory
Buls were ſent by Pope Gregory 14. from
Rome, Anno 1591. By theſe Bulls King
Henry 4. as an heretike and relaps, was declared

incapable of the Crowne of France,
and his Kingdome was expoſed to hauock
and ſpoile. The Court of Parliament beeing
aſſembled at Tours the 5. of Auguſt,
decreed the ſaid admonitorie Bulls to bee
cancelled, torne in peices, and caſt into a
great fire by the hand of the publike executioner.
The Arreſt it ſelfe or Decree is of
this tenor: The Court duely pondering and approouing
the concluding and vnanſwearable reaſons
of the Kings Atturney General, hath declared,
and by theſe preſent doth declare, the admonitorie
Bulls giuen at Rome the 1. of March 1591.
to be of no validitie, abuſiue, ſeditious, damnable,
full of impietie and impoſtures, contrarie to
the holie decrees, rights, franchiſes, and liberties
of the French Church: doth ordaine the Copies of
the ſaid Bulls, ſealed with the ſeale of Marſilius
Landrianus, and ſigned Septilius Lamprius, to be
rent in peices by the publike executioner, and by
him to be burnt in a great fire to be made for ſuch
purpoſe, before the great gates of the common
Hall or Palace, &c. Then euen then the L.
of Perron was firme for the better part, and
ſtood for his King againſt Gregorie the

Pope, notwithſtanding the crime of hereſie
pretended againſt Henrie his Lord.
               All the former examples by vs alleadged,
are drawne out of the times after
Schooles of Diuinitie were eſtabliſhed in
France. For I thought good to bound my
ſelfe within thoſe dooles and limits of time,
which the L. Card. himſelfe hath ſet. Who
goeth not ſincerely to worke and in good
earneſt, where he telleth vs there bee three
inſtances (as if we had no more) obiected
againſt Papall power, to remooue Kings
out of their chaires of State: by name, the
example of Philip the Faire,
                  Pag. 47. 
                  of Lewis XII. and
of Tanquerellus. For in very truth all the former
examples by vs produced, are no leſſe
pregnant and euident, howſoeuer the L.
Cardinal hath beene pleaſed to conceale
them all for feare of hurting his cauſe.
               Nay, France euen in the dayes of her ſoreſt
ſeruitude, was neuer vnfurniſhed of
great Diuines, by whom this vſurped powof
the Pope, ouer the Temporalties and
Crownes of Kings, hath been vtterly miſliked
and condemned.
               
                  
Robert Earle of Flanders was commanded
by Pope Paſchall 2. to perſecute with
fire and ſword the Clergie of Leige, who
then adhered and ſtood to the cauſe of the
Emperour Henry 4. whom the Pope had
ignominiouſly depoſed. Robert by the
Popes order and command, was to handle
the Clergie of Leige in like ſort as before
he had ſerued the Clergy of Cambray, who
by the ſaid Earle had beene cruelly ſtript
both of goods and life. The Pope promiſed
the ſaid Earle and his army pardon of
their ſinnes for the ſaid execution. The
Clergie of Leige addreſſed anſwer to the
Pope at large. They cried out vpon the
Church of Rome, and called her Babylon.
Told the Pope home, that God hath commanded
to giue vnto Ceſar that which is
Ceſars: that euery ſoule muſt be ſubiect vnto
the ſuperiour powers: that no man is exempted
out of this precept: and that euery
oath of allegiance is to be kept inuiolable:
yea, that hereof they themſelues are not ignorant,
in as much as they by a new ſchiſm,
and newe traditions, making a ſeparation

and rent of the prieſthood from the Kingdome,
doe promiſe to abſolue of periurie,
ſuch as haue perfidiouſly forſworne themſelues
againſt their King. And whereas by
way of deſpight and in opprobrious manner,
they were excommunicated by the
Pope, they gaue his Holines to vnderſtand,
that Dauids heart had vttered a good matter,
but Paſchals heart had ſpewed vp ſordid and railing
words, like old baudes and ſpinſters or webſters
of linnen, when they ſcold and brawle one
with an other. Finally, they reiected his Papall
excommunication, as a ſentence giuen
without diſcretion. This was the voice and
free ſpeech of that Clergie, in the life time
of their noble Emperour. But after he was
thruſt out of the Empire by the rebellion of
his owne ſonne, inſtigated and ſtirred vp
thereunto by the Popes perſwaſion and
practiſe, and was brought vnto a miſerable
death; it is no matter of wonder, that for
the ſafegard of their life, the ſaid Clergie
were driuen to ſue vnto the Pope for their
pardon.
               Hildebert Biſhop of Caenomanum vpon

the riuer of Sartre,Bibliotheca Patrum. liuing vnder the raigne
of King Philip the firſt, affirmeth in his Epiſtles
40. and 75. that Kings are to be admoniſhed
and inſtructed,Tom. 3. rather then puniſhed: to be
dealt with by counſell, rather then by commaund,
by doctrine and inſtruction, rather then by correction.
For no ſuch ſword belongeth to the Church,
becauſe the ſword of the Church is Eccleſiaſticall
diſcipline,D
                           •
                         co
                           •
                        ſid
                           •
                        r ib. 1. cap. 6. and nothing elſe. Bernard writeth to
Pope Eugenius after this manner: Whoſoeuer
they be that are of this mind and opinion, ſhal
neuer be able to make proofe, that any one of the
Apoſtles did euer ſit in qualitie of Iudge or Diuider
of lands. I reade where they haue ſtood to be
iudged, but neuer where they ſate downe to giue
iudgement. Againe, Your authoritie ſtretcheth
vnto crimes, not vnto poſſeſſions: becauſe you
haue receiued the keies of the kingdome of heauen,
not in regard of poſſeſſions, but of crimes, to
keepe all that pleade by couin or colluſion, and not
lawfull poſſeſſors, out of the heauenly kingdome.
A little after: Theſe baſe things of the earth
are iudged by the Kings and Princes of this
world: wherefore doe you thruſt your ſickle into
an others harueſt? wherefore doe you incraach

and intrude vpon an others limits? Elſewhere.
The Apoſtles are directly forbid to make themſelues
Lords and rulers.Lib. 2. cap. 6. Goe thou then, and beeing
a Lord vſurpe Apoſtleſhip, or beeing an Apoſtle
vſurpe Lordſhip. If thou needes wilt haue
both, doubtleſſe thou ſhalt haue neither.
               
               Iohannes Maior Doctor of Paris:Diſt. 24. quaeſt. 3. 
                  The
Soueraigne Biſhop hath no temporall authoritie
ouer Kings. The reaſon. Becauſe it followes (the
contrarie being once granted) that Kings are the
Popes vaſſals. Now let other men iudge,
whether hee that hath power to dipoſſeſſe
Kings of all their Temporalties, hath not
likewiſe authoritie ouer their Temporalties.
               The ſame Author:Comment. in l. 4. Sent. 
                  The Pope hath no manner
of title ouer the French or Spaniſh Kings in
temporall matters.
                  Diſt. 24. fol. 214. Where it is further added,
That Pope Innocent 3. hath beene pleaſed
to teſtifie, that Kings of France in Temporall
cauſes doe acknowledge no ſuperiour.
For ſo the Pope excuſed himſelfe to a certaine
Lord of Montpellier, who in ſtead of
ſuing to the King, had petitioned to the
Pope for a diſpenſation for his baſtard.

                  But perhaps (as be ſpeaketh) it will be alledged
out of the gloſſe, that he acknowledgeth no ſuperiour
by fact, and yet ought by right. But I tell
you the gloſſe is an Aurelian gloſſe, which marres
the text. Amongſt other arguments, Maior
brings this for one: This opinion miniſtreth
matter vnto Popes, to take away an others Empire
by force and violence: which the Pope ſhall
neuer bring to paſſe, as we reade of Boniface 8.
againſt Philip the Faire. Saith beſides, That
from hence proceede warres, in time of which many
outragious miſcheifes are done, and that Gerſon
calls them egregious flatterers by whom ſuch
opinion is maintained. In the ſame place Maior
denies that Childeric was depoſed by
Pope Zacharie: The word, He depoſed, ſaith
Maior, is not ſo to be vnderſtood, as it is taken at
the firſt bluſh or ſight; but he depoſed, is thus expounded
in the gloſſe, Hee gaue his conſent vnto
thoſe by whom he was depoſed.
               
               Iohn of Paris:De poteſt. Regia & Papali. cap. 10. 
                  Were it graunted that Chriſt
was armed with Temporall power, yet he committed
no ſuch power to Peter. A little after: The
power of Kings is the higheſt power vpon earth:
in Temporall cauſes it hath no ſuperiour power aboue

it ſelfe, no more then the Pope hath in ſpirituall
matters. This author ſaith indeede, the
Pope hath power to excommunicate the
King; but he ſpeaketh not of any power in
the Pope to put down the King from his regall
dignity and authority. He onely ſaith,
When a Prince is once excommunicated,
he may accidentally or by occaſion be depoſed:
becauſe his precedent excommunication,
incites the people to diſarme him of
all ſecular dignity & power. The ſame Iohn
on the other ſide holdeth opinion; that in
the Emperour there is inueſted a power to depoſe
the Pope, in caſe the Pope ſhall abuſe his power.
               
               Almainus Doctor of the Sorbonic
ſchoole:Almain. de poteſt. Eccl. & Laica. 
                  Jt is eſſentiall in the Laye-power to inflict
ciuill puniſhment,Queſt. 2. cap. 8. as death, baniſhment, and
priuation or loſſe of goods. But according to diuine
inſtitution, the power Eccleſiaſticall can lay
no ſuch puniſhment vpon delinquents:De dominio naturali ciuili & Eccl. 5. vlt. pars. nay more,
not lay in priſon, as to ſome Doctors it ſeemeth
probable: but ſtretcheth and reacheth onely to ſpirituall
puniſhment, as namely to excommunication:
all other puniſhments inflicted by the ſpirituall
power, are meerely by the Lawe poſitiue. If

then Eccleſiaſticall power by Gods Lawe
hath no authoritie to depriue any priuate
man of his goods; how dares the Pope and
his flatterers build their power to depriue
Kings of their ſcepters vpon the word of
God?
               The ſame author in an other place: Be it
graunted that Conſtantine had power to giue the
Empire vnto the Pope;Quaeſt. 1. de poteſt. Eccleſ. & laic. c. 12. & 14. yet is it not hereupon to be
inferred, that Popes haue authority ouer the
Kingdome of France; becauſe that Kingdom was
neuer ſubiect vnto Conſtantine. For the King of
Fraunce neuer had any ſuperiour in Temporall
matters. A little after: It is not in any place to
be found, that God hath giuen the Pope power to
make and vnmake Temporall Kings.
               
               He maintaineth elſewhere,Quaeſt. 2. c. 8. & ſic non depoſuit autoritatiue. that Zacharie
did not depoſe Childeric, but onely
conſented to his depoſing; and ſo depoſed
him not as by authoritie. In the ſame booke, taking
vp the words of Occam, whome hee
ſtyles the Doctor:Quae. 3. c. 2. 
                  The Emperour is the Popes
Lord in things Temporall,
                  Quaeſt. 1 1. c
                        ••
                     . Sacerd 
                  and the Pope calls him
Lord, as it is witneſſed in the body of the Text.
The Lord Cardinall hath diſſembled and

concealed theſe words of Doctor Almainus,
with many like places: and hath been
pleaſed to alledge Almainus reciting Occams
authoritie, in ſtead of quoting Almainus
himſelfe in thoſe paſſages, where hee
ſpeaketh as out of his owne opinion, and in
his owne words. A notable peice of ſlie and
cunning conueiance. For what hereſie may
not be fathered and faſtened vpon S. Auguſtine,
or S. Hierome, if they ſhould bee
deemed to approoue all the paſſages which
they alledge out of other authors. And that
is the reaſon wherfore the L. Cardinal doth
not alledge his teſtimonies whole and perfect,
as they are couched in their proper
texts, but clipt and curtaild. Thus he dealeth
euen in the firſt paſſage or teſtimonie
of Almainus; he brings it in mangled and
pared: hee hides and conceales the words
added by Almainus, to contradict & croſſe
the words going before. For Almainus
makes this addition and ſupply; Howſoeuer
ſome other Doctors doe ſtand for the negatiue,
and teach the Pope hath power onely to declare
that Kings and Princes are to bee depoſed.
                  
And ſo much appeareth by this reaſon; becauſe
this ample and Soueraigne power of
the Pope, might giue him occaſion to bee
puft vp with great pride, and the ſame fulneſſe
of power might prooue extreamely
hurtfull to the ſubiects, &c.
               The ſame Almainus brings in Occams
opinion in expreſſe tearmes deciding the
queſtion,Quaeſt. 2. de poteſt. Eccl. & Laic. cap. 12. and there ioynes his owne opinion
with Occams. The Doctors opinion, ſaith
Almainus, doth ſimply carrie the moſt probabilitie;
that a Pope hath no power, neither by excommunication,
nor by any other meanes, to dedepoſe
a Prince from his Imperiall and Royall
dignitie.
                  In cap. 9. 10 & 11. And a little before, hauing maintained
the Greeke Empire was neuer tranſported
by the Pope to the Germaines, and
that when the Pope crownes the Emperour,
he doth not giue him the Empire, no
more then the Archbiſhop of Reims when
he crownes the King of France, doth giue
him the Kingdome; he drawes this concluſion
according to Occams opinion: I denie
that an Emperour is bound by oath to promiſe the
Pope allegiance. On the other ſide, if the Pope

hold any Temporall poſſeſſions, hee is bound to
ſweare allegiance vnto the Emperour, and to pay
him tribute. The ſaid Occam alledged by
Almainus doth further auerre, that Iuſtinian
was acknowledged by the Pope for his
ſuperiour in Temporall cauſes: for as much
as diuerſe lawes which the Pope is bound
to keep and obſerue, were enacted by Iuſtinian;
as by name the law of preſcription
for an hundred yeeres: which law ſtandeth
yet in force againſt the Biſhop of Rome.
And to the ende that all men may cleerely
ſee, how great diſtance there is betweene
Occams opinion and the L. Cardinals, who
towards the ende of his Oration, exhorts
his hearers at no hand to diſſent from the
Pope; take you here a viewe of Occams
owne words, as they are alleadged by Almainus:
Queſt▪ 
                     
                        •
                     . cap. 14. 
                  The Doctor aſſoyles the arguments of
Pope Jnnocent, by which the Pope would prooue
out of theſe words of Chriſt, Whatſoeuer thou
ſhalt bind, &c. that fulnes of power in Temporall
matters, belongeth to the Soueraigne Biſhop.
For Innocent ſaith, Whatſoeuer, excepteth nothing.
But Occam aſſoyles Innocents authoritie,

as not onely falſe, but alſo hereticall; and ſaith
withal, that many things are ſpoken by Jnnocent,
which by his leaue ſauour and ſmell of hereſie,
&c.
               
               The L. Cardinal with leſſe fidelitie alledgeth
two places out of Thomas his
Summe.Pag. 40. The firſt, in the Second of his Second,
Queſt. 10. Art. 10. in the bodie of the
Article. In which place (let it be narrowly
examined) Thomas will eaſily be found to
ſpeake, not of the ſubiection of beleeuing
ſubiects vnder Infidel Kings, as the Lord
Cardinall pretendeth, but of beleeuing
ſeruants that liue vnder Maſters, whether
Iewes or Infidels. As when a Iew keepeth
ſeruants which profeſſe Ieſus Chriſt; or as
when ſome of the faithfull kept in Caeſars
houſe: who are not conſidered by Thomas
as they were ſubiects of the Empire, but as
they were ſeruants of the family. The other
place is taken out of Queſt. 11. and 2. art.
in the body of the article: where no ſuch
matter as the L. Cardinal alledgeth can be
found.
               With like fidelitie he taketh Gerſon in

hand:Pag. 44. who indeed in his booke of Eccleſiaſticall
power, and 12. Conſider. doth affirme,
When the abuſe of ſecular power redoundeth
to manifeſt impugning of the faith, and blaſpheming
of the Creator; then ſhall it not bee amiſſe
to haue recourſe vnto the laſt branch of this
12. Conſider. where, in ſuch caſe as aforeſaid, a
certain regitiue, directiue, regulatiue, and ordinatiue
authoritie is committed to the Eccleſiaſticall
power. His very words: which make no
mention at all of depoſing, or of any compulſiue
power ouer Soueraigne Princes.
For that forme of rule and gouernement
whereof Gerſon ſpeaketh, is exerciſed by
Eccleſiaſticall cenſures & excommunications;
not by loſſe of goods, of Kingdoms,
or of Empires. This place then is wreſted
by the L. Cardinall to a contrary ſenſe. Neither
ſhould his Lordſhip haue omitted,
that Gerſon, in the queſtion of Kings ſubiection
in Temporall matters, or of the dependance
of their Crowns vpon the Popes
power, excepteth alwaies the King of
France: witneſſe that which Gerſon a little
before the place alleadged by the Cardinal

hath plainely affirmed: Now ſince Peters
time, ſaith Gerſon, all Imperiall, Regall, and Secular
power is not immediately to drawe vertue
and ſtrength from the Soueraigne Biſhop: as in
this manner the moſt Chriſtian King of France
hath no Superiour, nor acknowledgeth any ſuch
vpon the face of the earth. Now here need no
great ſharpenes of wit for the ſearching out
of this deepe myſterie; that if the Pope
hath power to giue or take away Crownes
for any cauſe or any pretended occaſion
whatſoeuer, the Crowne of France muſt
needs depend vpon the Pope.
               But for as much as we are now hitte in
with Gerſon,Pag. 108. 109. 119. where the Card. takes Char. 7. for Charl. 6. we will examine the L. Cardinals
allegations towards the ende of his
Oration, taken out of Gerſons famous Oration
made before Charles 6. for the Vniuerſitie
of Paris: where he brings in Gerſon to
affirme, That killing a Tyrant is a ſacrifice acceptable
to God. But Gerſon (let it be diligently
noted) there ſpeaketh not in his owne
perſon: hee there brings in ſedition ſpeaking
the words. Of which words vttered
by ſedition, and other like ſpeeches, you

ſhall now heare what iudgement Gerſon
himſelfe hath giuen. When ſedition had ſpoken
with ſuch a furious voice, I turned away my
face as if I had beene ſmitten with death, to ſhew
that I was not able to endure her madneſſe any
longer. And indeede when diſſimulation on
the one ſide, and ſedition on the other, had
ſuggeſted the deuiſes of two contrary extremes,
he brings forth Diſcretion as a Iudge,
keeping the meane betweene both extreames,
and vttering thoſe words which
the L. Cardinall alleadgeth againſt himſelfe.
If the head, (ſaith Gerſon) or ſome other
member of the ciuill body, ſhould grow to ſo deſperate
a paſſe, that it would gulpe and ſwallowe
downe the deadly poiſon of tyrannie; euery member
in his place, with all power poſſible for him to
raiſe by expedient meanes, and ſuch as might preuent
a greater inconuenience, ſhould ſet himſelfe
againſt ſo madde a purpoſe, and ſo deadly practiſe:
For if the head be grieued with ſome light paine,
it is not fit for the hand to ſmite the head: no, that
were but a fooliſh and a madde part. Nor is the
hand forthwith to chop off or ſeparate the head
from the bodie, but rather to cure the head with

good ſpeach and other meanes, like a skilfull and
wiſe Phyſitian. Yea nothing would be more cruell
or more voide of reaſon, then to ſeeke to ſtoppe the
ſtrong and violent ſtreame of tyranny by ſedition.
Theſe words, me thinke, doe make verie
ſtrongly and expreſſely againſt butchering
euen of Tyrannicall Kings. And whereas
a little after the ſaid paſſage, he teacheth to
expell Tyrannie, he hath not a word of expelling
the Tyrant, but onely of breaking
and ſhaking off the yoke of Tyranny. Yet
for all that, hee would not haue the remedies
for the repreſſing of Tyrannie, to bee
fetcht from the Pope, who preſumeth to degrade
Kings, but from Philoſophers, Lawyers,
Diuines, and perſonages of good conuerſation.
It appeareth now by all that hath been
ſaid before, that whereas Gerſon in the 7
Conſiderat. againſt Flatterers, doth affirme:
Whenſoeuer the Prince doth manifeſtly purſue
and proſecute his naturall ſubiects, and ſhew himſelfe
obſtinately bent with notorious iniuſtice, to
vexe them of ſet purpoſe, and with full conſent, ſo
farre as to the fact; then this rule and law of Nature
doth take place, It is lawfull to reſiſt and repell

force by force; and that ſentence of Seneca,
There is no ſacrifice more acceptable to God, then
a Tyrant offered in ſacrifice; the words, Doth
take place, are ſo to be vnderſtood, as hee
ſpeaketh in an other paſſage, to wit, with or
amongſt ſeditious perſons. Or elſe the
words, doth take place, doe onely ſignifie, is
put in practiſe. And ſo Gerſon there ſpeaketh
not as out of his owne iudgement.
               
                  His Lordſhippe alſo ſhould not haue
balked and left out Sigebertus, who
with more reaſon might haue paſſed
for French, then Thomas and Occam,
whom he putteth vpon vs for French. Sigebertus
in his Chronicle vpon the yere 1088.
ſpeaking of the Emperours depoſing by
the Pope, hath words of this tenor: This hereſie
was not crept out of the ſhell in thoſe dayes,
that his Prieſts, who hath ſaid to the King, Apoſtata,
and maketh an hypocrite to rule for the
ſinnes of the people, ſhould teach the people they
owe no ſubiection vnto wicked Kings, nor any allegiance,
notwithſtanding they haue taken the
oath of allegiance.
               Now after the L. Card. hath courſed in

this manner through the hiſtories of the
laſt ages (which in caſe they all made for
his purpoſe, doe lacke the weight of authority)
in ſtead of ſearching the will of God
in the ſacred Oracles of his word, and ſtanding
vpon examples of the ancient Church;
at laſt leauing the troope of his owne allegations,
he betakes himſelfe to the ſharpening
and rebating of the points of his aduerſaries
weapons.
               For the purpoſe, he brings in his aduerſaries,
Pag. 52. & ſequentib. the champions of Kings Crownes,
and makes them to ſpeake out of his owne
mouth (for his L. ſaith it will be obiected)
after this manner: Jt may come to paſſe, that
Popes either carried with paſſion, or miſledde by
ſiniſter information, may without iuſt cauſe faſten
vpon Kings the imputation of hereſie or apoſtaſie.
Then for King-depoſers he frames this
anſwer: That by hereſie they vnderſtand notorious
hereſie, and formerly condemned by ſentence
of the Church. Moreouer, in caſe the Pope hath
erred in the fact, it is the Clergies part adhering
to their King, to make remonſtrances vnto the
Pope, and to require the cauſe may be referred to

the iudgement of a full Councill, the French
Church then and there beeing preſent. Now in
this anſwer,Aduer. Barclaium. the L. Cardinall is of an other
minde then Bellarmine his brother Cardinall.
For he goes thus farre: That a Prince
condemned by vniuſt ſentence of the
Pope, ought neuertheles to quit his Kingdome,
and that his Paſtors vniuſt ſentence
ſhall not redound to his detriment; prouided
that he giue way to the ſaid ſentence,
and ſhew himſelfe not refractarie, but ſtay
the time in patience, vntill the holy Father
ſhall renounce his error, and reuoke his
foreſaid vniuſt ſentence. In which caſe theſe
two materiall points are to be preſuppoſed.
The one, That he who now hath ſeized the
Kingdome of the Prince diſplaced, will
forthwith (if the Pope ſhall ſolicite and intercede)
return the Kingdome to the hand
of the late poſſeſſor. The other, That in the
interim the Prince vniuſtly depoſed, ſhall
not neede to feare the bloodie murderers
mercileſſe blade and weapon. But on the
other ſide, the Popes power of ſo large a
ſize, as Bellarmine hath ſhaped, is no whit

pleaſing to the L. Cardinals eie. For in caſe
the King ſhould be vniuſtly depoſed by the
Pope not well informed, he is not of the mind
the Kingdome ſhould ſtoope to the Popes
beheſts, but will rather haue the Kingdom
to deale by remonſtrance, and to referre
the cauſe vnto the Council. Wherein hee
makes the Council to be of more abſolute
and ſupreame authoritie then the Pope: a
ſtraine to which the holy Father will neuer
lend his eare. And yet doubtles, the Councill
required in this caſe muſt be vniuerſall;
wherein the French, for ſo much as they
ſtand firme for their King and his cauſe,
can be no Iudges: and in that regard the L.
Cardinal requireth onely the preſence of
the French Church. Who ſeeth not here
into what pickle the French cauſe is
brought by this meanes? The Biſhops of
Italie forſooth, of Spaine, of Sicilie, of Germany,
the ſubiects of Soueraignes many
times at profeſſed or priuy enmitie with
France, ſhall haue the cauſe compromitted
& referred to their iudgment, whether the
Kingdome of France ſhall driue out her

Kings, and ſhall kindle the flames of ſeditious
troubles, in the very heart and bowels
of the Realme. But is it not poſſible, that a
King may lacke the loue of his owne ſubiects,
and they taking the vantage of that
occaſion, may put him to his trumps in his
owne Kingdome? Is it not poſſible, that
calumniations whereby a credulous Pope
hath beene ſeduced, may in like manner
deceiue ſome great part of a credulous
people? Is it not poſſible, that one part of
the people may cleaue to the Popes faction,
an other may hold and ſtand out for the
Kings rightfull cauſe, and ciuil warres may
be kindled by the ſplene of theſe two ſides?
Is it not poſſible, that his Holineſſe will
not reſt in the remonſtrances of the
French, & will yet further purſue his cauſe?
And whereas nowe a dayes a Generall
Councill cannot be held, except it bee called
and aſſembled by the Popes authority;
is it credible, the Pope will take order for
the conuocation of a Council, by whom he
ſhall be iudged? And how can the Pope be
Preſident in a Council, where himſelfe is

the partie impleaded? and to whom the ſifting
of his owne ſentence is referred, as it
were to committies, to examine whether
it was denounced according to Law, or againſt
Iuſtice? But in the meane time,
whileſt all theſe remonſtrances and addreſſes
of the Council are on foote; behold, the
Royall Maieſty of the King hangeth as it
were by looſe gimmals, and muſt ſtay the
iudgement of the Council to whom it is referred.
Well: what if the Councill ſhould
happe to be two or three yeeres in aſſembling,
and to continue or hold eighteene
yeeres, like the Council of Trent; ſhould
not poore France, I beſeech you, be reduced
to a very bad plight? ſhould ſhee not
be in a very wiſe and warme taking? To be
ſhort; His Lordſhips whole ſpeech for the
vntying of this knot, not onely ſurmounteth
poſſibility, but is ſtuft with ridiculous
toyes. This I make manifeſt by his addition
in the ſame paſſage: If the Pope deceiued
in fact, ſhal raſhly and vniuſtly declare the King
to be an heretike; then the Popes declaration ſhal
not be ſeconded with actuall depoſition, vnles the

Realme ſhall conſent vnto the Kings depoſing.
What needes any man to be inſtructed in
this doctrine? Who doth not knowe, that a
King, ſo long as he is vpheld and maintained
in his Kingdome by his people, cannot
actually and effectually bee depoſed from
his Throne? Hee that ſpeaketh ſuch language
and phraſe, in effect ſaith, and ſaith
no more then this: A King is neuer depriued
of his Crowne, ſo long as he can keep
his Crowne on his head: a King is neuer
turn'd and ſtript naked, ſo long as hee can
keepe his cloathes on his backe: a King is
neuer depoſed, ſo long as he can make the
ſtronger partie and ſide againſt his enemies:
in breife, a King is King, and ſhal ſtil
remaine King, ſo long as he can hold the
poſſeſſion of his Kingdome, and ſit faſt in
his Chaire of Eſtate. Howbeit, let vs here
by the way, take notice of theſe words vttered
by his Lordſhip: That for the depoſing
of a King, the conſent of the people muſt be obtained:
For by theſe words the people are exalted
aboue the King, and are made the
Iudges of the Kings depoſing.
               
                  
But here is yet a greater matter:Can. Si Papa, Diſt. 40. For that
Popes may erre in faith,Niſi ſit à fide deuius. it is acknowledged
by Popes themſelues: For ſome of them
haue condemned Pope Honorius for a Monothelite:
S. Hierome, and S. Hilarius, and
S. Athanaſius doe teſtifie, that Pope Liberius
ſtarted aſide, and ſubſcribed to Arrianiſme:
Pope Iohn 23. was condemned in the
Council of Conſtance, for maintaining
there is neither hell nor heauen. Diuerſe other
Popes haue been tainted with error in
faith. If therefore any Pope hereticall in
himſelfe, ſhall depoſe an Orthodoxe King
for hereſie; can it be imagined, that he
which boaſts himſelfe to beare all diuine
and humane lawes in the priuy coffer or
casket of his breaſt,Omnia iura in ſcrinio pectoris. will ſtoope to the remonſtrances
of the French, and vayle to
the reaſons which they ſhall propound,
though neuer ſo iuſtifiable, and of neuer ſo
great validitie? And how can he, that may
be infected with damnable hereſie (when
himſelfe is not alwaies free from hereſie) be
a iudge of hereſie in a King? In this queſtion
ſome are of opinion, that as a man, the

Pope may fall into error, but not as Pope.
Very good: I demand then vpon the matter,
wherefore the Pope doth not inſtruct
and reforme the man? or wherefore the
man doth not require the Popes inſtructions?
But whether a King be depoſed by
that man the Pope, or by that Pope the
man, is it not all one? is he not depoſed?
Others affirme, the Pope may erre in a queſtion
of the fact, but not in a queſtion of the
right. An egregious gullery and impoſture.
For if he may bee ignorant whether Ieſus
Chriſt died for our ſinnes, doubtles he may
alſo be to ſeeke, whether we ſhould repoſe
all our truſt and aſſured confidence in the
death of Chriſt. Conſider with me the Prophets
of olde: They were all inſpired and
taught of God, to admoniſh and reprooue
the Kings of Iudah and Iſrael: they neither
erred in matter of fact, nor in point of right:
they were as farre from being blinded and
fetcht ouer by deceitfull calumniations, as
from beeing ſeduced by the painted ſhew
of corrupt and falſe doctrine. As they neuer
trode awry in matter of faith; ſo they

neuer whetted the edge of their tongue or
ſtyle againſt the faultles. Had it not beene
a trimme deuice in their times, to ſay, that
as Eſay and as Daniel they might haue
ſunke into hereſie, but not as Prophets?
For doubtleſſe in this caſe, that Eſay would
haue taken counſell of the Prophet which
was himſelfe. To bee ſhort; If Kings are
onely ſo long to be taken for Kings, vntill
they ſhall be declared heretikes, and ſhall
be depoſed by the Pope; they continually
ſtand in extreame danger, to vndergoe a
very heauy and vniuſt ſentence. Their ſafeſt
way were to know nothing, and to beleeue
by proxie; leaſt, if they ſhould happen
to talke of God, or to thinke of religion,
they ſhould be drawne for heretikes into
the Popes Inquiſition.
               All the examples hitherto produced by
the L. Cardinall on a rowe, are of a latter
date, they lacke weight, are drawne from
the time of bondage, and make the Popes
themſelues witneſſes in their owne cauſe.
They deſcant not vpon the point of depoſition,
but onely ſtrike out and ſound the

notes of excommunication and interdiction,
which make nothing at all to the muſicke
of the queſtion. And therefore he telleth
vs (in kindneſſe as I take it) more oftentimes
then once or twice, that he ſpeaketh
onely of the fact; as one that doth acknowledge
himſelfe to be out of the right.
Hee relates things done, but neuer what
ſhould bee done: which, as the Iudicious
know, is to teach nothing.
            
            
               The ſecond Jnconuenience
examined.
               
                  THE ſecond Inconuenience like to
growe,Pag. 86. (as the Lord Cardinall ſeemeth
to be halfe afraid) if the Article of the
third Eſtate might haue paſſed with approbation,
is couched in theſe words: Lay-men
ſhall by authoritie be ſtrengthened with power, to
iudge in matters of Religion; as alſo to determine
the doctrine compriſed in the ſaid Article to
haue requiſite conformitie with Gods word: yea
they ſhall haue it in their hands to compell Eccleſiaſtics

by neceſſitie, to ſweare, preach, and teach
the opinion of the one ſide, as alſo by Sermons and
publike writings to impugne the other. This
inconuenience hee aggrauateth with ſwelling
words, and breaketh out into theſe vehement
exclamations: O reproach, O ſcandall,
O gate ſet open to a world of hereſies. He therefore
laboureth both by reaſons, & by autorities
of holy Scripture, to make ſuch vſurped
power of Laics, a fowle, ſhamefull, and
odious practiſe. In the whole, his Lordſhip
toyles himſelfe in vaine, and maketh ſuppoſitions
of caſtles in the aire. For in preferring
this Article, the third Eſtate haue
born themſelues not as iudges or vmpires,
but altogether as petitioners: requeſting
the ſaid Article might be receiued into the
number of the Parliament bookes, to bee
preſented vnto the King and his Counſell,
vnto whome in all humilitie they referred
the iudgement of the ſaid Article; conceiuing
all good hope the Clergie and Nobilitie
would be pleaſed to ioyne for the furtherance
of their humble petition. They
were not ſo ignorant of State-matters, or ſo

vnmindfull of their owne places and charges,
to beare themſelues in hand, that a petition
put vp and preferred by the third Eſtate,
can carrie the force of a Lawe or Statute,
ſo long as the other two Orders withſtand
the ſame, and ſo long as the King
himſelfe holds backe his Royall conſent.
Beſides, the ſaid Article was not propounded
as a point of religious doctrine; but for
euer after to remaine and continue a fundamentall
Lawe of the Commonwealth
and State it ſelfe, the due care whereof was
put into their hands, and committed to
their truſt. If the King had ratified the ſaid
Article with Royall conſent, and had commanded
the Clergie to put in execution
the contents thereof; it had beene their duty
to ſee the Kings will and pleaſure fulfilled,
as they are ſubiects bound to giue him
aide in all things, which may any way ſerue
to procure the ſafetie of his life, and the
tranquility of his Kingdome. Which if the
Clergie had performed to the vttermoſt of
their power, they had not ſhewed obedience
as vnderlings, vnto the third Eſtate,

but vnto the King alone: by whome ſuch
commaund had beene impoſed, vpon ſuggeſtion
of his faithfull ſubiects, made the
more watchfull by the negligence of the
Clergie; whom they perceiue to be linked
with ſtricter bands vnto the Pope, then
they are vnto their King. Here then the
Cardinall fights with meere ſhadowes, and
mooues a doubt whereof his aduerſaries
haue not ſo much as once thought in a
dreame. But yet, according to his great
dexteritie and nimbleneſſe of ſpirit, by this
deuice he cunningly takes vpon him to
giue the King a leſſon with more libertie:
making ſemblance to direct his masked Oration
to the Deputies of the people, when
he ſhooteth in effect, and pricketh at his
King, the Princes alſo and Lords of his
Counſell, whom the Cardinall compriſeth
vnder the name of Laics; whoſe iudgment
(it is not vnlikely) was apprehended much
better by the Clergy, then the iudgement
of the third Eſtate. Now theſe are the men
whom he tearmeth intruders into other
mens charges, and ſuch as open a gate for

I wot not how many legions of hereſies, to
ruſh into the Church. For if it be proper to
the Clergie and their Head, to iudge in this
cauſe of the Right of Kings; then the King
himſelfe, his Princes, and Nobilitie, are debarred
and wiped of all iudgement in the
ſame cauſe, no leſſe then the repreſentatiue
body of the people.
               Well then,Pag. 61. the L▪ Cardinall ſhowres
downe like haile ſundry places and teſtimonies
of Scripture, where the people are
commaunded to haue their Paſtors in ſingular
loue, and to beare them all reſpects
of due obſeruance. Be it ſo; yet are the ſaid
paſſages of Scripture no barre to the people,
for their vigilant circumſpection, to
preſerue the life and Crown of their Prince,
againſt all the wicked enterpriſes of men
ſtirred vp by the Clergie, who haue their
Head out of the Kingdom, and hold themſelues
to be none of the Kings ſubiects: a
thing neuer ſpoken by the ſacrificing
Prieſts and Prelates, mentioned in the paſſages
alleadged by the Lord Cardinall. He
likewiſe produceth two Chriſtian Emperours,

                  Pag. 62. Conſtantine and Valentinian by
name; the firſt refuſing to meddle with
iudgement in Epiſcopall cauſes: the other
forbearing to iudge of ſubtile Queſtions in
Diuinity, with proteſtation, that Hee would
neuer be ſo curious, to diue into the ſtreames, or
ſound the bottome of ſo deepe matters. But who
doth not knowe, that working and prouiding
for the Kings indemnity and ſafetie, is
neither Epiſcopall cauſe, nor matter of curious
and ſubtile inquiſition? The ſame anſwer
meets with all the reſt of the places
produced by the L. Cardinal out of the Fathers.
And that one for example, out of
Gregory Nazianzenus,Orat. ad ciues timore perculſos. is not cited by the
Cardinall with faire dealing. For Gregorie
doth not boord the Emperour himſelfe,
but his Deputie or L. Preſident, on this
manner:
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     . 
                  For we alſo are in authoritie and place
of a Ruler, we haue command aſwell as your ſelfe:
whereas the L. Cardinal with fowle play,
turnes the place in theſe termes, We alſo are
Emperours. Which words can beare no ſuch
interpretation, as well becauſe he to whom
the Biſhop then ſpake, was not of Imperiall

dignitie; as alſo becauſe if the Biſhop himſelfe,
a Biſhop of ſo ſmall a citie as Nazianzum,
had qualified himſelfe Emperour, he
ſhould haue paſſed all the bounds of modeſtie,
and had ſhewed himſelfe arrogant
aboue meaſure. For as touching ſubiection
due to Chriſtian Emperours, hee freely
acknowledgeth a little before,
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     . 
                  that himſelfe
and his people are ſubiect vnto the ſuperiour
powers, yea bound to pay them tribute.
The hiſtory of the ſame Gregories life doth
teſtifie, that he was drawne by the Arrians
before the Conſuls iudgement ſeate, and
from thence returned acquitted, without
either ſtripes or any other kind of contumelious
entreatie and vſe: yet now at laſt
vp ſtarts a Prelate, who dares make this
good Father vaunt himſelfe to bee an Emperour.
It is willingly granted, that Emperours
neuer challenged, neuer arrogated,
to be Soueraigne Iudges in controuerſies
of doctrine and faith; neuertheles it is clearer
then the Sunnes light at high noone,
that for moderation at Synods, for determinations
and orders eſtabliſhed in Councils,

and for the diſcipline of the Church,
they haue made a good and a full vſe of
their Imperiall authoritie. The 1. Council
held at Conſtantinople, beares this title or
inſcription;Vide Canones Graecos à Tilio editos. 
                  The dedication of the holy Synode
to the moſt religious Emperour Theodoſius the
Great, to whoſe will and pleaſure they haue ſubmitted
theſe Canons by them addreſſed and eſtabliſhed
in Council. And there they alſo beſeech
the Emperour, to confirme and approoue
the ſaid Canons. The like hath bin
done by the Councill of Trullo, by whome
the Canons of the fift and ſixt Councils
were put forth and publiſhed. This was not
done, becauſe Emperours tooke vpon
them to bee infallible Iudges of doctrine;
but onely that Emperours might ſee and
iudge, whether Biſhops (who feele the
pricke of ambition as other men doe) did
propound nothing in their Conuocations
and Conſultations, but moſt of all in their
Determinations, to vndermine the Emperours
authoritie, to diſturbe the tranquilitie
of the Commonwealth, and to croſſe
the determinations of precedent Councils.

Now to take the cognizance of ſuch matters
out of the Kings hand or power; what
is it but euen to transforme the King into a
ſtanding image, to wring and wreſt him out
of all care of himſelfe and his Kingly
charge, yea to bring him downe to this baſeſt
condition, to become onely an executioner,
and (which I ſcorne to ſpeake) the
vnhappie hangman of the Clergies will,
without any further cognizance, not ſo
much as of matters which moſt neerely
touch himſelfe, and his Royall eſtate?
               I graunt it is for Diuinitie Schooles, to
iudge how farre the power of the Keyes
doth ſtretch: I graunt againe, that Clerics
both may, and ought alſo to diſplay the colours
and enſignes of their cenſures againſt
Princes, who violating their publike and
ſolemne oath, do raiſe and make open war
againſt Ieſus Chriſt: I graunt yet againe,
that in this caſe they need not admit Laics
to be of their counſell, nor allowe them any
ſcope or libertie of iudgement. Yet all
this makes no barre to Clerics, for extending
the power of their keies, many times

a whole degree further then they ought;
and when they are pleaſed, to make vſe of
their ſaid power, to depriue the people of
their goods, or the Prince of his Crowne:
all this doth not hinder Prince or people
from taking care for the preſeruation of
their owne rights and eſtates, nor from requiring
Clerics to ſhewe their cards, and
produce their Charts, and to make demonſtration
by Scripture, that ſuch power as
they aſſume and challenge, is giuen them
from God. For to leaue the Pope abſolute
Iudge in the ſame cauſe wherein hee is a
party, and (which is the ſtrongeſt rampier
and bulwarke, yea the moſt glorious and
eminent point of his domination) to arme
him with power to vnhorſe Kings out of
their feates; what is it elſe but euen to draw
them into a ſtate of deſpaire, for euery winning
the day, or preuailing in their honourable
and rightfull cauſe?
               It is moreouer graunted, if a King ſhall
commaund any thing directly contrary to
Gods word, and tending to the ſubuerting
of the Church; that Clerics in this caſe

ought not onely to diſpenſe with ſubiects
for their obedience, but alſo expreſſely to
forbid their obedience: For it is alwaies
better to obey God then man. Howbeit in
all other matters, whereby the glory and
maieſty of God is not impeached or impaired,
it is the duty of Clerics to plie the people
with wholeſome exhortation to conſtant
obedience, and to auert by earneſt
diſſwaſions the ſaid people from tumultuous
reuolt and ſeditious inſurrection. This
practiſe vnder the Pagan Emperours, was
held and followed by the auncient Chriſtians;
by whoſe godly zeale and patience in
bearing the yoke, the Church in times paſt
grew and flouriſhed in her happy and plentifull
encreaſe, farre greater then Poperie
ſhall euer purchaſe and attaine vnto by all
her cunning deuiſes and ſleights: as namely
by degrading of Kings, by interdicting of
Kingdomes, by appoſted murders, and
by Diabolicall traines of Gunne-powder-mines.
               The places of Scripture alledged in order
by the Cardinall,Pag. 66. in fauour of thoſe that

ſtand for the Popes claime of power and
authoritie to depoſe Kings, are cited with
no more ſinceritie then the former: They
alleadge (theſe are his words) that Samuel depoſed
King Saul, or declared him to bee depoſed,
becauſe hee had violated the lawes of the Iewes
religion. His Lordſhip auoucheth elſewhere,
that Saul was depoſed, becauſe hee had
ſought prophanely to vſurpe the holy
Prieſthood. Both falſe, and contrary to the
tenor of truth in the ſacred hiſtorie. For
Saul was neuer depoſed, according to the
ſenſe of the word (I meane, depoſe) in the
preſent queſtion: to wit, as depoſing is taken
for deſpoyling the King of his Royall
dignity, and reducing the King to the condition
of a priuate perſon: But Saul held the
title of King, and continued in poſſeſſion
of his Kingdome, euen to his dying day.
Yea,1. Sam. 23. 20. & 24. 15. & 2. the Scripture ſtyles him King, euen to
the periodical and laſt day of his life, by the
teſtimonie of Dauid himſelfe,Sam. 2. 5. who both by
Gods promiſe, and by precedent vnction,
was then heire apparant as it were to the
Crowne, in a manner then ready to gird

and adorne the temples of his head. For if
Samuel, by Gods commaundement, had
then actually remooued Saul from his
Throne, doubtles the whole Church of Iſrael
had committed a groſſe error, in taking
and honouring Saul for their King after
ſuch depoſition: doubtleſſe the Prophet
Samuel himſelfe, making known the Lords
ordinance vnto the people, would haue
enioyned them by ſtrict prohibition, to call
him no longer the King of Iſrael: doubtles
Dauid would neuer haue held his hand
from the throate of Saul, for this reſpect and
conſideration,1. Sam. 26. 11. becauſe hee was the Lords
annointed. For if Saul had loſt his Kingly
authoritie, from that inſtant when Samuel
gaue him knowledge of his reiection; then
Dauid, leaſt otherwiſe the bodie of the
Kingdome ſhould want a Royal Head, was
to beginne his Raigne, and to beare the
Royall Scepter in the very ſame inſtant:
which were to charge the holy Scriptures
with vntruth, in as much as the ſacred hiſtorie
beginnes the computation of the yeers
of Dauids raigne, from the day of Sauls

death. True it is, that in the 2. Sam. cap. 15.
Saul was denounced by Gods owne ſentence,
a man reiected, and as it were excommunicated
out of the Kingdome, that
he ſhould not rule and raigne any longer
as King ouer Iſrael; neuertheleſſe the ſaid
ſentence was not put in execution, before
the day when God, executing vpon Saul
an exemplarie iudgement, did ſtrike him
with death. From whence it is manifeſt and
cleare, that when Dauid was annointed
King by Samuel,1. Sam. 16. 13. that action was onely a
promiſe, and a teſtimony of the choice,
which God had made of Dauid for ſucceſſion
immediately after Saul; and not a
preſent eſtabliſhment, inueſtment, or inſtalment
of Dauid in the Kingdome. Wee
reade the like in 1. King. cap. 19. where
God commaundeth Elias the Prophet, to
annoint Haſael King of Syria. For can any
man be ſo blind and ignorant in the ſacred
Hiſtory, to beleeue the Prophets of Iſrael
eſtabliſhed, or ſacred the Kings of Syria?
For this cauſe,2. Sam. 2. 4▪
                   when Dauid was actually
eſtabliſhed in the Kingdom, he was anointed

the ſecond time.
               In the next place he brings in the Popes
champions vſing theſe words;1. K
                        ••
                     . 12. 
                  Rehoboam was
depoſed by Ahiah the Prophet, from his Royall
right ouer the tenne Tribes of Iſrael, becauſe his
father Salomon had played the Apoſtata, in falling
from the Lawe of God. This I ſay alſo, is
more then the truth of the ſacred hiſtorie
doth affoard. For Ahiah neuer ſpake to Rehoboam
(for ought we reade,) nor brought
vnto him any meſſage from the Lord. As
for the paſſage quoted by the L. Cardinall
out of Reg. 3. chap. 11. it hath not reference
to the time of Rehoboams raigne, but rather
indeed to Salomons time: nor doth it
carrie the face of a iudicatory ſentence for
the Kings depoſing, but rather of a Propheticall
prediction. For how could Rehoboam,
before he was made King, be depriued
of the Kingdome? Laſt of all, but worſt of
all; to alleadge this paſſage for an example
of a iuſt ſentence in matter of depoſing a
King, is to approoue the diſloyall treachery
of a ſeruant againſt his maſter, and the
rebellion of Ieroboam branded in Scripture

with a marke of perpetuall infamy for
his wickedneſſe and impietie.
               He goes on with an other example of
no more truth:1. Kin. 19. 
                  King Achab was depoſed by
Elias the Prophet, becauſe he imbraced falſe religion,
and worſhipped falſe gods. Falſe too like
the former; King Achab loſt his Crowne
and his life both together. The Scripture,
that ſpeaketh not according to mans fancy,
but according to the truth, doth extend
and number the yeeres of Achabs raigne,
to the time of his death. Predictions of a
Kings ruine, are no ſentences of depoſition.
Elias neuer gaue the ſubiects of Achab
abſolution from their oath of obedience;
neuer gaue them the leaſt inckling of
any ſuch abſolution; neuer ſet vp, or placed
any other King in Achabs Throne.
               That of the L. Cardinall a little after,Pag. 68. is
no leſſe vntrue: That King Vzziah was driuen
from the conuerſation of the people by Azarias
the Prieſt, and thereby the adminiſtration of
his Kingdome was left no longer in his power.
Not ſo:2. Chro. 26. For when God had ſmitten Vzziah
with leproſie in his forehead, he withdrew

himſelfe, or went out into an houſe apart,
for feare of infecting ſuch as were whole by
his contagious diſeaſe. The high Prieſt
ſmote him not with any ſentence of depoſition,
or denounced him ſuſpended from
the adminiſtration of his Kingdome. No:
the dayes of his raigne are numbred in
Scripture, to the day of his death. And
whereas the Prieſt, according to the Lawe
in the 13. of Leuit. iudged the King to be
vncleane; he gaue ſentence againſt him, not
as againſt a criminall perſon, and thereby
within the compaſſe of depoſition; but as
againſt a diſeaſed body. For the Lawe inflicteth
puniſhments, not vpon diſeaſes, but
vpon crimes. Hereupon, whereas it is recorded
by Ioſephus in his Antiquities,Antiq. l. 9. cap. 11. that
Vzziah lead a priuate, and in a manner, a ſolitarie
life; the ſaid author doth not meane,
that Vzziah was depoſed, but onely that he
disburdened himſelfe of care to mannage
the publike affaires.
               The example of Mattathias,Pag. 69. by whome
the Iewes were ſtirred vp to rebell againſt
Antiochus, is no better worth. For in that

example we finde no ſentence of depoſition,
but onely an heartning and commotion
of a people then grieuouſly afflicted
and oppreſſed. He that makes himſelfe the
ring-leader of conſpiracie againſt a King,
doth not forthwith aſſume the perſon, or
take vp the office and charge of a Iudge, in
forme of lawe, and iuridically to depriue a
King of his Regall rights, and Royall prerogatiues.
Mattathias was chiefe of that
conſpiracy, not in qualitie of Prieſt, but of
cheiftaine, or leader in warre, and a man the
beſt qualified of all the people. Things acted
by the ſuddaine violence of the baſe
vulgar, muſt not ſtand for lawes, nor yet
for proofes and arguments of ordinarie
power, ſuch as the Pope challengeth to
himſelfe, and appropriateth to his triple-Crowne.
               Theſe bee our ſolide anſwers:Pag. 67. wee diſclaime
the light armour which the L. Cardinall
is pleaſed to furniſh vs withall, forſooth
to recreate himſelfe, in rebating the
points of ſuch weapons, as he hath vouchſafed
to put into our hands. Now it will be

worth our labour to beate by his thruſts,
fetcht from the ordinary miſſion of the new
Teſtament, from leproſie, ſtones, and locks
of wool. A leach no doubt of admirable skil,
one that for ſubiecting the Crownes of
Kings vnto the Pope, is able to extract arguments
out of ſtones; yea, out of the leproſie,
and the drie ſcab, onely forſooth becauſe
hereſie is a kind of leproſie, and an
heretike hath ſome affinitie with a leper.
But may not his Quoniam, be as fitly applyed
to any contagious & inueterate vice of
the minde beſide hereſie?Pag. 66. His warning-peice
therefore is diſcharged to purpoſe,
whereby he notifies that hee pretendeth to
handle nothing with reſolution. For indeed
vpon ſo weake arguments, a reſolution
is but ill-fauouredly and weakely grounded.
               His bulwarks thus beaten downe,Pag. 69. let vs
now viewe the ſtrength of our owne. Firſt,
hee makes vs to fortifie on this manner:
They that are for the negatiue, doe alleadge the
authoritie of S. Paul; Let euery ſoule bee ſubiect
vnto the higher powers: For whoſoeuer reſiſteth

the power, reſiſteth the ordinance of God. And
likewiſe that of S. Peter, Submit your ſelues,
whether it be vnto the King, as vnto the ſuperiour,
or vnto gouernours, &c. Vpon theſe paſſages,
and the like, they inferre, that obedience is
due to Kings by the Lawe of God, and not diſpenſable
by any ſpirituall or temporall authoritie.
Thus he brings vs in with our firſt weapon.
But here the very cheife ſinew and
ſtrength of our argument, he doth wittingly
balke, and of purpoſe conceale. To wit,
That all the Emperours of whom the ſaid
holy Apoſtles haue made any mention in
their diuine Epiſtles, were profeſſed enemies
to Chriſt, Pagans, Infidels, fearefull
and bloody Tyrants: to whom notwithſtanding
euery ſoule, and therefore the Biſhop
of Rome for one, is commaunded to
ſubmit himſelfe, and to profeſſe ſubiection.
Thus much Chryſoſtome hath expreſſely
taught in his Hom. 23. vpon the Epiſtle to
the Romanes; The Apoſtle giues this commandement
vnto all: euen to Prieſts alſo, and cloiſtered
Monkes, not onely to ſecular: be thou an Apoſtle,
an Euangeliſt, a Prophet, &c. Beſides,

it is here worthy to be noted, that howſoeuer
the Apoſtles rule is generall, and therefore
bindeth all the faithfull in equal bands;
yet is it particularly, directly, and of purpoſe
addreſſed to the Church of Rome by
S. Paul, as by one who in the ſpirit of an Apoſtle
did foreſee, that rebellion againſt
Princes was to riſe and ſpring from the city
of Rome. Now in caſe the Head of that
Church by warrant of any priuiledge, contained
in the moſt holy Regiſter of Gods
holy word, is exempted from the binding
power of this generall precept or rule; did
it not become his Lordſhip to ſhew by the
booke, that it is a booke caſe, and to lay it
forth before that honourable aſſembly,
who no doubt expected & waited to heare
when it might fal from his learned lips? But
in ſtead of any ſuch authenticall and canonicall
confirmation, hee flyeth to a ſleight
ſhift, and with a cauill is bold to affirme the
foundation, laid by thoſe of our ſide, doth
no way touch the knot of the controuerſie.
Let vs heare him ſpeake: Jt is not in controuerſie,
whether obedience bee due to Kings by

Gods Lawe, ſo long as they are Kings, or acknowledged
for Kings: but our point controuerted, is
whether by Gods Lawe it bee required, that hee
who hath beene once recogniſed and receiued for
King by the bodie of Eſtates, can at any time bee
taken and reputed as no King, that is to ſay, can
doe no manner of act whereby hee may looſe his
right, and ſo ceaſe to be ſaluted King. This anſwer
of the L. Cardinal is the rare deuiſe, euaſion,
and ſtarting hole of the Ieſuites. In
whoſe eares of delicate and tender touch,
King-killing ſoundeth very harſh: but forſooth
to vn-king a King firſt, and then to
giue him the ſtabbe, that is a point of iuſt
and true deſcant. For to kill a King, once
vn-king'd by depoſition, is not killing of a
King. For the preſent I haue one of that
Ieſuiticall Order in priſon, who hath face
enough to ſpeak this language of Aſhdod,
and to maintaine this doctrine of the Ieſuites
Colledges. The L. Cardinal harps vpon
the ſame ſtring. He can like ſubiection
and obedience to the King, whileſt hee ſitteth
King: but his Holineſſe muſt haue all
power, and giue order withall, to hoyſt him

out of his Royall ſeate. I therefore now anſwer,
that in very deed the former paſſages
of S. Paul and S. Peter ſhould come nothing
neere the queſtion, if the ſtate of the queſtion
were ſuch as he brings it, made and
forged in his owne ſhop. But certes the
ſtate of the queſtion is not, whether a King
may doe ſome act, by reaſon whereof hee
may fall from his right, or may not any
longer be acknowledged for King. For all
our contention is, concerning the Popes
power to vn-authorize Princes: whereas in
the queſtion framed and fitted by the L.
Card. not a word of the Pope. For were it
graunted and agreed on both ſides, that a
King by election might fall from his Kingdome,
yet ſtill the knot of the queſtion
would hold, whether he can bee diſpoſſeſſed
of his Regall authority, by any power
in the Pope; and whether the Pope hath
ſuch fulneſſe of power, to ſtrip a King of
thoſe Royall robes, rights, and reuenues of
the Crowne, which were neuer giuen him
by the Pope; as alſo by what authority of
holy Scripture, the Pope is able to beare

out himſelfe in this power, and to make it
good.
               But here the L. Cardinal ſtoutly ſaith in
his owne defence by way of reioynder;Pag. 71. 
                  As
one text hath, Let euery ſoule be ſubiect vnto the
higher powers; in like manner an other text hath,
Obey your Prelates, and be ſubiect vnto your Paſtors:
for they watch ouer your ſoules, as men that
ſhall giue an accompt for your ſoules. This reaſon
is void of reaſon, and makes againſt
himſelfe. For may not Prelates be obeyed
and honoured, without Kings be depoſed?
If Prelates preach the doctrine of the Goſpell,
will they in the pulpit ſtirre vp ſubiects
to rebell againſt Kings? Moreouer,
whereas the vniuerſal Church in theſe daies
is diuided into ſo many diſcrepant parts,
that now Prelates neither do nor can draw
all one way; is it not exceeding hard, keeping
our obedience towards God, to honour
them all at once with due obedience?
Nay; is not here offered vnto me a dart out
of the L. Cardinals armorie, to caſt at himſelfe?
For as God chargeth all men with obedience
to Kings, and yet from that commaundement

of God, the Lord Cardinal
would not haue it inferred, that Kings haue
power to degrade Eccleſiaſticall Prelates:
euen ſo God giueth charge to obey Prelates,
yet doth it not followe from hence,
that Prelates haue power to depoſe Kings.
Theſe two degrees of obedience agree
well together, and are each of them bounded
with peculiar and proper limits.
               But for ſo much as in this point, we haue
on our ſide the whole auncient Church,
which, albeit ſhe liued and groned for many
ages together vnder heathen Emperours,
heretikes, and perſecuters, did neuer
ſo much as whiſper a word about rebelling
and falling from their Soueraigne Lords,
and was neuer by any mortall creature freed
from the oath of allegiance to the Emperour;
the Cardinal is not vnwilling to
graunt, that ancient Chriſtians in thoſe
times were bound to performe ſuch fidelity
& allegiance, for as much as the Church
(the Cardinal for ſhame durſt not ſay the
Pope) then had not abſolued them of their
oath. No doubt a pleaſant dreame, or a

merry conceit rather, to imagine the Biſhop
of Rome was armed with power to
take away the Empire of the world from
Nero, or Claudius, or Domitianus; to
whom it was not knowne, whether the citie
of Rome had any Biſhop at all. Is it not
a maſter-ieſt, of a ſtraine moſt ridiculous,
to preſuppoſe the Grand-maſters and abſolute
Lords of the whole world, had a ſent
ſo dull, that they were not able to ſmel out,
and to noſe things vnder their owne noſes?
that they ſaw ſo little with other mens eies
and their owne, that within their capitall
citie, they could not ſpie that Soueraigne
armed with ordinary and lawfull authority
to degrade, and to turne them out of their
renowned Empire? Doubtleſſe the ſaid
Emperours, vaſſals belike of the Popes
Empire, are to be held excuſed for not acknowledging
and honouring the Pope in
quality of their Lord, as became his vaſſals;
becauſe they did not know there was any
ſuch power in the world, as after-times
haue magnified and adored vnder the qualitie
of Pope. For the Biſhops of Rome in

thoſe times, were of no greater authoritie,
power, and meanes, then ſome of the Biſhops
are in theſe daies within my Kingdomes.
               But certes thoſe Popes of that primitiue
age, thought it not expedient in the ſaid
times to drawe their ſwords: they exerciſed
their power in a more mild and ſoft
kind of cariage toward thoſe miſerable Emperours,
for three ſeuerall reaſons alledged
by the L. Cardinall.
               The firſt: becauſe the Biſhops then durſt
not by their cenſures whet and prouoke
thoſe Emperous, for feare of plunging the
Church in a Sea of perſecutions. But if I be
not cleane voide of common ſenſe, this reaſon
ſerueth to charge not only the Biſhops
of Rome, but all the auncient profeſſors of
Chriſt beſides, with deepe diſſimulation
and hypocriſie. For it is all one as if he had
profeſſed, that all their obedience to their
Soueraignes, was but counterfeit, and extorted,
or wrung out of them by force: that
all the ſubmiſſiue ſupplications of the auncient
Fathers, the aſſured teſtimonies and

pledges of their allegiance, humilitie, and
patience, were but certaine formes of diſguiſed
ſpeech, proceeding not freely from
the ſuggeſtions of fidelity, but faintly and
fainedly, or at leaſt from the ſtrong twitches
& violent convulſions of feare. Wherupon
it followes, that all their torments and
puniſhments, euen to the death, are
wrongfully honoured with the title, and
crowned with the crowne of Martyrdome;
becauſe their patience proceeded not from
their owne free choice and election, but
was taught by the force of neceſſitie, as by
compulſion: and whereas they had not
mutinouſly and rebelliouſly riſen in arms,
to aſſwage the ſcorching heat and burning
flames of tyrannicall perſecuters, it was not
for want of will, but for lacke of power.
Which falſe and forged imputation, the
Fathers haue cleared themſelues of in their
writings.Tert. Apol. cap. 37. Tertullian in his Apologet: All
places are full of Chriſtians,
                  Heſterni ſumus, & omnia veſtra impleuimus. 
                  the cities, iſles, caſtles,
burroughs, armies, &c. If we that are ſo infinite
a power, and multitude of men, had broken from
you into ſome remote nooke or corner of the

world, the cities no doubt had become naked and
ſolitarie: there had beene a dreadfull and horrible
ſilence ouer the face of the whole Empire: the
great Emperours had beene driuen to ſeeke out
newe cities, and to diſcouer newe nations, ouer
whom to beare Soueraigne ſway and rule: there
had remained more enemies to the State, then
ſubiects and friends.
                  Cypr. cont. Demetr. Cyprian alſo againſt
Demetrianus: None of vs all, howſoeuer wee
are a people mighty and without number, haue
made reſiſtance againſt any of your vniuſt and
wrongfull actions, executed with all violence;
neither haue ſought by rebellious armes, or by any
other ſiniſter practiſes, to crie quittance with you
at any time for the righting of our ſelues. Certain
it is, that vnder Iulianus, the whole Empire
in a manner profeſſed the Chriſtian Religion;
yea, that his Leiftenants and great
Commanders, as Iovinianus, and Valentinianus
by name, profeſſed Chriſt. Which
two Princes not long after attained to the
Imperiall dignitie, but might haue ſolicited
the Pope ſooner to degrade Iulianus from
the Imperiall Throne. For ſay that Iulians
whole army had renounced the Chriſtian

Religion: (as the L. Cardinall againſt all
ſhew and appearance of truth would beare
vs in hand, and contrary to the generall
voice of the ſaid whole army, making this
profeſſion with one conſent when Iulian
was dead,Socr. lib. 3. cap. 19. 
                  Wee are all Chriſtians:) yet Italie
then perſiſting in the faith of Chriſt,Theod. lib. 4▪ cap. 1. and
the army of Iulian then lying quartered in
Perſia,Sozom. lib. 6. cap. 1. the vtmoſt limit of the Empire to
the Eaſt, the Biſhop of Rome had fit opportunity
to drawe the ſword of his authority
(if he had then any ſuch ſword hanging
at his Pontificall ſide) to make Iulian
feele the ſharpe edge of his weapon, and
thereby to pull him downe from the ſtately
pearch of the Romane Empire. I ſay
moreouer, that by this generall and ſuddaine
profeſſion of the whole Caeſarian army,
We are all Chriſtians, it is clearely teſtified,
that if his army or ſouldiers were then
addicted to Paganiſme, it was wrought by
compulſion, and cleane contrary to their
ſetled perſwaſion before: and then it followes,
that with greater patience they
would haue borne the depoſing of Iulian,

then if hee had ſuffered them to vſe the libertie
of their conſcience. To bee ſhort in
the matter; S. Auguſtine makes all whole,
and by his teſtimonie doth euince, that Iulians
army perſeuered in the faith of Chriſt.
The ſouldiers of Chriſt ſerued a heathen Emperour:
                  Auguſt
                        •
                     n Pſal. 124. 
                  But when the cauſe of Chriſt was called in
queſtion, they acknowledged none but Chriſt in
heauen: When the Emperour would haue them to
ſerue, and to perfume his idols with frankincenſe,
they gaue obedience to God, rather then to the
Emperour. After which words, the very ſame
words alledged by the L. Cardinall againſt
himſelfe doe followe:Pag. 81. 
                  They did then diſtinguiſh
betweene the Lord eternall, and the Lord
temporall: neuertheleſſe they were ſubiect vnto
the Lord temporall, for the Lord eternall. It was
therefore to pay God his duty of obedience,
and not for feare to incenſe the Emperour,
or to drawe perſecution vpon the
Church (as the L. Cardinall would make
vs beleeue) that Chriſtians of the Primitiue
Church and Biſhops by their cenſures, durſt
not anger and prouoke their Emperours.
But his Lordſhip by his coloured pretences

doth manifeſtly prouoke and ſtirre vp
the people to rebellion, ſo ſoone as they
knowe their owne ſtrength to beare out a
rebellious practiſe. Whereupon it followes,
that in caſe their conſpiracie ſhall take no
good effect, all the blame and fault muſt
lie, not in their diſloyalty and treaſon, but
in the badde choice of their times for the
beſt aduantage, and in the want of taking a
true ſight of their owne weakeneſſe. Let
ſtirring ſpirits be trained vp in ſuch practicall
precepts, let deſperate wits be ſeaſoned
with ſuch rules of diſcipline; and what need
we, or how can we wonder they contriue
powder—conſpiracies, and practiſe the
damnable art of parricides?
               After Iulian, his Lordſhip falles vpon
Valentinian the younger, who maintaining
Arrianiſme with great and open violence,
might haue beene depoſed by the
Chriſtians from his Empire, and yet (ſay
we) they neuer dream'd of any ſuch practiſe.
Pag. 82. Here the L. Cardinal maketh anſwer:
The Chriſtians mooued with reſpect vnto the
freſh memory both of the brother and father, as

alſo vnto the weake eſtate of the ſonnes young
yeeres, abſtained from all counſels and courſes of
ſharper effect and operation. To which anſwer
I reply: theſe are but friuolous coniectures,
deuiſed and framed to tickle his owne fancie.
For had Valentinianus the younger
beene the ſonne of an Arrian, and had then
alſo attained to threeſcore yeeres of age,
they would neuer haue borne themſelues
in other faſhion then they did, towards
their Emperour. Then the Cardinal goeth
on: The people would not abandon the
factious and ſeditious party, but were ſo
firme or obſtinate rather for the faction,
that Valentinian for feare of the tumultuous
vproares was conſtrained to giue way,
and was threatened by the ſouldiers, that
except hee would adhere vnto the Catholikes,
they would yeeld him no aſſiſtance,
nor ſtand for his partie. Now this anſwer
of the L. Cardinall makes nothing to the
purpoſe, concerning the Popes power to
pull downe Kings from their ſtately neſt.
Let vs take notice of his proper conſequence.
Valentinian was afraid of the popular

tumult at Milan: the Pope therefore
hath power to curbe hereticall Kings by
depoſition. Now marke what diſtance is
betweene Rome and Milan, what difference
betweene the people of Milan, and
the Biſhop of Rome; betweene a popular
tumult, and a iudicatory ſentence; between
fact and right, things done by the people or
ſouldiers of Milan, and things to bee done
according to right and law by the Biſhop of
Rome; the ſame diſtance, the ſame difference
(if not farre greater) is betweene the
L. Cardinals antecedent and his conſequent,
betweene his reaſon, and the maine
cauſe or argument which we haue in hand.
The madde commotion of the people was
not here ſo much to be regarded, as the ſad
inſtruction of the Paſtor, of their good and
godly Paſtor S. Ambroſe, ſo far from heartning
the people of Milan to rebell, that being
Biſhop of Milan, he offered himſelfe to
ſuffer Martyrdome: If the Emperour abuſe his
Imperiall authoritie, (for ſo Theodoret hath
recited his words) to tyrannize thereby, here
am I ready to ſuffer death. And what reſiſtance

he made againſt his L. Emperour, was only
by way of ſupplication in theſe tearmes: We
beſeech thee, O Auguſtus, as humble ſuppliants;
we offer no reſiſtance: we are not in feare, but we
flie to ſupplication.
                  Epiſt. lib. 5. Againe, If my patrimony be
your marke,
                  Epiſt. 33. 
                  enter vpon my patrimonie: if my bodie,
I will goe and meet my torments. Shall I bee
drag'd to priſon or to death? I will take delight in
both. Item, in his Oration to Auxentius: J
can afflict my ſoule with ſorrowe,
                  Epiſt. lib. 5. 
                  I can lament, J
can ſend forth grieuous groanes: My weapons againſt
either of both, ſouldiers or Goths, are
teares: A Prieſt hath none other weapons of defence:
I neither can reſiſt, nor ought in any other
manner to make reſiſtance.
               
               Iuſtinian Emperour in his old age fell
into the hereſie of the Aphthartodocites.
Againſt Iuſtinian, though fewe they were
that fauoured him in that hereſie, the Biſhop
of Rome neuer darted with violence
any ſentence of Excommunication, interdiction,
or depoſition.
               The Oſtrogot Kings in Italy, the Viſigot
in Spaine, the Vandal in Africa were all
addicted to the Arrian impietie, and ſome

of them cruelly perſecuted the true profeſſors.
The Viſigot and Vandall were no
neighbours to Italie. The Pope thereby
had the leſſe cauſe to feare the ſtings of
thoſe waſpes, if they had been angred. The
Pope for all that neuer had the humour to
wraſtle or iuſtle with any of the ſaid Kings
in the cauſe of depoſing them from their
Thrones. But eſpecially the times when the
Vandals in Affricke, and the Goths in Italy
by Beliſarius and Narſes, profeſſors of the
Orthodoxe faith, were tyred with long
warres, and at laſt were vtterly defeated in
bloodie battels, are to be conſidered. Then
were the times or neuer, for the Pope to
vnſheath his weapons, and to vn-caſe his
arrowes of depoſition; then were the times
to drawe them out of his quiuer, and to
ſhoote at all ſuch Arrian Heads: then were
the times by diſpenſations to releaſe their
ſubiects of their oathes, by that peremptory
meanes to aide and ſtrengthen the Catholike
cauſe. But in that age the ſaid weapons
were not knowne to haue been hammered
in the Pontificall forge.
               
                  
Gregory I. made his boaſts, that he was
able to ruine the Lombards, (for many
yeeres together ſworne enemies to the Biſhops
of Rome) their ſtate preſent, and the
hope of all their future proſperity. But hee
telleth vs, that by the feare of God before
his eyes and in his heart, he was bridled and
reſtrained from any ſuch intent, as elſwhere
we haue obſerued:In Apol. pro iuram. fidel. 
                  If J would haue medled
with practiſing and procuring the death of the
Lombards,
                  His owne words. lib. 7. Epiſt. 1. 
                  the whole nation of the Lombards at
this day had been robbed of their Kings, Dukes,
Earles, they had beene reduced to the tearmes of
extreame confuſion. Hee might at leaſt haue
depoſed their King, (if the credit of the L.
Cardinals iudgement bee currant) without
polluting or ſtayning his owne conſcience.
               What can we tearm this aſſertion of the
L. Cardinall, but open charging the moſt
auncient Biſhops of Rome with crueltie,
when they would not ſuccour the Church
of Chriſt oppreſſed by tyrants, whoſe oppreſſion
they had power to repreſſe by depoſing
the oppreſſors. Is it credible, that Ieſus

Chriſt hath giuen a Commiſſion to S.
Peter and his ſucceſſors for ſo many ages,
without any power to execute their Commiſſion,
or to make any vſe thereof by practiſe?
Is it credible, that he hath giuen them
a ſword to be kept in the ſcabbard, without
drawing once in a thouſand yeeres? Is it
credible, that in the times when Popes
were moſt deboſhed, abandoning themſelues
to all ſorts of corrupt and vitious
courſes, as it teſtified by their own flaterers
and beſt affected ſeruants; is it credible that
in thoſe times they beganne to vnderſtand
the vertue and ſtrength of their Commiſſion?
For if either feare or lacke of power,
was the cauſe of holding their hands, and
voluntarie binding of themſelues to the
peace or good behauiour: wherefore is not
ſome one Pope at leaſt produced, who hath
complained that he was hindered from executing
the power that Chriſt had conferred
vpon his Pontificall See? Wherefore is
not ſome one of the auncient and holy Fathers
alledged, by whom the Pope hath bin
aduiſed and exhorted to take courage, to

ſtand vpon the vigor and ſinewes of his Papall
Office, to vnſheath and vneaſe his
bolts of thunder againſt vngodly Princes,
and grieuous enemies to the Church?
wherefore liuing vnder Chriſtian and gracious
Emperours, haue they not made
knowne the reaſons, why they were hindred
from drawing the pretended ſword;
leaſt long cuſtome of not vſing the ſword
ſo many ages, might make it ſo to ruſt in
the ſcabbard, that when there ſhould bee
occaſion to vſe the ſaid ſword, it could not
be drawne at all; and leaſt ſo long cuſtome
of not vſing the ſame, ſhould confirme
preſcription to their greater preiudice? If
weakenes bee a iuſt let, how is it come to
paſſe, that Popes haue enterpriſed to depoſe
Philip the Faire, Lewis the XII. and
Elizabeth my predeceſſor of happy memorie;
(to let paſſe others) in whom experience
hath well prooued, how great inequalitie
was between their ſtrengths? Yea,
for the moſt part from thence growe moſt
grieuous troubles and warres, which iuſtly
recoyle and light vpon his owne head; as

happened to Gregory the VII. and Boniface
the VIII. This no doubt is the reaſon,
wherefore the Pope neuer ſets in (for feare
of ſuch inconueniences) to blaſt a King
with lightning and thunder of depoſition,
but when he perceiues the troubled waters
of the Kingdome by ſome ſtrong faction
ſetled in his Eſtate; or when the King is
confined, and bordered by ſome Prince
more potent, who thirſteth after the prey, &
is euer gaping for ſome occaſion to picke a
quarrell. The King ſtanding in ſuch eſtate,
is it not as eaſie for the Pope to pull him
downe, as it is for a man with one hand to
thruſt downe a tottering wall, when the
groundſil is rotten, the ſtuddes vnpind and
nodding or bending towards the ground?
But if the King ſhall beare down and break
the faction within the Realme; if hee ſhall
get withall the vpper hand of his enemies
out of the Kingdome; then the holy Father
preſents him with pardons neuer ſued
for, neuer asked; and in a fathers indulgence
forſooth, giues him leaue ſtil to hold
the Kingdome, that he was not able by all

his force to wreſt and wring out of his
hand, no more then the clubbe of Hercules
out of his fiſt. How many worthy Princes,
incenſed by the Pope, to conſpire againſt
Soueraigne Lords their Maſters,
and by open rebellion to worke ſome
change in their Eſtates, haue miſcarried in
the action, with loſſe of life, or honour, or
both? For example; Rodulphus Duke of
Sueuia was eg'd on by the Pope, againſt
Henrie IIII. of that name, Emperour.
How many maſſacres, how many deſolations
of cities and townes, how many bloody
battels enſued thereupon? Let hiſtories
be ſearched, let iuſt accompts be taken, and
beſide ſieges laid to cities, it wil appeare by
true computation, that Henrie IIII. and
Frederic the I. fought aboue threeſcore
battels, in defence of their owne right againſt
enemies of the Empire, ſtirred vp
to armes by the Popes of Rome. How
much Chriſtian blood was then ſplit in
theſe bloody battels, it paſſeth mans witte,
penne, or tongue to expreſſe. And to giue
a little touch vnto matters at home; doth

not his Holineſſe vnderſtand right well the
weakeneſſe of Papiſts in my Kingdome?
Doth not his Holineſſe neuertheleſſe animate
my Papiſts to rebellion, and forbid
my Papiſts to take the oath of allegiance?
Doth not his Holineſſe by this means draw
(ſo much as in him lieth) perſecution vpon
the backes of my Papiſts as vpon rebells,
and expoſe their life as it were vpon the open
ſtall, to be ſold at a very eaſie price? All
theſe examples, either ioynt or ſeuerall, are
manifeſt and euident proofes, that feare to
drawe miſchiefe and perſecution vpon the
Church, hath not barred the Popes from
thundering againſt Emperours and Kings,
whenſoeuer they conceiued any hope, by
their fulminations to aduance their greatneſſe.
               Laſt of all; I referre the matter to the
moſt poſſeſſed with preiudice, euen the
very aduerſaries, whether this doctrine, by
which people are trained vp in ſubiection
vnto Infidel or hereticall Kings, vntill the
ſubiects be of ſufficient ſtrength to mate
their Kings, to expell their Kings, and to

depoſe them from their Kingdomes, doth
not incenſe the Turkiſh Emperours and other
Infidel Princes, to roote out all the
Chriſtians that drawe in their yoke, as people
that waite onely for a fit occaſion to rebell,
and to take themſelues ingaged for obedience
to their Lords, onely by conſtraint
and ſeruile feare. Let vs therefore
now conclude with Ozius, in that famous
Epiſtle ſpeaking to Conſtantius an Arrian
hereticke:Apud A. than. in Epiſt. ad ſolitar. vitam agentes. 
                  As hee that by ſecret practiſe or open
violence would bereaue thee of thy Empire,
ſhould violate Gods ordinance: ſo be thou touched
with feare, leaſt, by vſurping authoritie ouer
Church matters, thou tumble not headlong into
ſome hainous crime. Where this holy Biſhop
hath not vouchſafed to inſert and mention
the L. Cardinals exception; to wit, the right
of the Church alwaies excepted and ſaued,
when ſhe ſhall be of ſufficient ſtrength to
ſhake off the yoke of Emperours. Neither
ſpeaks the ſame holy Biſhop of priuate perſons
alone, or men of ſome particular condition
and calling; but he ſetteth downe a
generall rule for all degrees, neuer to impeach

Imperial Maieſtie vpon any pretext
whatſoeuer.
               As his Lordſhips firſt reaſon drawn from
weakeneſſe is exceeding weake:The 2. reaſ. ſo is that
which the L. Cardinall takes vp in the next
place:Pag. 77. 
                  He telleth vs there is very great difference
betweene Pagan Emperours, and Chriſtian
Princes: Pagan Emperours who neuer did homage
to Chriſt, who neuer were by their ſubiects
receiued, with condition to acknowledge perpetuall
ſubiection vnto the Empire of Chriſt; who neuer
were bound by oath and mutuall contract betweene
Prince and ſubiect. Chriſtian Princes who
ſlide backe by Apoſtaſie, degenerate by Arrianiſme,
or fall away by Mahometiſme. Touching
the latter of theſe two, (as his Lordſhippe
ſaith) If they ſhall as it were take an oath, and
make a vowe contrary to their firſt oath and vow
made and taken when they were inſtalled, and
contrary to the condition vnder which they receiued
the Scepter of their Fathers; if they withall
ſhall turne perſecutors of the Catholike religion;
touching theſe I ſay, the L. Cardinal holds,
that without queſtion they may be remooued
from their Kingdomes. He telleth vs

not by whome, but euery where he meaneth
by the Pope. Touching Kings depoſed
by the Pope vnder pretence of ſtupidity,
as Childeric; or of matrimoniall cauſes,
as Philip I. or for collating of benefices,
as Philip the Faire; not one word. By
that point he eaſily glideth, and ſhuffles it
vp in ſilence, for feare of diſtaſting the
Pope on the one ſide, or his auditors on
the other.
               Now in alledging this reaſon, his Lordſhip
makes all the world a witneſſe, that in
depoſing of Kings, the Pope hath no eye of
regard to the benefit and ſecuritie of the
Church. For ſuch Princes as neuer ſuckt other
milke then that of Infidelitie, and perſecution
of Religion, are no leſſe noiſome
and pernicious vermin to the Church, then
if they had ſucked of the Churches breaſts.
And as for the greatneſſe of the ſinne or
offence, it ſeemes to me there is very little
difference in the matter. For a Prince that
neuer did ſweare any religious obedience
to Ieſus Chriſt, is bound no leſſe to ſuch obedience,
then if he had taken a ſolemne

oath. As the ſonne that rebelliouſly ſtands
vp againſt his father, is in equall degree of
ſinne, whether he hath ſworn or not ſworn
obedience to his father: becauſe hee is
bound to ſuch obedience, not by any voluntarie
contract or couenant, but by the
law of Nature. The commaundement of
God to kiſſe the Sonne,Pſal. 2. whom the Father
hath confirmed and ratified King of Kings,
doth equally bind all Kings, as wel Pagans
as Chriſtians. On the other ſide, who denies,
who doubts, that Conſtantius Emperour
at his firſt ſteppe or entrance into the
Empire, did not ſweare and bind himſelfe
by ſolemne vowe, to keepe the rules and
to maintaine the precepts of the Orthodox
faith, or that he did not receiue his fathers
Empire vpon ſuch condition? This notwithſtanding,
the Biſhop of Rome pulled
not Conſtantius from his Imperial throne,
but Conſtantius remooued the Biſhop of
Rome from his Papall See. And were it ſo,
that an oath taken by a King at his conſecration,
and after violated, is a ſufficient
cauſe for the Pope to depoſe an Apoſtate or

hereticall Prince; then by good conſequence
the Pope may in like ſort depoſe a
King, who beeing neither dead in Apoſtaſie,
nor ſicke of hereſie, doth neglect onely
the due adminiſtration of iuſtice to his
loyall ſubiects. For his oath taken at conſecration
importeth likewiſe, that he ſhall
miniſter iuſtice to his people. A point
wherein the holy Father is held ſhort by
the L. Cardinall, who dares preſcribe new
lawes to the Pope, and preſumes to limit
his fulneſſe of power, within certaine meeres
and head-lands, extending the Popes power
only to the depoſing of Chriſtian Kings,
when they turne Apoſtats forſaking the
Catholike faith; and not ſuch Princes as neuer
breathed any thing but pure Paganiſme,
and neuer ſerued vnder the colours
of Ieſus Chriſt. Meane while his Lordſhip
forgets, that King Attabaliba was depoſed
by the Pope from his Kingdome of Peru,
and the ſaid Kingdome was conferred vpon
the King of Spaine, though the ſaid
poore King of Peru, neuer forſook his heathen
ſuperſtition; and though the turning

of him out of his terreſtrial Kingdome was
no way to conuert him vnto the faith of
Chriſt. Yea his Lordſhip a little after telleth
vs himſelfe,Pag. 77. that Be the Turkes poſſeſſion
in the conqueſts that hee maketh ouer Chriſtians
neuer ſo auncient, yet by no long tract of time
whatſoeuer, can he gaine ſo much as a thumbes
breadth of preſcription: that is to ſay, the Turke
for all that is but a diſſeiſor, one that violently
and wilfully keeps an other man
from his owne, and by good right may be
diſpoſſeſſed of the ſame: whereas notwithſtanding
the Turkiſh Emperours neuer fauoured
nor ſauoured Chriſtianitie. Let vs
runne ouer the examples of Kings whome
the Pope hath dared and preſumed to depoſe;
and hardly will any one be found, of
whome it may be truely auouched, that he
hath taken an oath contrary to his oath of
ſubiection to Ieſus Chriſt, or that hee hath
wilfully caſt himſelfe into Apoſtaticall defection.
               And certes to any man that weighs the
matter with due conſideration, it will be
found apparantly falſe, that Kings of France

haue been receiued of their ſubiects at any
time, with condition to ſerue Ieſus Chriſt.
They were actually Kings before they
came foorth to the ſolemnity of their ſacring,
before they vſed any ſtipulation or
promiſe to their ſubiects. For in hereditary
Kingdomes, (nothing more certain, nothing
more vncontroulable) the Kings
death inſtantly maketh liuery and ſeiſin of
the Royalty, to his next ſucceſſor. Nor is
it materiall to reply, that a King ſucceeding
by right of inheritance, takes an oath in the
perſon of his predeceſſor. For euery oath
is perſonall, proper to the perſon by whom
it is taken: and to God no liuing creature
can ſweare, that his owne ſonne or his heire
ſhall prooue an honeſt man. Well may the
father, and with great ſolemnitie, promiſe
that he will exhort his heire apparant with
all his power and the beſt of his endeauours,
to feare God and to practiſe pietie.
If the fathers oath be agreeable to the duties
of godlines, the ſonne is bound thereby,
whether he take an oath, or take none.
On the other ſide, if the fathers oath come

from the puddles of impietie, the ſonne is
bound thereby to goe the contrarie way.
If the fathers oath concerne things of indifferent
nature, and ſuch as by the varietie or
change of times, become either pernicious
or impoſſible; then it is free for the Kings
next ſucceſſor and heire, prudently to fit
and proportion his lawes vnto the times
preſent, and to the beſt benefit of the
Commonwealth.
               When I call theſe things to mind with
ſome attention, I am out of all doubt his
Lordſhip is very much to ſeek, in the right
ſenſe and nature of his Kings oath taken at
his Coronation, to defend the Church and
to perſeuere in the Catholike faith. For
what is more vnlike and leſſe credible then
this conceit, that after Clouis had raigned
15. yeeres in the ſtate of Paganiſme, and
then receiued holy Baptiſme, he ſhould
become Chriſtian vpon this condition,
That in caſe hee ſhould afterward revolt
from the faith, it ſhould then bee in the
power of the Church, to turne him out
of his Kingdome? But had any ſuch conditionall

ſtipulation beene made by Clouis,
in very good earneſt and truth; yet
would hee neuer haue intended, that his
depoſing ſhould be the act of the Romane
Biſhop, but rather of thoſe (whether Peeres,
or people, or whole body of the State) by
whom he had been aduanced to the Kingdome.
Let vs heare the truth, and this is
the truth: It is farre from the cuſtomarie
vſe in France, for their Kings to take any
ſuch oath, or to vſe any ſuch ſtipulation
with their ſubiects. If any King or Prince
whereſoeuer, doth vſe an oath or ſolemne
promiſe in theſe expreſſe tearmes, Let mee
looſe my Kingdome, or my life, be that day my laſt
both for life and raigne, when I ſhall firſt reuolt
from the Chriſtian religion: by theſe words
he calleth vpon God for vengeance, he vſeth
imprecation againſt his owne head:
but he makes not his Crowne to ſtoope by
this meanes, to any power in the Pope, or
in the Church, or in the people.
               And touching inſcriptions vpon coines,
of which point his Lordſhip ſpeaketh by
the way; verily the nature of the money or

coine (the ſtamping and minting whereof
is one of the markes of the Prince his dignity
and Soueraignty) is not changed by
bearing the letters of Chriſts name, on the
reuerſe or on the front. Such characters of
Chriſts name, are aduertiſements and inſtructions
to the people, that in ſhewing
and yeelding obedience vnto the King,
they are obedient vnto Chriſt; and thoſe
Princes likewiſe, who are ſo well aduiſed to
haue the moſt ſacred names inſcribed and
printed in their coines, doe take and acknowledge
Ieſus Chriſt for ſupreame King
of Kings. The ſaid holy characters are no
repreſentation or profeſſion, that any
Kings Crown dependeth vpon the Church,
or can be taken away by the Pope. The L.
Cardinal indeed ſo beareth vs in hand. But
he inuerts the words of Ieſus Chriſt, and
wrings them out of the right ioynt. For
Chriſt without all ambiguity and circumlocution,
by the image and inſcription of
the money, doth directly and expreſſely
prooue Caeſar to be free from ſubiection,
and intirely Soueraigne. Now if ſuch a ſupreme

and Soueraigne Prince, at any time
ſhal bandie and combine againſt God, and
thereby ſhall become a rebellious and perfidious
Prince; doubtleſſe for ſuch diſloyalty
he ſhall deſerue, that God would take
from him all hope of life eternall: and yet
hereby neither Pope nor people hath reaſon
to be puft vp, in their power to depriue
him of his temporall Kingdome.
               The L. Cardinal ſaith beſides:Pag. 76. 
                  The champions
of the Popes power to depoſe Kings, doe
expound that commandement of S. Paul, whereby
euery ſoule is made ſubiect vnto the ſuperiour
powers, to be a prouiſionall precept or caution accommodated
to the times; and to ſtand in force, only
vntill the Church was growne in ſtrength vnto
ſuch a ſcantling, that it might be in the power of
the faithfull, without ſhaking the pillars of Chriſtian
ſtate, to ſtand in the breach, and cautelouſly
to prouide that none but Chriſtian Princes might
be receiued: according to the Law in Deut. Thou
ſhalt make thee a King frō among thy brethren.The reaſon whereupon they ground is this:
Becauſe Paul ſaith, It is a ſhame for Chriſtians
to bee iudged vnder vniuſt Infidels, in matters

or buſines, which they had one againſt an other.
For which inconuenience, Iuſtinian after prouided
by Lawe; when he ordained that no Infidell nor
heretike might be admitted to the adminiſtration
of iuſtice in the Commonwealth.
               
               In which words of the Cardinall, the
word Receiued, is to be obſerued eſpecially
and aboue the reſt. For by chopping in
that word, he doth nimbly and with a trick
of legier-de-main, transforme or change
the very ſtate of the queſtion. For the queſtion
or iſſue of the cauſe, is not about receiuing,
eſtabliſhing, or chooſing a Prince;
(as in thoſe Nations where the Kingdome
goes by election) but about doing homage
to the Prince, when God hath ſetled him
in the Kingdome, and hath caſt it vpon a
Prince by hereditary ſucceſſion. For that
which is written, Thou ſhalt make thee a
King, doth no way concerne and touch the
people of France in theſe dayes: becauſe
the making of their King hath not of long
time been tyed to their election. The paſſage
therefore in Deuteron▪ makes nothing
to the purpoſe; no more then doth Iuſtinians

law. For it is our free and voluntary
confeſſion, that a Chriſtian Prince is to
haue ſpeciall care of the Laws, and to prouide
that no vnbeleeuer be made Lord
Cheife-Iuſtice of the Land, that no Infidell
be put in truſt with adminiſtration of iuſtice
to the people. But here the iſſue doth
not direct vs to ſpeake of Delegates, of ſubordinate
Magiſtrates, and ſuch as are in
Commiſſion from the Prince, but of the
ſupreame Prince himſelfe, the Soueraigne
Magiſtrate ordained by nature, and confirmed
by ſucceſſion. Our queſtion is, whether
ſuch a Prince can be vnthroned by the
Pope, by whom he was not placed in the
Throne; and whether the Pope can deſpoile
ſuch a Prince, of that Royaltie which
was neuer giuen him by the Pope, vnder
any pretended colour and imputation of
hereſie, of ſtupiditie, or infringing the priuiledges
of Monaſteries, or tranſgreſſing
the lawes and lines of holy matrimonie.
               Now that Saint Pauls commandement
which bindeth euery ſoule in the bands of
ſubiection vnto the higher powers, is no

precept giuen by way of prouiſo, and onely
to ſerue the times, but a ſtanding and a
perpetuall rule, it is hereby more then manifeſt.
S. Paul hath grounded this commandement
vpon certaine reaſons, not only
conſtant and permanent by their proper
nature, but likewiſe neceſſary for euery
ſtate, condition, and revolution of the
times. His reaſons; Becauſe all powers are ordained
of God: becauſe reſiſting of powers is reſiſting
the ordinance of God: becauſe the Magiſtrate
beares the ſword to execute iuſtice: becauſe
obedience and ſubiection to the Magiſtrate is neceſſary,
not onely for feare of his wrath, or feare of
puniſhment, but alſo for conſcience ſake. It is
therefore a caſe grounded vpon conſcience,
it is not a law deuiſed by humane
wiſedome; it is not faſhionable to the qualities
of the times. Apoſtolicall inſtructions
for the right informing of manners, are not
changeable according to times and ſeaſons.
To vſe the L. Cardinals language, and
to followe his fancie in the matter, is to
make way for two peſtiferous miſcheifes:
Firſt, let it be free and lawfull for Chriſtians,

to hold the commanding rules of God
for prouiſionall cautions, and what followes?
Men are lead into the broad way
of impietie, and the whole Scripture is wiped
of all authority. Then againe, for the
other miſcheife: The glorious triumphs of
moſt bleſſed Martyrs in their vnſpeakeable
torments and ſufferings, by the L. Cardinalls
poſition ſhall be iudged vnworthy to
weare the title and Crown of Martyrdom.
How ſo? Becauſe (according to his new fiction)
they haue giuen place to the violence
and fury of heathen Magiſtrates, not
in obedience to the neceſſary and certaine
commaundement of God, but rather to a
prouiſionall direction, accommodated to
the humours of the times. And therefore
the L. Cardinall hath vſed none other clay
wherewith to dawbe ouer his deuiſe, but
plaine falſification of holy Scripture. For
he makes the Apoſtle ſay to the Corinthians,
It is a ſhame for Chriſtians to be iudged
vnder vnbeleeuing Magiſtrates: whereas in
that whole context of Paul, there is no ſuch
matter. For when the Apoſtle ſaith, I ſpeake

it euen to your ſhame;
                  
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     . hee doth not ſay it is a
ſhame for a beleeuer to be iudged vnder an
Infidel, but he makes thē aſhamed of their
vngodly courſe, and vnchriſtian practiſe,
that in ſuing and impleading one an other,
they laid their actions of contention in the
Courts of vnbeleeuing Iudges. The ſhame
was not in bearing that yoke which God
had charged their necks withall, but in deuouring
and eating vp one an other with
writs of habeas corpus, and with other proceſſes;
as alſo in vncouering the ſhame, in laying
open the ſhamefull parts and prankes
played by Chriſtians, before Infidels, to
the great ſcandall of the Church. Here I
ſay the L. Cardinall is taken in a tricke of
manifeſt falſification. If therefore a King
when hee falls to play the heretike, deſerueth
to be depoſed; why ſhall not a Cardinall
when hee falls to play the iuggler with
holy Scripture, deſerue to be diſrobed?
               Meane while the indifferent Reader is
to conſider, how greatly this doctrine is
preiudiciall, and how full of danger, to
Chriſtians liuing vnder heretical or Pagan

Princes. For make it once knowne to the
Emperour of Turkes, let him once get neuer
ſo little a ſmacke of this doctrine; that
Chriſtians liuing vnder his Empire do take
Gods commaundement, for obedience to
Princes whom they count Infidels, to bee
onely a prouiſionall precept for a time, and
wait euery houre for all occaſions to ſhake
off the yoke of his bondage; doubtleſſe he
will neuer ſpare with all ſpeed to roote the
whole ſtocke, with all the armes and branches
of Chriſtians, out of his dominions.
Adde hereunto the L. Cardinalls former
determination; that poſſeſſion kept neuer
ſo long by the Turk in his Conqueſts ouer
Chriſtians, gaines him not by ſo long tract
of time one inch of preſcription; and it wil
appeare, that his Lordſhip puts the Turkiſh
Emperour in mind, and by his inſtruction
leades the ſaid Emperour as it were
by the hand, to haue no manner of affiance
in his Chriſtian ſubiects; and withall to afflict
his poore Chriſtians with all ſorts of
moſt grieuous and cruell torments. In this
regard the poore Chriſtians of Graecia and

Syria, muſt needes be very little beholden
to his Lordſhip. As for my ſelfe, and my
Popiſh ſubiects, to whome I am no leſſe
then an heretike forſooth; am not I by this
doctrine of the Cardinall, pricked and
whetted againſt my naturall inclination, to
turne clemencie into rigour; ſeeing that by
his doctrine my ſubiects are made to beleeue,
they owe me ſubiection onely by
way of prouiſo, and with waiting the occaſion
to worke my vtter deſtruction and final
ruine? the rather, becauſe Turkes, miſcreants,
and heretikes are maſhalled by the
Cardinall in the ſame ranke; and heretikes
are counted worſe, yea more iuſtly depoſeable,
then Turkes and Infidels, as irreligious
breakers and violaters of their oath?
Who ſeeth not here how great indignitie
is offered to me a Chriſtian King? paralleld
with Infidels, reputed worſe then a Turke,
taken for an vſurper of my Kingdomes,
reckoned a Prince, to whom ſubiects owe
a forced obedience by way of prouiſion,
vntill they ſhall haue meanes to ſhake off
the yoke, and to bare my temples of the

Crowne, which neuer can be pulled from
the ſacred Head, but with loſſe of the head
it ſelfe?
               Touching the warres vndertaken by the
French, Engliſh, and Germaines, in their
expedition for Ieruſalem, it appeares by the
iſſue and euent of the ſaid warres, that God
approoued them not for honourable. That
expedition was a deuiſe and inuention of
the Pope, whereby he might come to be infeoffed
in the Kingdoms of Chriſtian Princes.
For then al ſuch of the French, Engliſh,
or Germaines, as vndertooke the Croiſade,
became the Popes meere vaſſals. Then all
robbers by the high way ſide, adulterers,
cut-throats, and baſe bankerupts, were exempted
from the Secular and Ciuil power,
their cauſes were ſped in Conſiſtorian
Courts, ſo ſoone as they had gotten the
Croſſe on their caſſocks or coat-armours,
and had vowed to ſerue in the expedition
for the Leuant. Then for the Popes pleaſure
and at his commaundement, whole
countryes were emptied of their Nobles
and common ſouldiers. Then they made

long marches into the Leuant. For what
purpoſe? Onely to die vpon the points of
the Saracens pikes, or by the edge of their
barbarous courtelaſſes, battle-axes, fauchions,
and other weapons, without any benefit
and aduantage to themſelues or others.
Then the Nobles were driuen to ſell
their goodly Mannors, and auncient demaines
to the Church-men, at vnder priſes
and low rates; the very roote from which
a great part of the Church and Churchmens
reuenewes hath ſprung and growne
to ſo great height.See the Bull of Innoc. 3. at the end of the Later. Conc. Then, to bee ſhort, his
moſt bountifull Holineſſe gaue to any of
the riffe-raffe-ranke, that would vndertake
this expedition into the Holy land, a free
and full pardon for all his ſinnes, beſides a
degree of glory aboue the vulgar in the
Celeſtiall Paradiſe. Military vertue, I confeſſe,
is commendable and honourable;
prouided it be employed for iuſtice, and
that generous nobleneſſe of valiant ſpirits
be not vnder a colour and ſhadow of piety,
fetcht ouer with ſome caſts or deuiſes of Italian
cunning.
               
                  
Now let vs obſerue the wiſedome of
the L. Cardinall through this whole diſcourſe.
His Lordſhip is pleaſed in his Oration,
to cite certaine few paſſages of Scripture,
culls and picks them out for the moſt
gracefull in ſhewe: leaues out of his liſt
whole troupes of honourable witneſſes,
vpon whoſe teſtimonie, the Popes themſelues
and their principall adherents doe
build his power to depoſe Kings, and to
giue order for all Temporall cauſes. Take
a ſight of their beſt and moſt honourable
witneſſes. Peter ſaid to Chriſt, See here two
ſwords; and Chriſt anſwered, It is ſufficient.
Chriſt ſaid to Peter,Ier. 1. 
                  Put vp thy ſword into thy
ſheath. God ſaid to Ieremie, I haue eſtabliſhed
thee ouer Nations and Kingdomes.
                  1. Cor. 2. Paul
ſaid to the Corinthians, The ſpirituall man
diſcerneth all things. Chriſt ſaid to his Apoſtles,
Whatſoeuer yee ſhall looſe vpon earth: by
which words the Pope hath power forſooth
to looſe the oath of allegiance. Moſes ſaid,
In the beginning God created the heauen and the
earth.
                  Extauag. Vnam Sanctam. Vpon theſe paſſages, Pope Boniface
8. grapling and tugging with Philip the

Faire, doth build his Temporall power. Other
Popes and Papiſts auouch the like authorities.
Chriſt ſaid of himſelf, All things
are giuen to me of my Father, and all power is giuen
vnto me in heauen and in earth. The Deuils
ſaid, If thou caſt vs out, ſend vs into this
herd of ſwine. Chriſt ſaid to his Diſciples, Yee
ſhall finde the colt of an aſſe bound, looſe it and
bring it vnto me. By theſe places the aduerſaries
prooue, that Chriſt diſpoſed of Temporall
matters; and inferre thereupon, why
not Chriſts Vicar as well as Chriſt himſelfe.
The places and teſtimonies now following
are very expreſſe: In ſtead of thy fathers ſhall
be thy children:
                  Pſal. 45. 
                  thou ſhalt make them Princes
through all the earth. Item, Ieſus Chriſt not
onely commaunded Peter to feed his lambs;
but ſaid alſo to Peter, Ariſe, kill, and eat: the
pleaſant gloſſe, the rare inuention of the L.
Cardinall Baronius.Ioh. 12. Chriſt ſaid to the people,
If I were lift vp from the earth, I wil draw
all things vnto me. Who lets, what hinders
this place from fitting the Pope? Paul ſaid
to the Corinthians, Know ye not that we ſhall
iudge the Angels? how much more then the things

that pertaine vnto this life? A little after, Haue
not wee power to eate? Theſe are the chiefe
paſſages, on which as vpon maine arches,
the roofe of Papall Monarchie, concerning
Temporall cauſes, hath reſted for three or
foure ages paſt. And yet his Lordſhip durſt
not repoſe any confidence in their firme
ſtanding to beare vp the ſaid roofe of Temporall
Monarchie, for feare of making his
auditors to burſt with laughter. A wiſe part
without queſtion, if his Lordſhip had not
defiled his lips before, with a more ridiculous
argument drawne from the leproſie
and drie ſcab.
               Let vs now by way of compariſon behold
Ieſus Chriſt paying tribute vnto Caeſar,
and the Pope making Caeſar to pay him
tribute: Ieſus Chriſt perſwading the Iewes
to pay tribute vnto an heathen Emperour,
and the Pope diſpenſing with ſubiects for
their obedience to Chriſtian Emperours:
Ieſus Chriſt refuſing to arbitrate a controuerſie
of inheritance partable betweene
two priuate parties, and the Pope thruſting
in himſelfe without warrant or Commiſſion

to be abſolute Iudge in the depoſing of
Kings: Ieſus Chriſt profeſſing that his
Kingdome is not of this world, and the
Pope eſtabliſhing himſelfe in a terrene
Empire. In like manner the Apoſtles forſaking
all their goods to followe Chriſt, and
the Pope robbing Chriſtians of their
goods; the Apoſtles perſecuted by Pagan
Emperours, and the Pope now ſetting his
foote on the very throate of Chriſtian Emperours,
then proudly treading Imperiall
Crownes vnder his feete. By this compariſon,
the L. Cardinals allegation of Scripture
in fauour of his Maſter the Pope, is
but a kind of puppet-play, to make Ieſus
Chriſt a mocking ſtocke, rather then to ſatisfie
his auditors with any ſound precepts
and wholeſome inſtructions. Hereof hee
ſeemeth to giue ſome inckling himſelfe.
For after he hath beene plentifull in citing
authorities of Scripture, and of newe Doctors,
which make for the Popes power to
depoſe Kings; at laſt he comes in with a
faire and open confeſſion,Pag. 85. that neither by
diuine Oracles, nor by honourable antiquitie,

this controuerſie hath beene yet determined:
and ſo pulls downe in a word
with one hand, the frame of worke that he
had built and ſet vp before with an other:
diſcouering withal the reluctation and priuie
checkes of his owne conſcience.
               There yet remaineth one obiection, the
knot whereof the L. Cardinall in a manner
ſweateth to vntie.Pag. 84. His words be theſe:
The champions for the negatiue flie to the analogie
of other proceedings and practiſes in the
Chruch. They affirme that priuate perſons, maſters
or owners of goods and poſſeſſions among
the common people, are not depriued of their goods
for hereſie; and conſequently that Princes much
more ſhould not for the ſame crime bee depriued
of their eſtates. For anſwer to this reaſon, he
brings in the defendants of depoſition,
ſpeaking after this manner: In the Kingdom
of France the ſtrict execution of lawes decreed in
Court againſt heretickes, is fauourably ſuſpended
and ſtopped, for the preſeruation of peace and
publike tranquilitie. He ſaith elſewhere, Conniuence
is vſed towards theſe heretikes in regard
of their multitude, becauſe a notable part of the

French Nation and State is made all of heretikes.
I ſuppoſe that out of ſpeciall charitie, hee
would haue thoſe heretikes of his own making,
forewarned what courteous vſe and
intreaty they are to expect; when hee affirmeth
that execution of the lawes is but ſuſpended.
For indeed ſuſpenſions hold but
for a time. But in a cauſe of that nature and
importance, I dare promiſe my ſelfe, that
my moſt honoured Brother the King of
France, will make vſe of other counſell:
will rather ſeek the amitie of his neighbour
Princes, and the peace of his Kingdom: will
beare in minde the great and faithfull ſeruice
of thoſe, who in matter of religion diſſent
from his Maieſtie, as of the onely men
that haue preſerued and ſaued the Crowne
for the King his Father, of moſt glorious
memorie. I am perſwaded my Brother of
France will beleeue, that his liege people
pretended by the L. Cardinall to be heretikes,
are not halfe ſo bad as my Romane
Catholike ſubiects, who by ſecret practiſes
vnder-mine my life, ſerue a forraine Soueraigne,
are diſcharged by his Bulls of their

obedience due to me their naturall Soueraigne,
are bound (by the maximes and
rules publiſhed and maintained in fauour
of the Pope, before this full and famous aſſembly
of the Eſtate at Paris; if the ſaid
maximes be of any weight and authoritie)
to hold me for no lawfull King, are there
taught and inſtructed that Pauls commandement
concerning ſubiection vnto the
higher powers, aduerſe to their profeſſed
religion, is onely a prouiſionall precept,
framed to the times, and watching for the
opportunitie to ſhake off the yoake. All
which notwithſtanding, I deale with ſuch
Romane-Catholiks by the rules and waies
of Princely clemencie; their hainous and
pernicious error, in effect no leſſe then the
capitall crime of high treaſon, I vſe to call
ſome diſeaſe or diſtemper of the mind. Laſt
of all, I beleeue my ſaid Brother of France
will ſet downe in his tables, as in record,
how little he ſtandeth ingaged to the Lord
Cardinal in this behalfe. For thoſe of the
reformed Religion profeſſe and proclaim,
that next vnder God, they owe their preſeruation

and ſafetie to the wiſedome and
benignity of their Kings. But now comes
the Cardinall, and hee ſeekes to ſteale this
perſwaſion out of their hearts: Hee tells
them in open Parliament, and without any
going about buſhes, that all their welfare
and ſecuritie ſtandeth in their multitude,
and in the feare which others conceiue to
trouble the State, by the ſtrict execution
of lawes againſt heretikes.
               He addeth moreouer,Note by the way that here the Church of Rome is called a ſect. that Jn caſe a third
ſect ſhould peepe out and growe vp in France, the
profeſſors thereof ſhould ſuffer confiſcation of
their goods, with loſſe of life it ſelfe: as hath been
practiſed at Geneua againſt Seruetus, and in
England againſt Arrians. My anſwer is this,
That puniſhments for heretikes, duely and
according to law conuicted, are ſet downe
by decrees of the ciuil Magiſtrate, bearing
rule in the countrey where the ſaid heretikes
inhabite, and not by any ordinances
of the Pope. I ſay withall, the L. Cardinal
hath no reaſon to match and parallell the
Reformed Churches with Seruetus and the
Arrians. For thoſe heretikes were powerfully

conuicted by Gods word, and lawfully
condemned by the auncient Generall
Councils, where they were permitted and
admitted to plead their owne cauſe in perſon.
But as for the truth profeſſed by me,
and thoſe of the reformed religion, it was
neuer yet hiſſed out of the Schooles, nor
caſt out of any Councill, (like ſome Parliament
bills) where both ſides haue been
heard with like indifferencie. Yea, what
Councill ſoeuer hath beene offered vnto vs
in theſe latter times, it hath been propoſed
with certaine preſuppoſitions: as, That his
Holineſſe (beeing a partie in the cauſe, and
conſequently to come vnder iudgement as
it were to the barre vpon his triall) ſhall be
the Iudge of Aſſize with Commiſſion of
oyer and determiner: it ſhall be celebrated
in a citie of no ſafe acceſſe, without ſafe
conduct or conuoy to come or goe at pleaſure,
and without danger: it ſhall be aſſembled
of ſuch perſons with free ſuffrage
and voice, as vphold this rule, (which they
haue alreadie put in practiſe againſt Iohn
Hus and Hierom of Prage) that faith giuen,

and oath taken to an heretike, muſt not be
obſerued.
               Now then to reſume our former matter;
If the Pope hitherto hath neuer preſumed,
for pretended hereſie to confiſcate by ſentence,
either the lands or the goods of priuate
perſons, or common people of the
French Nation, wherfore ſhould he dare to
diſpoſſeſſe Kings of their Royall Thrones?
wherefore takes he more vpon him ouer
Kings, then ouer priuate perſons? wherefore
ſhal the ſacred heads of Kings be more
churliſhly, vnciuilly, and rigorouſly handled,
then the hoods of the meaneſt people?
Here the L. Cardinal in ſtead of a direct anſwer,
breakes out of the liſts, alleadging
cleane from the purpoſe examples of heretikes
puniſhed, not by the Pope, but by the
ciuill Magiſtrate of the Countrey. But Bellarmine
ſpeakes to the point with a more
free and open heart: he is abſolute and reſolute
in this opinion, that his Holineſſe
hath plenarie power to diſpoſe all Temporall
eſtates and matters in the whole world:
I am confident (ſaith Bellarmine) and I ſpeake

it with aſſurance,
                  Contr. Barclaium. cap. 27. 
                  that our Lord Ieſus Chriſt in
the dayes of his mortalitie, had power to dispoſe
of all Temporall things; yea, to ſtrippe Soueraign
Kings and abſolute Lords of their Kingdomes
and Seignories: and without all doubt hath granted
and left euen the ſame power vnto his Vicar,
to make vſe thereof whenſoeuer he ſhall thinke it
neceſſary for the ſaluation of ſoules. And ſo his
Lordſhip ſpeaketh without exception of any
thing at all. For who doth not knowe,
that Ieſus Chriſt had power to diſpoſe no
leſſe of priuate mens poſſeſſions, then of
whole Realmes and Kingdomes at his
pleaſure, if it had been his pleaſure to diſplay
the enſignes of his power? The ſame
fulneſſe of power is likewiſe in the Pope.
In good time: belike his Holineſſe is the
ſole heire of Chriſt, in whole and in part.
The laſt Lateran Council fineth a Laic that
ſpeaketh blaſphemie,Seſſ. 9. for the firſt offence
(if he be a gentleman) at 25. ducats, and at
50. for the ſecond. It preſuppoſeth and taketh
it for graunted, that the Church may
rifle and ranſacke the purſes of priuate
men, and caſt lots for their goods. The

Councill of Trent diggeth as deepe for the
ſame veine of gold and ſiluer. It ordaines;
That Emperours,
                  Seſſ. 25 cap. 19. 
                  Kings, Dukes, Princes, and
Lords of cities, caſtles, and territories holding of
the Church, in caſe they ſhall aſſigne any place
within their limits or liberties for the duell between
two Chriſtians, ſhal be depriued of the ſaid
citie, caſtle, or place, where ſuch duell ſhall be performed,
they holding the ſaid place of the Church
by any kind of tenure: that all other Eſtates held
in fee where the like offence ſhall be committed,
ſhall foorthwith fall and become forfeited to
their immediate and next Lords: that all goods,
poſſeſſions, and eſtates, as well of the combatants
themſelues, as of their ſeconds ſhall be confiſcate.
This Council doth neceſſarily preſuppoſe,
it lieth in the hand and power of the
Church, to diſpoſe of all the lands and eſtates,
held in fee throughout all Chriſtendome;
(becauſe the Church forſooth can
take from one, and giue vnto an other all
eſtates held in fee whatſoeuer, as well ſuch
as hold of the Church, as of ſecular Lords)
and to make ordinances for the confiſcation
of all priuate perſons goods. By this Canon

the Kingdome of Naples hath need to
looke well vnto it ſelfe. For one duell it
may fal into the Exchecker of the Romane
Church: becauſe that Kingdome payeth a
Reliefe to the Church, as a Royaltie or
Seignorie that holdeth in fee of the ſaid
Church. And in France there is not one
Lordſhip, not one Mannor, not one farme
which the Pope by this means cannot ſhift
ouer to a new Lord. His Lordſhip therefore
had carried himſelfe and the cauſe
much better, if in ſtead of ſeeking ſuch idle
ſhifts, he had by a more large aſſertion
maintained the Popes power to diſpoſe of
priuate mens poſſeſſions, with no leſſe
right and authoritie then of Kingdomes.
For what colour of reaſon can be giuen, for
making the Pope Lord of the whole, and
not of the parts? for making him Lord of
the forreſt in groſſe, and not of the trees in
parcell? for making him Lord of the whole
houſe, and not of the parlour or the dining
chamber?
               His Lordſhip alleadgeth yet an other
reaſon, but of no better weight: Betweene

the power of priuate owners ouer their goods, and
the power of Kings ouer their eſtates, there is no
little difference. For the goods of priuate perſons
are ordained for their owners, and Princes for
the benefit of their Common-wealths. Heare
me now anſwer. If this Cardinal-reaſon
hath any force to inferre, that a King may
lawfully be depriued of his Kingdome for
hereſie, but a priuate perſon cannot for the
ſame crime bee turned out of his manſion
houſe; then it ſhall follow by the ſame reaſon,
that a Father for the ſame cauſe may
be depriued of all power ouer his children,
but a priuate owner cannot be depriued of
his goods in the like caſe: becauſe goods
are ordained for the benefit and comfort
of their owners, but fathers are ordained
for the good and benefit of their children.
But moſt certaine it is, that Kings repreſenting
the image of God in earth and Gods
place, haue a better and cloſer ſeat in their
chaires of Eſtate, then any priuate perſons
haue in the ſaddle of their inheritances and
patrimonies, which are daily ſeene for
ſleight cauſes, to flit and to fall into the

hands of newe Lords. Whereas a Prince
beeing the Head, cannot be looſed in the
proper ioynt, nor diſmounted; like a cannon
when the carriage thereof is vnlockt,
without a ſore ſhaking and a moſt grieuous
diſlocation of all the members, yea
without ſubuerting the whole bodie of the
State, whereby priuate perſons without
number are inwrapped together in the
ſame ruine: euen as the lower ſhrubs and
other bruſh-wood are cruſhed in peices altogether
by the fall of a great oake. But
ſuppoſe his Lordſhips reaſon were ſomewhat
ponderous and ſolide withall, yet a
King (which would not be forgotten) is indowed
not onely with the Kingdome, but
alſo with auncient deſmenes and Crownelands,
for which none can be ſo ſimple to
ſay, the King was ordained and created
King; which neuertheleſſe he looſeth when
he looſeth his Crowne. Admit againe this
reaſon were of ſome pith, to make mighty
Kings more eaſily depoſeable then priuate
perſons from their patrimonies; yet all this
makes nothing for the deriuing and fetching

of depoſition from the Popes Conſiſtorie.
What hee neuer conferred, by what
right or power can hee claime to take away?
               But ſee here no doubt a ſharpe and ſubtile
difference put by the L. Cardinall betweene
a Kingdome, and the goods of priuate
perſons. Goods, as his Lordſhip ſaith,
are without life: they can be conſtrained by no
force, by no example, by no inducement of their
owners to looſe eternall life: Subiects by their
Princes may. Now I am of this contrary beleefe,
That an hereticall owner, or maſter
of a family, hath greater power and means
withall, to ſeduce his owne ſeruants and
children, then a Prince hath to peruert his
owne ſubiects; and yet for the contagion
of hereſie, and for corrupt religion, children
are not remooued from their parents,
nor ſeruants are taken away from their
maſters. Hiſtories abound with examples
of moſt flouriſhing Churches, vnder a
Prince of contrary religion. And if things
without life or ſoule are with leſſe danger
left in an heretikes hands; why then ſhall

not an hereticall King with more facilitie
and leſſe danger keep his Crown, his Royall
charge, his lands, his cuſtomes, his impoſts?
&c. For will any man, except he bee
out of his wits, affirme theſe things to haue
any life or ſoule? Or why ſhall it be counted
follie, to leaue a ſword in the hand of a
mad Bedlam? Is not a ſword alſo without
life and ſoule? For my part, I ſhould rather
be of this minde; that poſſeſſion of
things without reaſon, is more dangerous
and pernicious in the hands of an euill Maſter,
then the poſſeſſion of things indued
with life and reaſon. For things without
life lacke both reaſon and iudgement, how
to exempt and free themſelues from being
inſtruments in euill and wicked actions,
from beeing emploied to vngodly and abhominable
vſes. I will not deny, that an
hereticall Prince is a plague, a pernicious
and mortal ſicknes to the ſoules of his ſubiects.
But a breach made by one miſchiefe,
muſt not be filled vp with a greater inconuenience.
An errour muſt not be ſhocked
and ſhouldered with diſloialtie, nor hereſie

with periurie, nor impietie with ſedition
and armed rebellion againſt God and the
King. God, who vſeth to try and to ſchoole
his Church, will neuer forſake his Church:
nor hath need to protect his Church by any
proditorious and prodigious practiſes of
perfidious Chriſtians. For hee makes his
Church to be like the burning buſh. In the
middeſt of the fire and flames of perſecutions,
he will prouide that ſhe ſhall not bee
conſumed, becauſe he ſtandeth in the midſt
of his Church. And ſuppoſe there may bee
ſome iuſt cauſe for the French, to play the
rebels againſt their King; yet will it not follow,
that ſuch rebellious motions are to be
raiſed by the bellowes of the Romane Biſhop,
to whoſe Paſtorall charge and office
it is nothing proper, to intermeddle in the
ciuill affaires of forraine Kingdomes.
               Here is the ſumme and ſubſtance of the
L. Cardinals whole diſcourſe, touching his
pretence of the ſecond inconuenience.
Which diſcourſe he hath cloſed with a remarkeable
confeſſion: to wit, that neither
by the authoritie of holy Scripture, nor by

the teſtimony and verdict of the Primitiue
Church, there hath beene any full deciſion
of this queſtion. In regard whereof he falleth
into admiration, that Lay-people haue
gone ſo farre in audaciouſneſſe, as to labour
that a doubtfull doctrine might for euer
paſſe currant, and be taken for a newe
article of faith. What a ſhame, what a reproach
is this? how full of ſcandall? for ſo his Lordſhip
is pleaſed to cry out. This breakes into the ſeueralls
and incloſures of the Church: this lets in
whole herds of hereſies to graſe in her green and
ſweet paſtures. On the other ſide, without any
ſuch Rhetoricall outcries, I ſimply affirme:
It is a reproach, a ſcandall, a crime
of rebellion, for a ſubiect hauing his full
charge and loade of benefits, in the newe
ſpring of his Kings tender age, his King-fathers
blood yet reeking, and vpon the
point of an addreſſe for a double match
with Spaine; in ſo honourable an aſſembly,
to ſeek the thraldome of his Kings Crown,
to play the captious in cauilling about cauſes
of his Kings depoſing, to giue his former
life the lie with ſhame enough in his

olde age, and to make himſelfe a common
by-word, vnder the name of a Problematicall
Martyr; one that offers himſelfe to fagot
and fire for a point of doctrine but problematically
handled, that is, diſtruſtfully and
onely by way of doubtfull and queſtionable
diſcourſe: yea for a point of doctrine, in
which the French (as he pretendeth) are
permitted to thwart and croſſe his Holines
in iudgement, prouided they ſpeake in it as
in a point not certaine and neceſſary, but
onely doubtfull and probable.
            
            
               The third Jnconvenience
examined.
               
                  THE third Inconuenience pretended
by the L. Cardinall to growe by
admitting this Article of the third Eſtate,Pag. 87. is
flouriſhed in theſe colours: It would breede
and bring forth an open and vnauoideable ſchiſm
againſt his Holineſſe, and the reſt of the whole
Eccleſiaſticall bodie. For thereby the doctrine
long approoued and ratified by the Pope and the

reſt of the Church, ſhould now be taxed and condemned
of impious and moſt deteſtable conſequence;
yea the Pope and the Church, euen in
faith and in points of ſaluation, ſhould be reputed
and beleeued to be erroniouſly perſwaded. Hereupon
his Lordſhip giues himſelfe a large
ſcope of the raines, to frame his elegant
amplifications againſt ſchiſmes and ſchiſmatikes.
               Now to mount ſo high, and to flie in ſuch
place vpon the wings of amplification for
this Inconuenience, what is it elſe but magnifically
to report and imagine a miſcheife
by many degrees greater then the miſcheife
is? The L. Cardinal is in a great error,
if he make himſelfe beleeue, that other
nations wil make a rent or ſeparation from
the communion of the French, becauſe the
French ſtand to it tooth and nayle, that
French Crownes are not liable or obnoxious
to Papall depoſition; howſoeuer there
is no ſchiſme that importeth not ſeparation
of communion. The moſt illuſtrious Republike
of Venice, hath imbarked herſelfe
in this quarrell againſt his Holineſſe▪ hath

played her prize, and carried away the
weapons with great honour. Doth ſhe, notwithſtanding
her triumph in the cauſe, forbeare
to participate with all her neighbors
in the ſame Sacraments? doth ſhe liue in
ſchiſme with all the reſt of the Romane
Church? No ſuch matter. When the L.
Cardinal himſelfe not many yeeres paſt,
maintained the Kings cauſe, and ſtood honourably
for the Kings right againſt the
Popes Temporall vſurpations, did he then
take other Churches to be ſchiſmaticall, or
the rotten members of Antechriſt? Beleeue
it who liſt, I beleeue my Creed. Nay, his
Lordſhip telleth vs himſelfe a little after,
that his Holineſſe giues the French free
ſcope, to maintaine either the affirmatiue
or negatiue of this queſtion. And will his
Holineſſe hold them ſchiſmatikes, that diſſent
from his opinion and iudgement in a
ſubiect or cauſe eſteemed problematicall?
Farre be it from his Holineſſe. The King
of Spaine, reputed the Popes right arme,
neuer gaue the Pope cauſe by any act or other
declaration, to conceiue that hee acknowledged

himſelfe depoſeable by the
Pope for hereſie, or Tyrannie, or ſtupidity.
But beeing well aſſured the Pope ſtandeth
in greater feare of his arme, then he doth of
the Popes head and ſhoulders, he neuer
troubles his owne head about our queſtion.
More, when the booke of Cardinall
Baronius was come forth, in which booke
the Kingdome of Naples is decryed and
publiquely diſcredited (like falſe money)
touching the qualitie of a Kingdome, and
attributed to the King of Spain, not as true
proprietary thereof, but onely as an Eſtate
held in fee of the Romane Church; the
King made no bones to condemne and to
baniſh the ſaid booke out of his dominions.
The holy Father was contented to put vp
his Catholike Sonnes proceeding to the
Cardinalls diſgrace, neuer opened his
mouth againſt the King, neuer declared or
noted the King to bee ſchiſmaticall. Hee
waits perhaps for ſome fitter opportunitie;
when the Kingdome of Spaine groaning
vnder the burthens of inteſtine diſſentions
and troubles, he may without any danger

to himſelfe giue the Catholike King a
Biſhops mate. Yea, the L. Cardinall himſelfe
is better ſeen in the humors and inclinations
of the Chriſtian world, then to be
groſſely perſwaded, that in the Kingdome
of Spaine, and in the very heart of Rome
it ſelfe there be not many, which either
make it but a ieaſt, or elſe take it in fowle
ſcorne, to heare the Popes power ouer the
Crownes of Kings once named: eſpecially
ſince the Venetian Republike hath put his
Holineſſe to the worſe in the ſame cauſe,
and caſt him in Lawe.
               What needed the L. Cardinall then, by
caſting vp ſuch mounts and trenches, by
heaping one amplification vpon an other,
to make ſchiſme looke with ſuch a terrible
and hideous aſpect? Who knowes not how
great an offence, how heinous a crime it is
to quarter, not Ieſus Chriſts coat, but his
body, which is the Church? And what needed
ſuch terrifying of the Church with vglineſſe
of ſchiſme, whereof there is neither
colourable ſhew, nor poſſibility?
               The next vgly monſter, after ſchiſme,

ſhaped by the L. Cardinall in the third ſuppoſed
and pretended inconuenience, is hereſie.
His Lordſhip ſaith for the purpoſe:Pag. 89.
                  By this Article we are caſt headlong into a manifeſt
hereſie, as binding vs to confeſſe, that for many
ages paſt the Catholike Church hath been baniſhed
out of the whole world. For if the champions
of the doctrine contrary to this Article, doe
hold an impious and a deteſtable opinion, repugnant
vnto Gods word; then doubtleſſe the Pope
for ſo many hundred yeers expired, hath not been
the head of the Church, but an heretike and the
Antechriſt. He addeth moreouer; That the
Church long agoe hath loſt her name of Catholike,
and that in France there hath no Church flouriſhed,
nor ſo much as appeared theſe many and
more then many yeeres: for as much as all the
French Doctors for many yeeres together haue
ſtood for the contrary opinion. We can erect and
ſet vp no trophey more honourable for heretikes
in token of their victorie, then to avowe that
Chriſts viſible Kingdome is periſhed from the
face of the earth, and that for ſo many hundred
yeeres there hath not beene any Temple of God,
nor any ſpouſe of Chriſt, but euery where, and all

the world ouer, the Kingdome of Antechriſt, the
Synagogue of Satan, the ſpouſe of the Deuill,
hath mightily preuailed and borne all the ſway.
Laſtly, what ſtronger engines can theſe heretikes
wiſh or deſire, for the battering and the demoliſhing
of tranſubſtantiation, of auricular confeſſion,
and other like towers of our Catholike religion,
then if it ſhould bee graunted the Church
hath decided the ſaid points without any authoritie?
&c.
               
               Me thinkes the Lord Cardinall in the
whole draught and courſe of theſe words,
doth ſeeke not a little to blemiſh the honour
of his Church, and to marke his religion
with a blacke coale. For the whole
frame of his mother-Church is very eaſie to
be ſhaken, if by the eſtabliſhing of this Article
ſhe ſhall come to finall ruine and ſhall
become the Synagoue of Satan. Likewiſe,
Kings are brought into a very miſerable
ſtate and condition, if their Soueraigntie
ſhall not ſtand, if they ſhall not be without
danger of depoſition, but by the totall ruine
of the Church, and by holding the
Pope, whome they ſerue, to be Antechriſt.

The L. Cardinall himſelfe (let him be well
ſifted) herein doth not credit his owne
words. For doth not his Lordſhip tell vs
plaine, that neither by diuine teſtimonie,
nor by any ſentence of the ancient Church,
the knot of this controuerſie hath been vntyed?
againe, that ſome of the French, by
the Popes fauourable indulgence, are licenſed
or tolerated to ſay their mind, to deliuer
their opinion of this queſtion, though
contrarie to the iudgement of his Holines;
prouided they hold it onely as problematicall,
and not as neceſſary? What? Can
there be any aſſurance for the Pope, that he
is not Antechriſt; for the Church of Rome,
that ſhe is not a Synagogue of Satan, when
a mans aſſurance is grounded vpon wauering
and wild vncertanties, without Canon
of Scrpture, without conſent or countenance
of antiquity, and in a cauſe which the
Pope with good leaue ſuffereth ſome to
toſſe with winds of problematicall opinion?
It hath beene ſhewed before, that by
Gods word, whereof ſmall reckoning perhaps
is made, by venerable antiquity, and

by the French Church in thoſe times when
the Popes power was mounted aloft, the
doctrine which teaches depoſing of Kings
by the Pope, hath been checked and countermaunded.
What, did the French in
thoſe dayes beleeue, the Church was then
ſwallowed vp, and no where viſible or extant
in the world? No verily. Thoſe that
make the Pope of Soueraigne authoritie
for matters of faith, are not perſwaded that
in this cauſe they are bound abſolutely to
beleeue and credit his doctrine. Why ſo?
Becauſe they take it not for any decree or
determination of faith; but for a point pertaining
to the myſteries of State, and a pillar
of the Popes Temporal Monarchy; who
hath not receiued any promiſe from God,
that in cauſes of this nature hee ſhall not
erre. For they hold, that errour by no
meanes can crawle or ſcramble vp to the
Papall See, ſo highly mounted; but graunt
ambition can ſcale the higheſt walls, and
climbe the loftieſt pinnacles of the ſame
See. They hold withall, that in a caſe of ſo
ſpeciall aduantage to the Pope, whereby he

is made King of Kings, and as it were the
pay-maſter or diſtributer of Crownes, it is
againſt all reaſon that hee ſhould ſit as
Iudge, to carue out Kingdoms for his own
ſhare. To be ſhort, let his Lordſhip be aſſured
that he meets with notorious blocke-heads,
more blunt witted then a whetſtone,
when they are drawne to beleeue by his
perſwaſion, that whoſoeuer beleeues the
Pope hath no right nor power to put Kings
beſide their Thrones, to giue and take away
Crownes, are all excluded and barred
out of the heauenly Kingdome.
               But now followes a worſe matter: For
they whome the Cardinall reproachfully
calls heretikes, haue wrought and wonne
his Lordſhip (as to me ſeemeth) to plead
their cauſe at the barre, and to betray his
owne cauſe to theſe heretikes. For what
is it in his Lordſhip, but plaine playing the
Praeuaricator, when he cryeth ſo loud, that
by admitting and eſtabliſhing of this Article,
the doctrine of cake-incarnation and
priuy Confeſſion to a Prieſt, is vtterly ſubuerted?
Let vs heare his reaſon, and willingly

accept of the truth from his lips. The
Articles (as his Lordſhippe graunteth) of
Tranſubſtantiation, auricular Confeſſion,
and the Popes power to depoſe Kings, are
all grounded alike vpon the ſame authoritie.
Now he hath acknowledged the Article
of the Popes power to depoſe Kings, is
not decided by the Scripture, nor by the
auncient Church, but within the compaſſe
of certaine ages paſt, by the authority of
Popes and Councils. Then he goes on well,
and inferres with good reaſon, that in caſe
the point of the Popes power be weakned,
then the other two points muſt needs bee
ſhaken, and eaſily ouerthrowne. So that he
doth confeſſe the monſtrous birth of the
breaden-God, and the blind Sacrament or
vaine phantaſie of auricular confeſſion, are
no more conueyed into the Church by
pipes from the ſprings of ſacred Scripture,
or from the riuers of the auncient
Church, then that other point of the Popes
power ouer Kings and their Crownes. Very
good: For were they indeede deriued
from either of thoſe two heads, that is to

ſay, were they grounded vpon the foundation
of the firſt or ſecond authoritie; then
they could neuer be ſhaken by the downefall
of the Popes power to depoſe Kings. I
am well aſſured, that for vſing ſo good a
reaſon, the world will hold his Lordſhippe
in ſuſpicion, that he ſtill hath ſome ſmacke
of his fathers diſcipline and inſtruction,
who in times paſt had the honour to be a
Miniſter of the holy Goſpel.
               Howbeit he playeth not faire, nor vſeth
ſincere dealing in his proceeding againſt
ſuch as he calls heretikes; when he caſts in
their diſh, and beares them in hand they
frowardly wrangle for the inuiſibilitie of
the Church in earth. For indeed the matter
is nothing ſo. They freely acknowledge a
viſible Church. For howſoeuer the aſſembly
of Gods elect, doth make a bodie not
diſcernable by mans eye: yet we aſſuredly
beleeue, and gladly profeſſe, there neuer
wanted a viſible Church in the world; yet
onely viſible to ſuch as make a part of the
ſame. All that are without ſee no more but
men, they doe not ſee the ſaid men to be

the true Church. We beleeue moreouer
of the vniuerſall Church viſible, that it is
compoſed of many particular Churches,
whereof ſome are better fined and more
cleane from lees and dregs then other:
and withall, we deny the pureſt Churches
to be alwaies the greateſt and moſt viſible.
            
            
               The fourth and laſt Inconuenience
examined.
               
                  THE Lord Cardinall before he looketh
into the laſt Inconuenience, vſeth
a certaine preamble of his owne life
paſt, and ſeruices done to the Kings, Henry
the III. and IIII. Touching the latter of
which two Kings, his Lordſhip ſaith in a
ſtraine of boaſting, after this manner: I, by
the grace of God, or the grace of God by me rather,
reduced him to the Catholike religion. I obtained
at Rome his abſolution of Pope Clement 8.
I reconciled him to the holy See. Touching the
firſt of theſe points; I ſay the time, the occaſions,
and the foreſaid Kings neceſſary

affaires doe ſufficiently teſtifie, that he was
induced to change his mind, and to alter
his religion, vpon the ſtrength of other
manner of arguments then Theologicall
ſchooles, or the perſwaſions of the L. Cardinals
fluent Rhetoricke, do vſually afford,
or could poſſibly ſuggeſt. Moreouer, who
doth not know, that in affaires of ſo high
nature and conſequence, reſolutions once
taken, Princes are to proceede with inſtructions
by a formall courſe? As for the Kings
abſolution, pretended to bee purchaſed of
Clement 8. by the L. Cardinals good ſeruice;
it had beene the part of ſo great a
Cardinall, for the honour of his King, of
the Realme, and of his owne place, to haue
buried that peice of his notable ſeruice in
perpetuall ſilence, and in the darke night of
eternall obliuion. For in this matter of reconcilement,
it is not vnknowne to the
world, how ſhamefully and baſely he proſtituted
the inuiolable dignity of his King,
when his Lordſhip repreſenting the perſon
of his King, and couching on the ground,
by way of ſufficient penance, was glad (as I

haue noted in the Preface to my Apologie)
to haue his venerable ſhoulders gracefully
ſaluted with ſtripes, and reuerently worſhipped
with baſtonados of a Pontificiall
cudgell. Which gracefull, or diſgracefull
blemiſh rather, it pleaſed Pope Clement
of his rare clemencie, to grace yet with a
higher degre of ſpirituall graces: in giuing
the L. Cardinall then Biſhop of Eureux, a
certaine quantity of holy graines, croſſes,
and medals, or little plates of ſiluer, or ſome
other mettall, to hang about the necke, or
to be born about againſt ſome euil. Which
treaſures of the Popes grace, whoſoeuer
ſhould graciouſly and reuerently kiſſe,
they ſhould without faile purchaſe vnto
themſelues a pardon for one hundred
yeeres. Theſe feate and prety gugawes for
children, were no doubt a ſpeciall comfort
vnto the good Kings heart, after his Maieſtie
had been handſomely baſted vpon the
L. Biſhops backe. But with what face can
his Lordſhip brag, that he preuailed with
Pope Clement for the Kings abſolution?
The late Duke of Neuers, not long before

had ſolicited his Holines, with all earneſt
and humble inſtance to the ſame purpoſe;
howſoeuer, the Kings affaires then ſeeming
deſperate in the Popes eye, hee was
licenſed to depart for France, without any
due and gracious reſpect vnto his errand.
But ſo ſoone as the Pope receiued intelligence,
of the Kings fortunes growing to
the full, and the affaires of the League to
be in the wane, and the principall cities, the
ſtrongeſt places of garriſon through all
France to ſtrike tops and tops gallant, and
to hale the King; then the holy Ghoſt in
good time inſpired the holy Father with a
holy deſire and tender affection, to receiue
this poore wandring ſheep againe into the
flocke of Chriſt, and boſome of holy
Church. His Holineſſe had reaſon. For he
feared by his obſtinate ſeuerity to prouoke
the patience of the French, and to driue
that Nation (as they had many times threatned
before) then to put in execution their
auncient deſigne; which was, to ſhake off
the Pope, and to ſet vp ſome of their owne
tribes or kinreds for Patriarch ouer the

French Church. But let his Lordſhippe
vouchſafe to ſearch the ſecret of his owne
boſome, and no doubt he will not ſticke to
acknowledge, that before hee ſtirred one
foote out of France, he had good aſſurance
of the good ſucceſſe and iſſue of his honourable
embaſſage.
               Now the hearers thus prepared by his
Preface, the L. Cardinall proceedeth in his
purpoſe; namely to make proofe, how this
Article of the third Eſtate, wherein doubtfull
and queſtionable matters are mingled
and confounded with certaine and indubitable
principles, doth ſo debilitate and weaken
the ſinewes and vertue of any remedy
intended for the danger of Kings, as it maketh
all remedies and receipts preſcribed
for that purpoſe, to become altogether vnprofitable,
and without effect. He yeelds
this reaſon, (take it forſooth vpon my warrant)
a reaſon full of pith and ſubſtance:
The onely remedie againſt parricides, is to
thunder the ſolemne curſes of the Church,
and the puniſhments to bee inflicted after
death: which points, if they be not grounded

vpon infallible authoritie, wil neuer be
ſetled in mens perſwaſions with any certaine
aſſurance. Now in the ſolemne curſes
of the Church, no man can attaine to
the ſaid aſſurance, if things not denied bee
mingled with points not graunted, and not
conſented vnto by the Vniuerſall Church.
By a thing not denied and not conteſted,
the L. Cardinall meanes prohibiting and
condemning of King-killing: & by points
conteſted, hee meanes denying of the
Popes power to depoſe Kings.
               In this whole diſcourſe, I find neither
pith of argument, nor courſe of proofe; but
onely a caſt of the L. Cardinalls office by
way of counſell: whereunto I make this anſwer.
If there be in this Article of the third
Eſtate any point, wherein all are not of one
mind and the ſame iudgement; in whome
lieth all the blame, from whence riſes the
doubt, but from the Popes and Popiſh paraſites,
by whome the certaintie of the ſaid
point hath been cunningly remooued and
conueied away, and muſt bee reſtored againe
by publike authoritie? Now the way

to reſtore certaintie vnto a point, which againſt
reaſon is called into doubt and queſtion,
is to make it vp in one maſſe, or to
tie it vp in the ſame bundle, with other certaine
points of the ſame nature.
               Here I am forced to ſummon the conſciences
of men, to make ſome ſtand or ſtay
vpon this point, and with me to enter into
deepe conſideration, how great and vnvanquiſhable
force is euer found in the truth.
For theſe two queſtions, Whether Kings
may lawfully bee made away by aſſaſſins
waged and hired for the act; and Whether
the Pope hath lawful power to chaſe Kings
out of their Thrones, are by the L. Cardinals
owne confeſſion, in ſo full aſpect of
coniunction, that if either bee brought vnder
any degree of doubt, the other alſo is
fetcht within the ſame compaſſe. In which
words he directly pointeth as with a finger
to the very true ſource of the maine miſchiefe,
and to the baſilique and liuer veine,
infected with peſtilentiall blood, inflamed
to the deſtruction of Baſilicall Princes by
deteſtable parricide. For whoſoeuer ſhall

confidently beleeue that Popes are not armed
with power to depoſe Kings; will beleeue
with no leſſe confidence and aſſurance,
it is not lawfull by ſudden aſſaults to
flie at their throats. For are not all deſperate
villaines perſwaded, when they are hired
to murder Kings, that in doing ſo damnable
a feate, they doe it for a peice of notable
and extraordinarie ſeruice to the
Pope? This maxime therefore is to be
held for a principle vnmooueable and indubitable;
that, If ſubiects deſire the life of
their Kings to be ſecured; they muſt not
yeeld the Pope one inch of power, to depriue
their Kings of their Thrones and
Crownes, by depoſing their Kings.
               The Lord Cardinall teſtifieth no leſſe
himſelfe in theſe words: If thoſe monſters of
men, and furies of hell, by whom the life-blood of
our two laſt Kings was let out, had euer been acquainted
with Lawes Eccleſiaſticall, they might
haue read themſelues adiudged by the Councill of
Conſtance to expreſſe damnation. For in theſe
words, the L. Cardinall preferreth a bill of
inditement to caſt his Holineſſe; who, vpon

the commencing of the Leaguers warres,
in ſtead of giuing order for the publiſhing
of the ſaid Eccleſiaſticall Lawes for the reſtraining
of all parricidicall practiſes and attempts,
fell to the terrour of his fulminations,
which not long after were ſeconded
and ratified by the moſt audacious and
bloody murder of King Henry III. In like
manner, the whole Clergy of France are
wrapped vp by the L. Cardinals words, and
inuolued in the perill of the ſaid inditement.
For in ſtead of preaching the ſaid
Eccleſiaſticall Lawes, by which all King-killing
is inhibited; the Prieſts taught, vented,
and publiſhed nothing but rebellion;
and when the people in great deuotion
came to powre their confeſſions into the
Prieſts eares; then the Prieſts, with a kind
of counterbuffe in the ſecond place when
their turne was come, and with greater deuotion,
powred blood into the eares of the
people: out of which roote grewe the terrour
of thoſe cruell warres, and the horrible
parricide of that good King.
               But let vs here take ſome neere ſight of

theſe Eccleſiaſticall Lawes, whereby ſubiects
are inhibited to kill, or deſperately to
diſpatch their Kings out of the way. The
L. Cardinall, for full payment of all ſcores
vpon this reckoning, layeth downe the credit
of the Council at Conſtance, which neuertheleſſe
affoardeth not one myte of true
and currant payment. The truth of the hiſtorie
may be taken from this briefe relation.
Iohn Duke of Burgundie, procured
Lewis Duke of Orleans to be murthered
in Paris. To iuſtifie and make good this
bloody act, hee produced a certaine petimaſter,
one called by the name of Iohn Petit.
This little Iohn cauſed nine propoſitions
to be giuen forth or ſet vp, to be diſcuſſed
in the famous Vniuerſitie of Paris. The
ſumme of all to this purpoſe: It is lawfull,
iuſt, and honourable, for euery ſubiect or
priuate perſon, either by open force and violence,
or by deceit and ſecret lying in wait,
or by ſome witty ſtratagem, or by any other
way of fact, to kill a Tyrant practiſing
againſt his King and other higher powers:
yea the King ought in reaſon, to giue him

a penſion or ſtipend, that hath killed any
perſon diſloyall to his Prince. The words
of Petits firſt propoſition be theſe: It is lawfull
for euery ſubiect,
                  Gerſon. 
                  without any commaund or
commiſſion from the higher powers, by all the
Lawes of nature, of man, and of God himſelfe, to
kill or cauſe to be killed any Tyrant, who either
by a couetous and greedie deſire, or by fraud, by
diuination vpon caſting of lots, by double and
treacherous dealing, doth plot or practiſe againſt
his Kings corporall health, or the health of his
higher powers. In the third propoſition: It is
lawfull for euery ſubiect, honourable and meritorious,
to kill the ſaid Tyrant, or cauſe him to bee
killed as a Traitor, diſloyall and trecherous to his
King. In the ſixt propoſition: The King is
to appoint a ſalarie and recompence for him that
hath killed ſuch a Tyrant, or hath cauſed him to
be killed. Theſe propoſitions of Iohannes
Parvus, were condemned by the Councill
of Conſtance, as impious, and tending to
the ſcandall of the Church. Now then,
whereas the ſaid Councill no doubt vnderſtood
the name or word Tyrant in the
ſame ſenſe, wherein it was taken by Iohannes

Parvus; certaine it is, the Councill was
not of any ſuch iudgment or mind, to condemne
one that ſhould kil a King or Soueraigne
Prince; but one that by treaſon, and
without commandement ſhould kill a ſubiect,
rebelling and practiſing againſt his
King. For Iohn Petit had vndertaken
to iuſtifie the making away of the Duke
of Orleans to bee a lawfull act, and
calls that Duke a Tyrant, albeit he was no
Soueraigne Prince; as all the aboue recited
words of Iohn Petit doe teſtifie, that hee
ſpeaketh of ſuch a Tyrant, as beeing in ſtate
of ſubiection rebelleth againſt his free and
abſolute Prince. So that whoſoeuer ſhall
narrowly ſearch and looke into the minde
and meaning of the ſaid Councill, ſhall eaſily
perceiue, that by their decrees the ſafetie
of Kings was not confirmed but weakned,
not augmented but diminiſhed: for as
much as they inhibited priuate perſons to
kill a ſubiect, attempting by wicked counſells
and practiſes to make away his King.
               But be it graunted, the Council of Conſtance
is flat and altogether direct againſt

King-killers. For I am not vnwilling to be
perſwaded, that had the queſtion then touched
the murdering of Soueraign Princes,
the ſaid Council would haue paſſed a ſound
and holy decree. But, I ſay, this graunted,
what ſheild of defence is hereby reached
to Kings, to ward or beat off the thruſts of
a murderers weapon, and to ſaue or ſecure
their life? ſeeing the L. Cardinal, building
vpon the ſubtile deuiſe and ſhift of the Ieſuites,
hath taught vs out of their Schooles,
that by Kings are vnderſtood Kings in eſſe,
not yet fallen from the ſupreame degree of
Soueraigne Royalty. For beeing once depoſed
by the Pope, (ſay the Ieſuites) they
are no longer Kings, but are fallen from
the rights of Soueraigne dignity; and conſequently
to make ſtrip and waſt of their
blood, is not forſooth to make ſtrip and
waſt of Royall blood. Theſe Ieſuiticall maſters,
in the file of their words are ſo ſupple
and ſo limber, that by leauing ſtill in their
ſpeech ſome ſtarting hole or other, they are
able by the ſame, as by a poſterne or back-doore,
to make an eſcape.
               
                  
Meane while the Readers are here to
note (for well they may) a tricke of monſtrous
and moſt wicked cunning. The L.
Cardinall contends for the bridling and
hampering of King-killers by the Lawes
Eccleſiaſticall. Now it might be preſumed,
that ſo reuerend and learned a Cardinal intending
to make vſe of Eccleſiaſticall laws,
by vertue whereof the life of Kings may be
ſecured, would fill his mouth and garniſh
the point with diuine Oracles, that wee
might the more gladly and willingly giue
him the hearing, when he ſpeakes as one
furniſhed with ſufficient weight and authoritie
of ſacred Scripture. But behold, in
ſtead of the authenticall and moſt auncient
word, he propounds the decree of a late-borne
Councill at Conſtance, neither for
the Popes tooth, nor any way comming
neere the point in controuerſie. And ſuppoſe
it were pertinent vnto the purpoſe, the
L. Cardinall beareth in his hand a forke of
diſtinction, with two tines or teeth to beare
off, nay to ſhift off and to avoide the matter
with meere dalliance. The ſhorteſt and

neereſt way (in ſome ſort of reſpects) to eſtabliſh
a falſe opinion, is to charge or ſet
vpon it with falſe and with ridiculous reaſons.
The like way to worke the ouerthrow
of true doctrine, is to reſt or ground it vpon
friuolous reaſons or authorities of ſtubble-weight.
For example; if wee ſhould
thus argue for the immortality of the ſoule
with Plato:In Phaedone. The ſwan ſingeth before her
death; ergo, the ſoule is immortall. Or thus
with certain ſeduced Chriſtians: The Pope
hath ordained the word of God to be authenticall:
ergo, all credit muſt be giuen to
diuine Scripture. Vpon the ſpurkies or
hookes of ſuch ridiculous arguments and
friuolous reaſons, the L. Cardinall hangs
the life and ſafetie of Kings.
               With like artificiall deuiſes he pretendeth
to haue the infamous murders, and
appoſted cutting of Kings throats in extreame
deteſtation; and yet by depoſing
them from their Princely dignities, by degrading
them from their ſupreme and Soueraigne
authorities, he brings their ſacred
heads to the butchers blocke. For a King

depoſed by the Pope, (let no man doubt)
will not leaue any ſtone vnremooued, nor
any meanes and wayes vnattempted, nor
any forces or powers of men vnleuied or
vnhired, to defend himſelfe and his Regall
dignitie, to repreſſe and bring vnder his rebellious
people, by the Pope diſcharged of
their allegiance. In this perplexitie of the
publike affaires, in theſe tempeſtuous perturbations
of the State, with what perills is
the King not beſieged and aſſaulted? His
head is expoſed to the chances of warre; his
life a faire marke to the inſidious practiſes
of a thouſand traytors; his Royall perſon
obuious to the dreadfull ſtorme of angry
fortune, to the deadly malice, to the fatall
and mortall weapons of his enemies. The
reaſon: He is preſuppoſed to be lawfully
and orderly ſtripped of his Kingdome. Wil
he yet hold the ſterne of his Royall eſtate?
Then is he neceſſarily taken for a Tyrant,
reputed an vſurper, and his life is expoſed
to the ſpoyle. For the publike lawes make
it lawfull and free, for any priuate perſon
to enterpriſe againſt an vſurper of the

Kingdome:In reos Maieſtatis, & publicos hoſtes omnis homo miles eſt. Ter. apol. cap. 2. 
                  Euery man, ſaith Tertullian, is
a ſouldier, to beare armes againſt all Traytors and
publike enemies. Take from a King the title
of lawful King, you take from him the warrant
of his life, and the weapons whereby
he is maintained in greater ſecurity, then
by his Royall Guard armed with ſwords
and halbards, through whoſe wards and
rankes, a deſperate villaine will make himſelfe
an eaſie paſſage, beeing maſter of an
other mans life, becauſe he is prodigall and
careleſſe of his owne. Such therefore as
pretend ſo much pittie towards Kings, to
abhorre the bloody opening of their liuerveine,
and yet withall to approoue their
hoyſting out of the Royall dignity; are iuſt
in the vaine and humour of thoſe that ſay,
Let vs not kill the King, but let vs diſarme
the King that he may die a violent death:
let vs not depriue him of life, but of the
meanes to defend his life: let vs not ſtrangle
the King and ſtoppe his vitall breath, ſo
long as he remaineth King; O that were
impious, O that were horrible and abhominable;
but let him bee depoſed, and

then whoſoeuer ſhall runne him through
the body with a weapon vp to the very
hilts, ſhall not beare the guilt of a King-killer.
All this muſt be vnderſtood to be ſpoken
of Kings, who after they are deſpoyled
of Regalitie, by ſentence of depoſition giuen
by the Pope, are able to arme themſelues,
and by valiant armes doe defend
their Soueraigne rights. But in caſe the
King, blaſted with Romane lightning, and
ſtricken with Papall thunder, ſhall actually
and ſpeedily bee ſmitten downe from his
high Throne of Regality, with preſent loſſe
of his Kingdome; I beleeue it is almoſt impoſſible
for him to warrant his owne life,
who was not able to warrant his own Kingdome.
Let a cat be throwne from a high
roofe to the bottome of a cellour or vault,
ſhe lighteth on her feete, and runneth away
without taking any harme. A King is not
like a cat, howſoeuer a cat may looke vpon
a King: he cannot fall from the loftie pinnacle
of Royaltie, to light on his feet vpon
the hard pauement of a priuate ſtate, without
cruſhing all his bones in peices. It hath

been the lot of very few Emperours and
Kings, to outliue their Empire. For men
aſcend to the lofty Throne of Kings, with a
ſoft and eaſie pace, by certaine ſteps and
degrees; there be no ſtately ſtaires to come
downe, they tumble head and heeles together
when they fall. He that hath once griped
anothers Kingdom, thinks himſelfe in
little ſafetie, ſo long as he ſhall of his courteſy
ſuffer his diſſeiſed predeceſſor to draw
his breath. And ſay that ſome Princes, after
their fall from their Thrones, haue eſcaped
both point and edge of the Tyrants weapon;
yet haue they wandred like miſerable
fugitiues in forraine countryes, or elſe haue
beene condemned like captiues to perpetuall
impriſonment at home, a thouſandfold
worſe and more lamentable then
death it ſelfe. Dyoniſius the Tyrant of Syracuſa,
from a great King in Sicilie turn'd
School-maſter in Corinth. It was the onely
calling & kind of life, that as he thought
bearing ſome reſemblance of rule and gouernment,
might recreate his mind, as an
image or picture of his former Soueraigntie

ouer men. This Dyoniſius was the onely
man (to my knowledge) that had a humour
to laugh after the loſſe of a Kingdome,
and in the ſtate of a Pedant or gouernour
of children, merily to ieaſt and to
ſcorne his former ſtate and condition of a
King. In this my Kingdome of England,
ſundry Kings haue ſeen the walls as it were
of their Princely fortreſſe diſmantled, razed,
and beaten downe. By name, Edward
and Richard, both II. and Henrie VI. all
which Kings were moſt cruelly murdered
in priſon. In the raigne of Edward III. by
act of Parliament, whoſoeuer ſhal imagine,
(that is the very word of the Statute) or machinate
the Kings death, are declared guilty
of rebellion and high treaſon. The learned
Iudges of the Land, grounding vpon
this law of Edward the third, haue euer
ſince reputed and iudged them traytors according
to Law, that haue dared onely to
whiſper or talke ſoftly between the teeth,
of depoſing the King. For they count it a
cleare caſe, that no Crowne can be taken
from a Kings head, without loſſe of Head

and Crowne together, ſooner or later.
               The L. Cardinall therefore in this moſt
weighty and ſerious point doth meerely
dally, and flowt after a ſort, when he tels vs,
The Church doth not intermeddle with releaſing
of ſubiects,
                  Pag. 95. 
                  and knocking off their yrons of obedience,
but onely before the Eccleſiaſticall tribunall
ſeate; and that beſides this double cenſure, of
abſolution to ſubiects, and excommunication to
the Prince, the Church impoſeth none other penaltie.
Vnder pretence of which two cenſures, ſo far
is the Church (as the L. Cardinal pretendeth)
from conſenting that any man ſo cenſured ſhould
be touched for his life, that ſhee vtterly abhorreth
all murder whatſoeuer; but eſpecially all ſudden
and vnprepenced murders, for feare of caſting away
both body and ſoule; which often in ſudden
murders goe both one way. It hath been made
manifeſt before, that all ſuch proſcription
and ſetting forth of Kings to port-ſale, hath
alwaies for the traine thereof, either ſome
violent and bloody death, or ſome other
miſchiefe more intolerable then death it
ſelfe. What are we the better, that parricides
of Kings are neither ſet on, nor approoued

by the Church in their abhominable
actions; when ſhe layeth ſuch plots,
and taketh ſuch courſes, as neceſſarily doe
inferre the cutting of their throates? In the
next place be it noted, that his Lordſhip againſt
all reaſon, reckons the abſoluing of
ſubiects from the oath of allegiance, in the
ranke of penalties awarded and enioyned
before the Eccleſiaſticall tribunall ſeate.
For this penaltie is not Eccleſiaſticall, but
Ciuill, and conſequently not triable in Eccleſiaſticall
Courts, without vſurping vpon
the ciuill Magiſtrate. But I wonder with
what face the Lord Cardinall can ſay, the
Church neuer conſenteth to any practiſe againſt
his life, whome ſhe hath once chaſtiſed
with ſeuere cenſures. For can his
Lordſhip be ignorant, what is written by
Pope Vrbanus,Can. excom. Cauſ. 23. Quaeſt. 6. 
                  Can. Excommunicatorum. We
take them not in any wiſe to be man-ſlayers, who
in a certain heate of zeale towards the Catholike
Church their Mother, ſhall happen to kill an excomunicate
perſon. More, if the Pope doth
not approoue and like the practiſe of King-killing,
wherefore hath not his Holineſſe

impoſed ſome ſeuere cenſure vpon the
booke of Mariana the Ieſuite (by whome
parricides are commended, nay highly extolled)
when his Holines hath been pleaſed
to take the paines, to cenſure and call in
ſome other of Mariana's bookes? Againe,
wherefore did his Holines aduiſe himſelfe,
to cenſure the decree of the Court of Parliament
in Paris againſt Iohn Chaſtell?
Wherefore did he ſuffer Garnet and Oldcorne
my powder-miners, both by bookes
and pictures vendible vnder his noſe in
Rome, to be inrowled in the Canon of
holy Martyrs? And when he ſaw two great
Kings murdered one after an other, wherfore
by ſome publike declaration did not
his Holineſſe teſtifie to all Chriſtendome,
his inward ſenſe and true apprehenſion of
ſo great miſfortune, as all Europe had iuſt
cauſe to lament on the behalfe of France?
Wherefore did not his Holineſſe publiſh
ſome Lawe or Pontificiall decree, to prouide
for the ſecuritie of Kings in time to
come? True it is that he cenſured Becanus
his booke. But wherefore? That by a captious

and ſleight cenſure, he might preuent
a more exact and rigorous decree of the
Sorbon Schoole. For the Popes checke to
Becanus, was onely a generall cenſure and
touch, without any particular ſpecification
of matter touching the life of Kings. About
ſome two moneths after, the ſaid book was
printed againe, with a dedication to the
Popes Nuntio in Germany; yet without any
alteration, ſaue onely of two articles
containing the abſolute power of the people
ouer Kings. In recompence and for a
counterchecke whereof, three or fowre articles
were inſerted into the ſaid book, touching
the Popes power ouer Kings; articlcs
no leſſe wicked and iniurious to Regall
rights; nay more iniurious then any of the
other clauſes, whereof iuſt cauſe of exception
and complaint had been giuen before.
If I would collect and heape vp examples
of auncient Emperours, (as of Henrie IV.
whoſe dead corps felt the rage and fury of
the Pope; or of Frederic 2. againſt whome
the Pope was not aſhamed to whet and
kindle the Sultane; or of Queen Elizabeth

our Predeceſſour, of glorious memorie,
whoſe life was diuers times aſſaulted by
priuie murderers, expreſſely diſpatched
from Rome for that holy ſeruice) if I would
gather vp other examples of the ſame
ſtampe, which I haue laid forth in my Apology
for the oth of allegiance; I could make
it more cleare then day-light, how farre the
L. Cardinals words are diſcrepant from the
truth, where his Lordſhip out of moſt rare
confidence is bold to avowe,Pag. 97. 
                  That neuer any
Pope went ſo farre, as to giue conſent or counſell
for the deſperate murdering of Princes. That
which already hath beene alleadged may
ſuffice to conuince his Lordſhip: I meane,
that his Holineſſe by depoſing of Kings,
doth lead them directly to their graues
and tombes.
               The Cardinal himſelfe ſeemeth to take
ſome notice hereof. The Church (as he ſpeaketh)
abhorreth ſudden and vnprepenſed murders
aboue the reſt.
                  Pag. 95. Doth not his Lordſhip in
this phraſe of ſpeech acknowledge, that
murders committed by open force, are not
ſo much diſavowed or diſclaimed by the

Church? A little after he ſpeakes not in the
teeth, as before, but with full and open
mouth: that he doth not diſlike a King
once depoſed by the Pope, ſhould be purſued
with open warre. Whereupon it followes,
that in warre the King may be lawfully
ſlaine. No doubt a remarkeable degree
of his Lordſhips clemencie. A King
ſhall be better entreated and more mildly
dealt withall, if he be ſlaine by the ſhot of
an harquebuſe or caleeuer in the field, then
if he be ſtabd by the ſtroke or thruſt of a
knife in his chamber: or if at a ſiege of ſome
city he be blown vp with a myne, then by a
myne made, and a train of gunpowder laid
vnder his Palace or Parliament houſe in
time of peace. His reaſon: Forſooth, becauſe
in ſudden murders, oftentimes the ſoule &
the bodie periſh both together. O ſingular
bounty, and rare clemencie! prouokers,
inſtigators, ſtrong puffers and blowers of
parricides, in mercifull compaſſion of the
ſoule, become vnmercifull and ſhamefull
murderers of the body. This deuice may
well claime and challenge kinred of Mariana

the Ieſuites inuention. For he liketh
not at any hand the poiſoning of a Tyrant
by his meate or drinke; for feare leaſt he taking
the poiſon with his owne hand, and
ſwallowing or gulping it down in his meat
or drinke ſo taken, ſhould be found felo de
ſe, (as the common Lawyer ſpeaketh) or
culpable of his owne death. But Mariana
likes better, to haue a Tyrant poyſoned by
his chaire, or by his apparell and robes, after
the example of the Mauritanian Kings;
that beeing ſo poyſoned onely by ſent, or
by contact, he may not be found guilty of
ſelfe-fellonie, and the ſoule of the poore
Tyrant in her flight out of the body may
be innocent. O hell-hounds, O diabolicall
wretches, O infernall monſters! Did they
onely ſuſpect and imagine, that either in
Kings there is any remainder of Kingly
courage, or in their ſubiects any ſparke left
of auncient libertie; they durſt as ſoon eate
their nayles, or teare their owne fleſh from
the bones, as once broach the veſſell of
this Diabolicall deuice. How long then,
how long ſhall Kings whom the Lord hath

called his Anointed, Kings the breathing
images of God vpon earth; Kings that with
a wry or frowning looke, are able to cruſh
theſe earth-wormes in peices; how long
ſhall they ſuffer this viperous brood, ſcot-free
and without puniſhment, to ſpit in
their faces? how long, the Maieſtie of God
in their perſon and Royall Maieſtie to bee
ſo notoriouſly vilified, ſo diſhonourably
trampled vnder foote?
               The L. Cardinall bourds vs with a like
manifeſt ieaſt, and notably trifles; firſt, diſtinguiſhing
between Tyrants by adminiſtration,
and Tyrants by vſurpation; then
ſhewing that he by no meanes doth approoue
thoſe prophane and heatheniſh
Lawes, whereby ſecret practiſes and conſpiracies
againſt a Tyrant by adminiſtration
are permitted. His reaſon. Becauſe after
depoſition there is a certaine habitude to Royall
dignitie, and as it were a kind of politicke character
inherent in Kings, by which they are diſcerned
from perſons meerely priuate, or the common
ſort of people; and the obſtacle, croſſe-barre, or
ſparre once remooued and taken out of the way,

the ſaid Kings depoſed are at length reinueſted
and endowed againe with lawfull vſe of Royall
dignitie, and with lawfull adminiſtration of the
Kingdome. Is it poſſible that his Lordſhip
can ſpeake and vtter theſe words according
to the inward perſwaſion of his heart? I beleeue
it not. For admit a King caſt out of
his Kingdom were ſure to eſcape with life;
yet beeing once reduced to a priuate ſtate
of life, after hee hath wound or wrought
himſelfe out of deadly danger, ſo farre he is
from holding or retayning any remainder
of dignity or politike impreſſion, that on
the contrary he falleth into greater contempt
and miſery, then if he had beene a
very peaſant by birth, and had neuer held
or gouerned the ſterne of Royall eſtate.
What fowle is more beautifull then the
peacocke? Let her be plumed and bereft
of her feathers; what owle, what iacke-daw
more ridiculous, more without all pleaſant
faſhion? The homely ſowter, the infamous
catchpol, the baſe tincker, the rude artificer,
the pack-horſe-porter, then liuing in Rome
with liberty, when Valentinian was detaind

captiue by Saporas the Perſian King, was
more happy then that Romane Emperour.
And in caſe the Lord Cardinall himſelfe
ſhould be ſo happy (I ſhould ſay ſo vnfortunate)
to be ſtript of all his dignities and
Eccleſiaſtical promotions; would it not redound
to his Lordſhips wonderfull conſolation,
that in his greateſt extremitie, in the
loweſt of his bareneſſe and nakedneſſe, he
ſtill retaineth a certaine habituall right and
character of a Cardinall, whereby to recouer
the loſſe of his former dignities and
honours? when hee beholds theſe prints
and impreſſions of his foreſaid honours;
would it not make him the more willing
and glad, to forſake the backe of his venerable
mule, to vſe his Cardinals foot-cloath
no longer, but euer after like a Cardinall
in print and character, to walke on foote?
               But let vs examine his Lordſhips conſolation
of Kings, thruſt out of their kingdomes
by the Pope for hereſie. The obſtacle
(as the L. Cardinall ſpeaketh) beeing taken
away; that is to ſay, when the King ſhal
be reformed; this habituall right and character

yet inherent in the perſon of a King, reſtores him
to the lawfull adminiſtration of his Kingdome. I
take this to be but a cold comfort. For here
his Lordſhip doth onely preſuppoſe, and
not prooue, that after a King is thruſt out
of his Throne, when he ſhall repent and
turne true Romane Catholike, the other
by whome he hath been caſt out, and by
force diſſeiſed, will recall him to the Royal
ſeate, and faithfully ſettle him againe in his
auncient right, as one that reioyceth for the
recouery of ſuch a loſt ſheep. But I ſhould
rather feare, the new King would preſſe
and ſtand vpon other termes; as a terme of
yeeres for a triall, whether the repentance
of the King diſplaced be true and ſound to
the coare, or counterfeit, diſſembled, and
painted holines; for the words, the ſorrowfull
and heauy lookes, the ſadde and formal
geſtures, of men pretending repentance,
are not alwaies to be taken, to be reſpected,
to be credited. Again, I ſhould feare
the afflicted King might be charged and
borne downe too, that albeit he hath renounced
his former hereſie, he hath ſtumbled

ſince at an other ſtone, and runne the
ſhip of his faith againſt ſome other rock of
new hereticall prauitie. Or I ſhould yet
feare, he might be made to beleeue, that
hereſie maketh a deeper impreſſion, and a
character more indeleble in the perſon,
then is the other politike character of Regall
Maieſty. Alas, good Kings! in how
hard, in how miſerable a ſtate doe they
ſtand? Once depoſed, and euer barred of
repentance. As if the ſcapes and errors of
Kings, were all ſinnes againſt the Holy
Ghoſt, or ſinnes vnto death, for which it is
not lawfull to pray. Falls a priuate perſon?
he may be ſet vp, and new eſtabliſhed. Fals
a King? is a King depoſed? his repentance
is euer fruitles, euer vnprofitable. Hath a
priuate perſon a trayne of ſeruants? He can
not be depriued of any one without his
priuity and conſent. Hath a King millions
of ſubiects? He may be depriued by the
Pope of a third part, when his Holineſſe
will haue them turne Clerics or enter cloiſters,
without asking the King leaue: & ſo of
ſubiects they may be made nonſubiects.
               
                  
But I queſtion yet further. A King falling
into hereſie, is depoſed by the Pope;
his ſonne ſtands pure Catholike. The Regall
ſeate is empty. Who ſhall ſucceed in
the depoſed Kings place? Shall a ſtranger
be preferred by the Pope? That were to do
the innocent ſonne egregious and notorious
wrong. Shall the ſonne himſelfe? That
were a more iniurious part in the ſonne againſt
his father. For if the ſonne be touched
with any feare of God, or mooued
with any reuerence towards his Father, he
will diligently and ſeriouſly take heed, that
he put not his Father by the Kingdome, by
whoſe meanes he himſelfe is borne to a
Kingdome. Nor will he tread in the ſteps
of Henry V. Emperour, who by the Popes
inſtigation, expelled and chaſed his aged
father out of the Imperiall dignity. Much
leſſe will he hearken to the voice & aduiſe
of Doctor Suares the Ieſuite;Lib. 6. cap. 4. Si papa Regem deponat, ab illis tantum p
                        •
                     terit, expelli vel interfici, quibus ipſe id commiſerit. who, in his
booke written againſt my ſelfe, a book applauded
and approoued of many Doctors,
after he hath like a Doctor of the chaire,
pronounced, That a King depoſed by the

Pope, cannot bee lawfully expelled or killed, but
onely by ſuch as the Pope hath charged with ſuch
execution: falleth to adde a little after: If the
Pope ſhall declare a King to be an heretike, and
fallen from the Kingdome, without making further
declaration touching execution; that is to
ſay, without giuing expreſſe charge vnto
any to make away the King: then the lawfull
ſucceſſor beeing a Catholike, hath power to do the
feate; and if he ſhall refuſe, or if there ſhall bee
none ſuch, then it appertaineth to the comminaltie
or body of the Kingdome. A moſt deteſtable
ſentence. For in hereditarie Kingdoms,
who is the Kings lawfull ſucceſſor, but his
ſonne? The ſonne then by this doctrine,
ſhall imbrew his hands in his owne fathers
blood, ſo ſoone as he ſhall be depoſed by
the Pope. A matter ſo much the neerer and
more deepely to be apprehended, becauſe
the ſaid moſt outragious booke flyeth like
a furious maſtiffe directly at my throat, and
withal inſtilleth ſuch precepts into the tender
diſpoſition of my ſonne, as if hereafter
he ſhall become a Romane Catholike, ſo
ſoone as the Pope ſhall giue me the lift out

of my Throne, ſhall bind him forthwith to
make effuſion of his owne fathers blood.
Such is the religion of theſe Reuerend Fathers,
the pillars of the Pontificiall Monarchie.
In compariſon of whoſe religion and
holineſſe, all the impietie that euer was among
the Infidels, and all the barbarous
cruelty that euer was among the Canibals,
may paſſe henceforth in the Chriſtian
world for pure clemencie and humanity.
Theſe things ought his Lordſhip to haue
pondered, rather then to babble of habitudes
and politike characters, which to the
common people are like the Bergamaſque
or the wild-Iriſh forme of ſpeech, and paſſe
their vnderſtanding.
               All theſe things are nothng in a manner,
if we compare them with the laſt clauſe,
which is the cloſer, and as it were the vpſhot
of his Lordſhips diſcourſe. For therein
he laboureth to perſwade concerning
this Article, framed to bridle the Popes tyrannicall
power ouer Kings, if it ſhould receiue
gratious entertainment, and general
approbation; That it would breed great danger,

and worke effects of pernicious conſequence
vnto Kings. The reaſon: becauſe it would
prooue an introduction to ſchiſme; and ſchiſme
would ſtirre vp ciuill warres, contempt of Kings,
diſtempered inclinations and motions to intrappe
their life; and which is worſt of all, the fierce
wrath of God, inflicting all ſorts of calamities.
An admirable paradoxe, and able to ſtrike
men ſtone-blind: that his Holineſſe muſt
haue power to depoſe Kings, for the better
ſecurity and ſafegard of their life; that when
their Crownes are made ſubiect vnto an others
will and pleaſure, then they are come
to the higheſt altitude and eleuation of honour;
that for the onely warrant of their life,
their ſupreame and abſolute greatnes muſt
be depreſſed; that for the longer keeping of
their Crownes, an other muſt plucke the
Crowne from their heads. As if it ſhould
be ſaid, Would they not be ſtript naked by
an other? the beſt way is, for themſelues to
vntruſſe, for themſelues to put off all, and
to goe naked of their owne accord. Will
they keepe their Soueraigntie in ſafetie for
euer? The beſt way is to let an other haue

their Soueraigne authority and ſupreame
Eſtate in his power. But I haue been euer
of this mind, that when my goods are at no
mans command or diſpoſing but mine
owne, then they are truely and certainly
mine owne. It may be this error is growne
vpon me and other Princes, for lacke of
braines: whereupon it may be feared, or
at leaſt coniectured, the Pope meanes to
ſhaue our crownes, and thruſt vs into ſome
cloiſter, there to hold ranke in the brotherhood
of good King Childeric. For as
much then as my dull capacity doth not
ſerue me to reach or comprehend the pith
of this admirable reaſon, I haue thought
good to ſeeke and to vſe the inſtruction of
old and learned experience, which teacheth
no ſuch matter: by name, that ciuill
warres and fearefull perturbations of State
in any nation of the world, haue at any time
growne from this faithfull credulity of ſubiects,
that Popes in right haue no power, to
wreſt and lift Kings out of their dignities
and poſſeſſions. On the other ſide, by eſtabliſhing
the contrary maximes, to yoke

and hamper the people with Pontificiall
tyrannie, what rebellious troubles and
ſtirres, what extreame deſolations hath
England been forced to feare and feele, in
the raigne of my Predeceſſors Henry II.
Iohn, and Henry III? Theſe be the maximes
and principles, which vnder the Emperour
Henry IV. and Frederic the I. made all Europe
flowe with channels and ſtreames of
blood, like a riuer with water, while the
Saracens by their incurſions and victories
ouerflowed, and in a manner drowned the
honour of the Chriſtian name in the Eaſt.
Theſe bee the maximes and principles,
which made way for the warres of the laſt
League into France; by which the very
bowels of that moſt famous and flouriſhing
Kingdome were ſet on ſuch a combuſtion,
that France herſelfe was brought
within two fingers breadth of bondage to
an other Nation, and the death of her two
laſt Kings moſt villanouſly and trayterouſly
accompliſhed. The Lord Cardinall
then giuing theſe diabolicall maximes
for meanes to ſecure the life and eſtate of

Kings, ſpeaketh as if he would giue men
counſell to dry themſelues in the riuer,
when they come as wet as a water ſpaniel
out of a pond; or to warme themſelues by
the light of the Moone, when they are ſtarnaked,
and well neere frozen to death.
            
            
               The Concluſion of the Lord of
Perron examined.
               
                  
                     AFTER the L. Cardinal hath ſtoutly
ſhewed the ſtrength of his arme,
and the deepe skill of his head in fortification;
at laſt he leaues his loftie ſcaffolds, and
falls to work neerer the ground, with more
eaſie tooles of humble prayers and gentle
exhortations. The ſumme of the whole is
this: He adiures his auditors neuer to forge remedies,
neuer ſo to prouide for the temporall ſafetie
of Kings, as thereby to worke their finall falling
from eternall ſaluation: neuer to make any
rent or rupture in the vnity of the Church, in this
corrupt age infected with peſtilent hereſies, which
alreadie hauing made ſo great a breach in the

walls of France, will no doubt double their
ſtrength by the diſſentions, diuiſions, and ſchiſmes
of Catholikes. If this infectious plague ſhall ſtill
encreaſe and growe to a carbuncle, it can by no
meanes poyſon religion; without bringing Kings
to their winding ſheetes and wofull hearſes. The
firſt rowlers of that ſtone of offence, aymed at no
other marke, then to make an ignominious and lamentable
rent in the Church. He thinks the Deputies
of the third Eſtate, had neither head nor
firſt hand in contriuing this Article; but holds it
rather a newe deuice and ſubtile inuention, ſuggeſted
by perſons, which beeing alreadie cut off
by their owne practiſes from the body of the Romane
Church, haue likewiſe inueigled and inſnared
ſome that beare the name of Catholiks, with
ſome other Eccleſiaſtics; and vnder a faire pretence
and goodly cloake, by name, the ſeruice of
the King, haue ſurpriſed and played vpon their
ſimplicitie. Theſe men (as the Cardinal ſaith)
doe imitate Julian the Apoſtata, who to bring the
Chriſtians to idolatrous worſhip of falſe gods,
commaunded the idols of Iupiter and Venus to be
intermingled with Imperiall ſtatues, and other Images
of Chriſtian Emperours, &c. Then after

certaine Rhetoricall flouriſhes, his Lord
ſhip fals to proſecute his former courſe, and
cries out of this Article; A monſter hauing
the tayle of a fiſh, as if it came cutting the narrow
Seas out of England. For in full effect it is downright
the Engliſh oath; ſauing that indeede the
oath of England runneth in a more mild forme,
and a more moderate ſtraine. And here he ſuddenly
takes occaſion to make ſome digreſſion.
For out of the way, and cleane from
the matter, he entreth into ſome purpoſe of
my praiſe and commendation. He courteouſly
forſooth is pleaſed to grace me with knowledge
of learning, and with ciuill vertues. Hee
ſeemeth chiefly to reioyce in his owne behalfe,
and to giue me thanks, that I haue
done him the honour to enter the liſts of Theologicall
diſpute againſt his Lordſhip. Howbeit he
twitches and carpes at me withall, as at one
that ſoweth ſeeds of diſſention and ſchiſme
amongſt Romane Catholiks. And yet he
would ſeeme to qualifie the matter, and to
make all whole againe, by ſaying, That in ſo
doing I am perſwaded I doe no more then my dutie
requires. But now (as his Lordſhip followes

the point) it ſtandeth neither with godlineſſe,
nor with equity, nor with reaſon, that Acts
made, that Statutes, Decrees, and Ordinances
ratified for the State and Gouernement of England,
ſhould be thruſt for binding Laws vpon the
Kingdome of France: nor that Catholikes, and
much leſſe that Eccleſiaſtics, to the ende they may
liue in ſafetie, and freely enioy their priuiledges
or immunities in France, ſhould be forced to beleeue,
and by oath to ſeale the ſame points, which
Engliſh Catholikes to the ende they may purchaſe
libertie onely to breath, nay ſorrowfully to ſigh
rather, are conſtrained to allow and to aduowe
beſides. And whereas in England there is no
ſmall number of Catholikes, that lacke not conſtant
and reſolute minds to endure all ſorts of puniſhment,
rather then to take that oath of allegiance;
will there not be found an other manner of
number in France, armed with no leſſe conſtancie
and Chriſtian reſolution? There will, moſt honourable
Auditors, there will without all doubt: and
we all that are of Epiſcopall dignity will ſooner
ſuffer Martyrdome in the cauſe. Then out of
the ſuper-abundance and ouer-weight of
his Lordſhips goodneſſe, he cloſely coucheth

and conuayeth a certaine diſtaſtfull
oppoſition between me and his King; with
prayſes and thankes to God, that his King is
not delighted, and takes no pleaſure to make
Martyrs.
               All this Artificial and ſwelling diſcourſe
like vnto puffe-paſt, if it be viewed at a
neere diſtance, will be found like a bladder
full of wind, without any ſoliditie of ſubſtantiall
matter. For the Deputies of the
third Eſtate were neuer ſo voide of vnderſtanding,
to beleeue that by prouiding for
the life and ſafety of their King they ſhould
thruſt him headlong into eternall damnation.
Their braines were neuer ſo much
blaſted, ſo farre benummed, to dreame the
ſoule of their King cannot mount vp to
heauen, except he be diſmounted from his
Princely Throne vpon earth, whenſoeuer
the Pope ſhall hold vp his finger.
               And whereas he is bold to pronounce,
that heretikes of France doe make their
benefit and aduantage of this diuiſion; that
ſpeech is grounded vpon this propoſition;
That profeſſors of the Chriſtian Religion

reformed (which is to ſay, purged and
cleanſed of all Popiſh dregs) are heretiks in
fact, and ought ſo to be reputed in right.
Which propoſition his Lordſhip wil neuer
ſoundly and ſufficiently make good, before
his Holineſſe hath compiled an other Goſpell,
or hath forged an other Bible at his
Pontificiall anvile. The L. Cardinall vndertooke
to reade me a lecture vpon that
argument; but euer ſince hath played
Mum-budget, and hath put himſelfe to ſilence,
like one at a Non-plus in his enterpriſe.
There be three yeeres already gone
and paſt, ſince his Lordſhip beganne to
ſhape ſome anſwer to a certaine writing diſpatched
by me in few daies. With forming
and reforming, with filing and poliſhing,
with labouring and licking his anſwer ouer
and ouer againe, with reiterated extractions
and calcinations, it may be coniectured
that all his Lordſhips labour and coſt
is long ſince evaporated and vaniſhed in
the aire. Howbeit, as well the friendly
conference of a King, (for I will not call it
a contention) as alſo the dignitie, excellencie,

and importance of the matter, long
ſince deſerued, and as long ſince required
the publiſhing of ſome or other anſwer. His
Lordſhips long ſilence will neuer be imputed
to lacke of capacity, wherewith who
knoweth not how abundantly he is furniſhed;
but rather to well aduiſed agnition
of his owne working and building vpon a
weake foundation.
               But let vs returne vnto theſe heretikes,
that make ſo great gaine by the diſagreement
of Catholikes. It is no part of their
dutie to aime at ſowing of diſſentions; but
rather to intend and attend their faithfull
performance of ſeruice to their King. If
ſome be pleaſed, and others offended, when
ſo good and loyall duties are ſincerely diſcharged;
it is for all good ſubiects to grieue
and to be ſory, that when they ſpeake for
the ſafetie of their King and honour of the
truth, it is their hard hap to leaue any at all
vnſatisfied. But ſuppoſe the ſaid heretikes
were the Authors of this Article preferred
by the third Eſtate. What need they to
conceale their names in that regard? What

need they to diſclaime the credit of ſuch a
worthy act? Would it not redound to their
perpetuall honour, to be the onely ſubiects
that kept watch ouer the Kings life and
Crowne, that ſtood centinell, and walked
the rounds for the preſeruation of his
Princely diademe, when all other had no
more touch, no more feeling thereof then
ſo many ſtones? And what neede the Deputies
for the third Eſtate, to receiue inſtructions
from forraine Kingdomes, concerning
a cauſe of that nature; when there was
no want of domeſticall examples, and the
French hiſtories were plentifull in that argument?
What need they to gape for this
reformed doctrine, to come ſwimming
with a fiſhes tayle out of an Iſland to the
mayne continent, when they had before
their eyes the murders of two Kings, with
diuerſe ciuill warres, and many Arreſts of
Court, all tending to inſinuate and ſuggeſt
the introduction of the ſame remedy? Suggeſtions
are needleſſe from abroad, when
the miſchiefe is felt at home. It ſeemes to
me that his Lordſhip in ſmoothing and

tickling the Deputies for the third Eſtate,
doth no leſſe then wring and wrong their
great ſufficiencie with contumely and outragious
abuſe: as if they were not furniſhed
with ſufficient foreſight, & with loyal
affection towards their King, for the preſeruation
of his life and honour, if the remedie
were not beaten into their heads by
thoſe of the Religion, reputed heretikes.
               Touching my ſelfe, ranged by his Lordſhip
in the ſame ranke with ſowers of diſſention;
I take my God to witnes, and my
owne conſcience, that I neuer dream'd of
any ſuch vnchriſtian proiect. It hath been
hitherto my ordinary courſe to follow honeſt
counſells, and to walke in open waies.
I neuer wonted my ſelfe to holes and corners,
to crafty ſhifts, but euermore to plain
and open deſignes. I need not hide mine
intentions for feare of any mortall man,
that puffeth breath of life out of his noſtrils.
Nor in any ſort doe I purpoſe, to ſet
Iulian the Apoſtata before mine eyes, as a
patterne for me to follow. Iulian of a Chriſtian
became a Pagan: I profeſſe the ſame

faith of Chriſt ſtill, which I haue euer profeſſed:
Iulian went about his deſignes with
crafty conueiances; I neuer with any of his
captious and cunning ſleights: Iulian forced
his ſubiects to infidelitie againſt Ieſus
Chriſt; I labour to induce my ſubiects vnto
ſuch tearmes of loyaltie towards my ſelfe,
as Ieſus Chriſt hath preſcribed and taught
in his word. But how farre I differ from Iulian,
it is to bee ſeene more at large in my
anſwer to Bellarmines Epiſtles written to
Blackwell; from whence the Lord Cardinall
borrowing this example, it might well
haue beſeemed his Lordſhip to borrow
likewiſe my anſwer from the ſame place.
               Now as it mooues me nothing at all, to
be drawne by his Lordſhip into ſuſpitions
of this nature and qualitie: ſo by the prayſes,
that he rockes me withall, I will neuer
be lulled aſleepe. To commend a man for
his knowledge, and withall to take from
him the feare of God, is to admire a ſouldier
for his goodly head of haire or his curled
locks, and withall to call him baſe coward,
faint-hearted and freſh-water ſouldier.

Knowledge, wit, and learning in an hereticke,
are of none other vſe and ſeruice, but
onely to make him the more culpable, and
conſequently obnoxious to the more grieuous
puniſhments. All vertues turne to
vices, when they become the ſeruants of
impietie. The hand-maids which the Soueraigne
Lady Wiſdome calleth to be of
her traine in the 9. Prouerb. are moral vertues,
and humane ſciences; which then
become pernicious, when they runne away
from their Soueraigne Lady-Miſtris, and
put ouer themſelues in ſeruice to the Deuill.
What difference is between two men,
both alike wanting the knowledge of God;
the one fnrniſhed with arts and ciuill vertues,
the other brutiſhly barbarous and of
a deformed life, or of prophane manners?
What is the difference between theſe two?
I make this the onely difference: the firſt
goeth to hell with a better grace, and falleth
into perdition with more facility, then
the ſecond. But he becommeth exceedingly
wicked, euen threefold and fourefold
abhominable, if he waſt his treaſure and

ſtocke of ciuill vertues in perſecuting the
Church of Chriſt: and if that may be layed
in his diſh which was caſt in Caeſars teeth,
that in plain ſobernes and well-ſetled temper,
he attempts the ruine of the Common-wealth,
which from a drunken ſot
might receiue perhaps a more eaſie fall. In
briefe, I ſcorn all garlands of praiſes, which
are not euer greene; but beeing drie and
withered for want of ſap and radicall moyſture,
doe flagge about barbarous Princes
browes. I defie and renounce thoſe prayſes,
which fit me no more then they fit a
Mahumetane King of Marocco. I conteſt
againſt all praiſes which grace me with pety
acceſſories, but rob me of the principall,
that one thing neceſſary; namely, the feare
and knowledge of my God: vnto whoſe
Maieſty alone, I haue deuoted my ſcepter,
my ſword, my penne, my whole induſtry,
my whole ſelfe, with all that is mine in
whole and in part. I doe it, I doe it in all
humble acknowledgement of his vnſpeakable
mercy and fauour, who hath vouchſafed
to deliuer me from the erroneous way

of this age, to deliuer my Kingdome from
the Popes tyrannicall yoake, vnder which
it hath lyen in times paſt moſt grieuouſly
oppreſſed. My Kingdome where God is
now purely ſerued, and called vpon in a
tongue which all the vulgar vnderſtand.
My Kingdom, where the people may now
reade the Scriptures without any ſpeciall
priuiledge from the Apoſtolike See, and
with no leſſe libertie then the people of Epheſus,
of Rome, and of Corinth did reade
the holy Epiſtles, written to their Churches
by S. Paul. My Kingdome, where the people
now pay no longer any tribute by the
poll for Papall indulgences, as they did about
an hundred yeeres paſt,Aliquot annis poſt, Apoſtolicae ſedis nuncius in Angliam ad colligendum S. Petri vectigal miſſus. Onu
                        •
                     
                     phri in vit Paul. 4. Vide & Math. Paris. and are no
longer compelled to the mart, for pardons
beyond the Seas and Mountaines, but haue
them now freely offered from God, by the
doctrine of the Goſpel preached at home,
within their owne ſeuerall pariſhes and iuriſdictions.
If the Churches of my Kingdome,
in the L. Cardinals accompt, be
miſerable for theſe cauſes and the like; let
him dreame on, and talke his pleaſure: for

my part I will euer advowe, that more
worth is our miſery then all his felicity. For
the reſt, it ſhall by Gods grace be my daily
endeauour and ſerious care, to paſſe my
daies in ſhaping to my ſelfe ſuch a courſe of
life, that without ſhamefull calumniating
of my perſon, it ſhall not reſt in the tippe of
any tongue, to touch my life with iuſt reprehenſion
or blame. Nor am I ſo priuie
to mine owne guiltineſſe, as to thinke my
ſtate ſo deſperate, ſo deplorable, as Popes
haue made their owne. For ſome of them
haue been ſo open-hearted and ſo tongue-free,
to pronounce that Popes themſelues,
the key-bearers of Heauen and hel,Onup. de vitis Pontif. in vit. Mar. 2. doth teſtifie, that Marcel alſo after Adrian 4. vſed theſe words: Non video quo modo qui locum hunc altiſſ. tenent, ſaluari poſſint. cannot
be ſaued. Two Popes, reckoned among
the beſt of the whole bunch or pack, namely,
Adrian IV. and Marcelline II. haue
both ſung one and the ſame note; that in
their vnderſtanding they could not conceiue
any reaſon why, or any meanes how
thoſe that ſway the Popedome can be partakers
of ſaluation. But for my particular,
grounding my faith vpon the promiſes of
God contained in the Goſpell, I doe confidently

and aſſuredly beleeue, that repenting
mee of my ſinnes, and repoſing my
whole truſt in the merits of Ieſus Chriſt, I
ſhall obtaine forgiueneſſe of my ſinnes
thorough his Name. Nor doe I feare, that
I am now, or ſhall be hereafter caſt out of
the Churches lap and boſome; that I now
haue or hereafter ſhall haue no right to the
Church as a putrified member thereof, ſo
long as I do or ſhall cleaue to Chriſt Ieſus,
the Head of the Church: the appellation
and name whereof, ſerueth in this corrupt
age, as a cloake to couer a thouſand newe
inuentions; and now no longer ſignifies the
aſſembly of the faithfull, or ſuch as beleeue
in Ieſus Chriſt according to his word, but
a certaine glorious oſtentation and Temporall
Monarchy, whereof the Pope forſooth
is the ſupreame head.
               But if the L. Cardinall by aſſured and
certaine knowledge (as perhaps he may by
common fame) did vnderſtand the horrible
conſpiracies that haue been plotted and
contriued, not againſt my perſon and life
alone, but alſo againſt my whole ſtocke: if

he rightly knew and were inly perſwaded,
of how many fowle periuries and wicked
treaſons, diuerſe Eccleſiaſticall perſons
haue been lawfully conuicted: in ſtead of
charging me with falſe imputations, that I
ſuffer not my Catholikes to fetch a ſigh, or to draw
their breath; and that I thruſt my Catholikes vpon
the ſharpe edge of puniſhment in euery kind;
he would, and might well, rather wonder,
how I my ſelfe, after ſo many dangers run,
after ſo many proditorious ſnares eſcaped,
doe yet fetch my owne breath, and yet practiſe
Princely clemency towards the ſaid
Catholiks, notorious tranſgreſſors of diuine
and humane laws. If the French King
in the heart of his Kingdome, ſhould nouriſh
and foſter ſuch a neſt of ſtinging hornets
and buſie waſpes, I meane ſuch a pack
of ſubiects, denying his abſolute Soueraignty,
as many Romane Catholikes of
my Kingdome do mine: it may well bee
doubted, whether the L. Cardinall would
aduiſe his King ſtill to feather the neſt of
the ſaid Catholiks, ſtill to keep them warm,
ſtill to beare them with an eaſie and a gentle

hand. It may well be doubted, whether
his Lordſhip would extoll their conſtancie,
that would haue the courage to
ſheath vp their ſwords in his Kings bowels,
or blow vp his King with gun-powder, into
the neather ſtation of the loweſt region. It
may well be doubted, whether hee would
indure that Orator, who (like as himſelfe
hath done) ſhould ſtirre vp others to ſuffer
Martyrdome after ſuch examples, and to
imitate parricides and traitors in their conſtancy.
The ſcope then of the L. Cardinal,
in ſtriking the ſweet ſtrings, and ſounding
the pleaſant notes of prayſes, which faine
he would fill mine eares withall; is onely
by his excellent skil in the muſicke of Oratorie,
to bewitch the hearts of my ſubiects,
to infatuate their minds, to ſettle them in a
reſolution to depriue me of my life. The
reaſon: Becauſe the plotters and practiſers
againſt my life, are honoured and rewarded
with a glorious name of Martyrs: their
conſtancie (what els?) is admired, when
they ſuffer death for treaſon. Whereas hitherto
during the time of my whole raigne

to this day, (I ſpeake it in the word of a
King, and truth it ſelfe ſhal make good the
Kings word) no man hath loſt his life, no
man hath endured the Racke, no man hath
ſuffered corporall puniſhment in other
kinds, meerely or ſimply, or in any degree
of reſpect, for his conſcience in matter of
religion; but for wicked conſpiring againſt
my life, or Eſtate, or Royall dignitie; or els
for ſome notorious crime, or ſome obſtinate
and wilfull diſobedience. Of which
traiterous and viperous brood, I commanded
one to be hanged by the necke of late
in Scotland: a Ieſuite of intolerable impudencie,
who at his arraignment and publike
triall, ſtiffely maintained, that I haue
robbed the Pope of his right, and haue no
manner of right in the poſſeſſion of my
Kingdome. His Lordſhip therefore in offering
himſelfe to Martyrdome, after the
rare example of Catholiks, as he ſaith ſuffering
all ſort of puniſhment in my Kingdome,
doth plainely profeſſe himſelfe a
follower of traytors and parricides. Theſe
be the Worthies, theſe the heroicall ſpirits,

theſe the honourable Captaines and Coronels,
whoſe vertuous parts neuer ſufficiently
magnified and prayſed, his Lordſhip
propoundeth for imitation to the French
Biſhops. O the name of Martyrs, in olde
times a ſacred name! how is it now derided
and ſcoffed? how is it in theſe daies filthily
prophaned? O you the whole quire
and holy company of Apoſtles, who haue
ſealed the truth with your deareſt blood!
how much are you diſparaged? how vnfitly
are you paragoned and matched, when
traytors, bloody butchers, and King-killers
are made your aſſiſtants, and of the ſame
Quorum; or to ſpeake in milder tearmes,
when you are coupled with Martyrs that
ſuffer for maintaining the Temporall rites
of the Popes Empire? with Biſhops that offer
themſelues to a Problematicall Martyrdome,
for a point decided neither by the
authorities of your Spirit-inſpired pens, nor
by the auncient and venerable teſtimonie
of the Primitiue Church? for a point which
they dare not vndertake to teach, otherwiſe
then by a doubtfull, cold, fearefull

way of diſcourſe, and altogether without
reſolution. In good ſooth, I take the Cardinall
for a perſonage of a quicker ſpirit and
clearer ſight, (let his Lordſhip hold me
excuſed) then to perſwade my ſelfe, that in
theſe matters his tongue and his heart, his
pen and his inward iudgement, haue any
concord or correſpondence one with another.
For beeing very much againſt his
minde (as he doth confeſſe) thruſt into the
office of an Aduocate to pleade this cauſe;
he ſuffered himſelfe to be carried (after his
engagement) with ſome heat, to vtter ſome
things againſt his conſcience murmuring
and grumbling the contrary within; and to
affirme ſome other things with confidence,
whereof he had not been otherwiſe
informed, then onely by vaine and lying
report. Of which ranke is that bold aſſertion
of his Lordſhip; That many Catholiks
in England, rather then they would ſubſcribe
to the oath of allegiance in the form
thereof, haue vndergone all ſorts of puniſhment.
For in England (as we haue truely
giuen the whole Chriſtian world to vnderſtand

in our Preface to the Apologie) there
is but one forme or kind of puniſhment ordained
for all ſorts of traytors.
               Hath not his Lordſhip now graced me
with goodly teſtimonialls of prayſe and
commendation? Am I not by his prayſes
proclaimed a Tyrant, as it were inebriated
with blood of the Saints, and a famous Enginer
of torments for my Catholikes? To
this exhortation for the ſuffering of Martyrdome,
in imitation of my Engliſh traytors
and parricides, if we ſhall adde; how
craftily and ſubtilly he makes the Kings of
England to hold of the Pope by fealty, and
their Kingdome in bondage to the Pope
by Temporall recognizance; it ſhall eaſily
appeare, that his holy-water of prayſes
wherewith I am ſo reuerently beſprinkled,
is a compoſition extracted out of a dram
of hony and a pound of gall, firſt ſteeped
in a ſtrong decoction of bitter wormewood,
or of the wild gourd called Coloquintida.
For after he hath in the beginning
of his Oration,Pag. 10. ſpoken of Kings that
owe fealtie to the Pope, and are not Soueraignes

in the higheſt degree of Temporal
ſupremacie within their Kingdomes; to explaine
his mind and meaning the better, he
marſhals the Kings of England a little after
in the ſame ranke. His words be theſe;
When King Iohn of England, not yet bound in
any temporall recognizance to the Pope, had expelled
his Biſhops, &c. His Lordſhip means,
that King Iohn became ſo bound to the
Pope not long after. And what may this
meaning be, but in plaine tearmes and
broad ſpeach, to cal me vſurper and vnlawfull
King? For the feudatarie, or he that
holdeth a Mannor by fealty, when he doth
not his homage, with all ſuit and ſeruice
that he owes to the Lord Paramount, doth
fall from the propertie of his fee. This reproach
of the L. Cardinals, is ſeconded
with an other of Bellarmines his brother
Cardinall; That Ireland was giuen to the
Kings of England by the Pope. The beſt is
that his moſt reuerend Lordſhip hath not
ſhewed, who it was that gaue Ireland to
the Pope.
               And touching Iohn King of England,

thus in briefe ſtands the whole matter. Between
Henry 2. and the Pope had paſſed
ſundry bickerments, about collating of
Eccleſiaſticall dignities. Iohn the ſonne, after
his fathers death, reneweth, vndertaketh,
and purſueth the ſame quarrell. Driueth
certaine Engliſh Biſhops out of the
Kingdome, for defending the Popes inſolent
vſurpation vpon his Royall prerogatiue,
and Regall rights. Sheweth ſuch
Princely courage and reſolution in thoſe
times, when all that ſtood and ſuffered for
the Popes Temporall pretenſions againſt
Kings, were enrowled Martyrs or Confeſſors.
The Pope takes the matter in fowle
ſcorne, and great indignation; ſhuts the
King by his excommunicatory Bulls out
of the Church; ſtirres vp his Barons, for other
cauſes the Kings heauy friends, to riſe
in armes; giues the Kingdome of England
(like a maſterleſſe man turned ouer to a
new maſter) to Philippus Auguſtus King
of France; binds Philip to make a conqueſt
of England by the ſword, or elſe no bargaine,
or elſe no gift; promiſes Philip, in recompence

of his trauell and Royall expences
in that conqueſt, full abſolution and a
general pardon at large for all his ſinnes: to
be ſhort, cuts King Iohn out ſo much
worke and makes him keep ſo many yrons
in the fire for his worke, that he had none
other way, none other meanes to pacifie
the Popes high diſpleaſure, to correct or
qualifie the malignitie of the Popes cholericke
humour, by whom he was then ſo intangled
in the Popes toyles, but by yeelding
himſelfe to become the Popes vaſſall,
and his Kingdome feudatary or to hold by
fealty of the Papall See. By this meanes his
Crowne is made tributarie, all his people
liable to payment of taxes by the poll for a
certaine yearly tribute, and he is bleſſed
with a pardon for all his ſinnes. Whether
King Iohn was mooued to doe this diſhonourable
act vpon any deuotion, or inflamed
with any zeale of Religion; or inforced
by the vnreſiſtable weapons of neceſſitie,
who can be ſo blind, that he doth not
well ſee and clearely perceiue? For to purchaſe
his owne freedom from this bondage

to the Pope; what could he be vnwilling to
doe, that was willing to bring his Kingdome
vnder the yoke of Amirales Murmelinus
a Mahumetan Prince, then King
of Granado and Barbaria? The Pope after
that, ſent a Legat into England. The King
now the Popes vaſſall, and holding his
Crowne of the Pope, like a man that holds
his land of an other by Knights ſeruice, or
by homage and fealty, doth faire homage
for his Crowne to the Popes Legat, and
layeth downe at his feete a great maſle of
the pureſt gold in coyne. The reuerend
Legat, in token of his Maſters Soueraigntie,
with more then vſuall pride fals to kicking
and ſpurning the treaſure, no doubt
with a paire of moſt holy feete. Not onely
ſo; but likewiſe at ſolemne feaſts is eaſily
entreated to take the Kings chaire of Eſtate.
Here I would faine know the Lord
Cardinals opinion; whether theſe actions
of the Pope were iuſt or vniuſt, lawfull or
vnlawfull, according to right or againſt all
right and reaſon. If he will ſay againſt
right; it is then cleare, that againſt right his

Lordſhip hath made way to this example:
if according to right; let him then make
it knowne, from whence or from whom
this power was deriued and conuaied to
the Pope, whereby he makes himſelfe Soueraigne
Lord of Temporalties in that
Kingdome, where neither he nor any of his
predeceſſors euer pretended any right, or
laid any claime to Temporall matters before.
Are ſuch prankes to be played by the
Pontificiall Biſhop? Is this an act of Holineſſe,
to ſet a Kingdome on fire by the flaming
brands of ſedition? to diſmember
and quarter a Kingdome with inteſtine
warres; onely to this end, that a King once
reduced to the loweſt degree of miſerie,
might be lifted by his Holineſſe out of his
Royall prerogatiue, the very ſoule and life
of his Royall Eſtate? When beganne this
Papall power? In what age beganne the
Pope to practiſe this power? What! haue
the auncient Canons, (for the Scripture in
this queſtion beareth no pawme) haue the
Canons of the auncient Church, impoſed
any ſuch ſatisfaction vpon a ſinner, that of

ueraigne and free King, he ſhould become
vaſſal to his ghoſtly Father; that he ſhould
make himſelfe together with all his people
and ſubiects tributaries to a Biſhop, that
ſhall rifle a whole Nation of their coyne,
that ſhall receiue homage of a King, and
make a King his vaſſall? What! Shall not
a ſinner be quitted of his faults, except his
Paſtor turne robber, and one that goeth about
to get a booty? except he make his
Paſtor a feoffee in his whole Eſtate, and ſuffer
himſelfe vnder a ſhadow of penance to
freeze naked, to be turned out of all his
goods and poſſeſſions of inheritance? But
be it graunted, admit his Holineſſe robs
one Prince of his rights and reuenewes, to
conferre the ſame vpon an other: were it
not an high degree of Tyrannie to finger
an other mans eſtate, and to giue that away
to a third, which the ſecond hath no
right, no lawfull authoritie to giue? Well,
if the Pope then ſhall become his own caruer
in the rights of an other; if he ſhal make
his owne coffers to ſwell with an others
reuenewes, if he ſhall decke and array his

owne backe in the ſpoyles of a ſinner, with
whom in abſolution he maketh peace, and
taketh truce; what can this be elſe, but running
into further degrees of wickedneſſe
and miſchiefe? what can this be elſe, but
heaping of robbery vpon fraud, and impiety
vpon robbery? For by ſuch deceitfull,
crafty, and cunning practiſes, the nature of
the Pontificiall Sea, meerely ſpirituall, is
changed into the Kings-bench-Court,
meerely temporall: the Biſhops chaire is
changed into a Monarchs Throne. And
not onely ſo; but beſides, the ſinners repentance
is changed into a ſnare or pit-fall
of couſening deceit; and Saint Peters net is
changed into a caſting-net or a flew, to fiſh
for all the wealth of moſt flouriſhing Kingdomes.
Moreouer, the King (a hard caſe)
is driuen by ſuch wyles and ſubtilties, to
worke impoſſibilities, to act more then is
lawfull or within the compaſſe of his power
to practiſe. For the King neither may
in right, nor can by power tranſ-nature his
Crowne, impaire the Maieſtie of his Kingdome,
or leaue his Royall dignitie leſſe

free to his heire apparant, or next ſucceſſor,
then he receiued the ſame of his predeceſſor.
Much leſſe, by any diſhonourable
capitulations, by any vnworthy contracts,
degrade his poſteritie, bring his people vnder
the grieuous burden of tributes and
taxes to a forraine Prince. Leaſt of all, make
them tributary to a Prieſt: vnto whom it no
way appertaineth to haue any hand in the
ciuill affaires of Kings, or to diſtaine & vnhallow
their Crownes. And therefore when
the Pope diſpatched his Nuntio to Philippus
Auguſtus, requeſting the King to avert
Lewis his ſonne from laying any claime to
the Kingdom of England; Philip anſwered
the Legat (as we haue it in Math. Paris;) No
King, no Prince can abienate or giue away his
Kingdome, but by conſent of his Barons, bound
by Knights ſeruice to defend the ſaid Kingdom:
and in caſe the Pope ſhall ſtand for the contrary
error, his Holineſſe ſhall giue to Kingdomes a
moſt pernicious example. By the ſame Authorit
is teſtified, that King Iohn became odious
to his ſubiects, for ſuch diſhonorable and
vnworthie inthralling of his Crowne and

Kingdome. Therefore the Popes right pretended
to the Crowne of England, which
is nothing elſe but a ridiculous vſurpation,
hath long agoe vaniſhed into ſmoake, and
required not ſo much as the drawing of
one ſword to ſnatch and pull it by violence
out of his hands. For the Popes power lying
altogether in a certaine wild and wandring
conceit or opinion of men, and beeing
onely an imaginary caſtle in the ayre,
built by pride, and vnderpropped by ſuperſtition,
is very ſpeedily diſperſed vpon the
firſt riſing and appearing of the truth in
her glorious brightneſſe. There is none
ſo very a dolt or block-head to deny, that in
caſe this right of the Pope ouer England, is
grounded vpon Gods word, then his Holineſſe
may challenge the like right ouer
all other Kingdomes: becauſe all other
Kingdomes, Crownes, and Scepters are
ſubiect alike to Gods word. For what priuiledge,
what charter, what euidence can
France fetch out of the Rolles, or any other
treaſurie of her monuments or records, to
ſhew that ſhe oweth leſſe ſubiection to

God then England? Or was this yoke of
bondage then brought vpon the Engliſh
Nation; was it a prerogatiue, whereby they
might more eaſily come to the libertie of
the ſonnes of God? Or were the people of
England perſwaded, that for all their ſubſtance,
wealth, and life beſtowed on the
Pope, his Holineſſe by way of exchange
returned them better weight and meaſure
of ſpirituall graces? It is ridiculous, onely
to conceiue theſe to yes in thought; and yet
with ſuch ridiculous, with ſuch toyes in
conceit, his Lordſhip feedes and entertains
his auditors.
               From this point he falleth to an other
bowt and fling at his heretikes,Pag. 105. with whom
he played no faire play before: There is not
one Synode of miniſters (as he ſaith) which
would willingly ſubſcribe to this Article, whereunto
we ſhould be bound to ſweare. But herein
his Lordſhip ſhooteth farre from the mark.
This Article is approued and preached by
the Miniſters of my Kingdome. It is likewiſe
preached by thoſe of France, and if
neede be (I aſſure my ſelfe) will be ſigned

by all the Miniſters of the French Church.
               The L. Cardinall proceedeth, (for hee
meaneth not ſo ſoone to giue ouer theſe
heretikes: All their Conſiſtories beleeue it as
their Creede; that if Catholike Princes at any
time ſhall offer force vnto their conſcience, then
they are diſpenſed withall for their oath of allegiance.
Hence are theſe modifications and reſtrictions,
toſſed ſo much in their mouthes; Prouided
the King force vs not in our conſcience.
Hence are theſe exceptions in the profeſſion of
their faith; Prouided the Soueraigne power and
authoritie of God, be not in any ſort violated or
infringed. I am not able to conceiue what
engine can be framed of theſe materialls,
for the bearing of Kings out of their eminent
ſeats, by any lawfull authority or power
in the Pope. For ſay, thoſe of the Religion
ſhould be tainted with ſome like errour;
how can that be any ſhelter of excuſe
for thoſe of the Romiſh Church, to vndermine
or to digge vp the Thrones of their
Kings? But in this allegation of the Lord
Cardinal, there is nothing at all, which doth
not iumpe iuſt and accord to a haire with

the Article of the third Eſtate, and with obedience
due to the King. For they doe
not profeſſe, that in caſe the King ſhall
commaund them to doe any act contrarie
to their conſcience, they would flie at his
throat, would make any attempt againſt
his life, would refuſe to pay their taxations,
or to defend him in the warres. They make
no profeſſion of depoſing the King, or diſcharging
the people from the oath of allegiance
tendred to the King: which is the
very point or iſſue of the matter in controuerſie,
and the maine miſcheife, againſt
which the third Eſtate hath bin moſt worthily
carefull to prouide a wholeſome remedie
by this Article. There is a world of
difference betweene the termes of diſobedience,
and of depoſition. It is one thing to
diſobey the Kings commaund in matters
prohibited by diuine lawes, and yet in all
other matters to performe full ſubiection
vnto the King. It is another thing of a farre
higher degree or ſtraine of diſloyaltie, to
bare the King of his Royall robes, throne,
and ſcepter, and when he is thus farre diſgraced,

to degrade him and to put him
from his degree and place of a King. If the
holy Father ſhould charge the L. Cardinal
to doe ſome act repugnant in his owne
knowledge to the Law of God, I will religiouſly,
and according to the rule of charity
preſume, that his Lordſhip in this caſe
would ſtand out againſt his Holineſſe, and
notwithſtanding would ſtill acknowledge
him to be Pope.
               His Lordſhip yet proſecutes and followes
his former purpoſe: Hence are thoſe
armes which they haue oftentimes borne againſt
Kings, when Kings practiſed to take away the
libertie of their conſcience and Religion. Hence
are thoſe turbulent Commotions and ſeditions by
them raiſed, as well in the Law-countryes againſt
the King of Spaine, as in Swethland againſt the
Catholike King of Polonia. Beſides, he caſteth
Iunius Brutus, Buchananus, Barclaius, and
Gerſon in our teeth. To what end all this?
I ſee not how it can be auaileable to authorize
the depoſing of Kings, eſpecially the
Popes power to depoſe. And yet his Lordſhip
here doth outface (by his leaue) and

beare downe the truth. For I could neuer
yet learne by any good and true intelligence,
that in France thoſe of the Religion
took armes at any time againſt their King.
In the firſt ciuill warres they ſtood onely
vpon their guard: they ſtood only to their
lawfull wards and locks of defence: they armed
not, nor tooke the field before they
were purſued with fire and ſword, burnt vp
and ſlaughtred. Beſides, Religion was neither
the root nor the rynde of thoſe inteſtine
troubles. The true ground of the
quarrell was this: During the minority of
King Francis 2. the Proteſtants of France
were a refuge and ſuccour to the Princes of
the blood, when they were kept from the
Kings preſence, and by the ouer powring
power of their enemies, were no better
then plaine driuen and chaſed from the
Court. I meane, the Grand-father of the
King now raigning, and the Grand-father
of the Prince of Condé, when they had no
place of ſafe retreate. In regard of which
worthy and honourable ſeruice, it may
ſeem the French King hath reaſon to haue

the Proteſtants in his gracious remembrance.
With other commotion or inſurrection,
the Proteſtants are not iuſtly to be
charged. But on the contrary, certaine it is
that King Henry III. rayſed and ſent forth
ſeuerall armies againſt the Proteſtants, to
ruine and roote them out of the Kingdom:
howbeit, ſo ſoon as they perceiued the ſaid
King was brought into dangerous tearms,
they ranne with great ſpeed and ſpeciall fidelitie
to the Kings reſcue and ſuccour, in
the preſent danger. Certaine it is, that by
their good ſeruice the ſaid King was deliuered,
from a moſt extreame and imminent
perill of his life in the city of Tours.
Certaine it is, they neuer abandoned that
Henry 3. nor his next ſucceſſor Henry 4.
in all the heat of reuolts and rebellions, raiſed
in the greateſt part of the Kingdome
by the Pope, and the more part of the Clergie:
but ſtood to the ſaid Kings in all their
battels, to beare vp the Crowne then tottering
and ready to fall. Certaine it is, that
euen the heads and principalls of thoſe by
whome the late King deceaſed was purſued

with all extremities, at this day doe enioy
the fruit of all the good ſeruices done to
the King by the ſaid Proteſtants. And they
are now diſgraced, kept vnder, expoſed to
publike hatred. What, for kindling coales
of queſtions and controuerſies about Religion?
Forſooth, not ſo: but becauſe if
they might haue equall and indifferent
dealing, if credit might be giuen to their
faithfull aduertiſements, the Crowne of
their Kings ſhould be no longer pinned to
the Popes flie-flap; in France there ſhould
be no French exempted from ſubiection
to the French King; cauſes of benefices or
of matrimonie, ſhould be no longer citable
and ſummonable to the Romiſh Court;
and the Kingdome ſhould be no longer
tributarie vnder the colour of annats, the
firſt fruits of Benefices after the remooue
or death of the Incumbent, and other like
impoſitions.
               But why do I ſpeake ſo much in the behalfe
of the French Proteſtants? The Lord
Cardinall himſelfe quittes them of this
blame, when he telleth vs this doctrine for

the depoſing of Kings by the Popes mace
or verge, had credit and authoritie through
all France, vntill Caluins time. Doth not
his Lordſhip vnder-hand confeſſe by theſe
words, that Kings had been alwaies before
Caluins time, the more diſhonoured, and
the worſe ſerued? Item, that Proteſtants,
whome his Lordſhip calls heretikes, by
the light of holy Scripture made the world
then and euer ſince to ſee the right of
Kings, oppreſſed ſo long before? As for
thoſe of the Low Countries, and the ſubiects
of Swethland, I haue little to ſay of
their caſe, becauſe it is not within ordinary
compaſſe, and indeed ſerueth nothing to
the purpoſe. Theſe Nations, beſides the
cauſe of Religion, doe ſtand vpon certaine
reaſons of State, which I will not here take
vpon me like a Iudge to determine or to
ſift.
               Iunius Brutus, whom the L. Cardinall
obiecteth, is an author vnknowne; and perhaps
of purpoſe patcht vp by ſome Romaniſt,
with a wyly deceit to draw the reformed
Religion into hatred with Chriſtian

Princes.
               Buchanan I reckon and ranke among
Poets, not among Diuines, claſſicall or
common. If the man hath burſt out here
and there into ſome tearmes of exceſſe, or
ſpeach of bad temper; that muſt be imputed
to the violence of his humour, and
heate of his ſpirit, not in any wiſe to the
rules and concluſions of true Religion,
rightly by him conceiued before.
               Barclaius alledged by the Cardinal, meddles
not with depoſing of Kings; but deals
with diſavowing them for Kings, when
they ſhall renounce the right of Royaltie,
and of their owne accord giue ouer the
Kingdome. Now he that leaues it in the
Kings choice, either to hold or to giue ouer
his Crowne, leaues it not in the Popes
power to take away the Kingdome.
               Of Gerſon obtruded by the Cardinall,
we haue ſpoken ſufficiently before. Where
it hath been ſhewed how Gerſon is diſguiſed,
masked, and peruerted by his Lordſh.
In briefe, I take not vpon me to iuſtifie and
make good all the ſayings of particular authors.

We glory (and well we may) that
our religion affordeth no rules of rebellion:
nor any diſpenſation to ſubiects for the
oath of their allegiance: and that none of
our Churches giue entertainement vnto
ſuch monſtrous and abhominable principles
of diſloyaltie.
               If any of the French, otherwiſe perſwaded
in former times,Richerius. now hauing altered
and changed his iudgement, doth contend
for the Soueraignty of Kings againſt Papal
vſurpation; he doubtles, for winding himſelfe
out of the Laborinth of an error ſo intricate
and pernicious, deſerueth great honour
and ſpeciall prayſe. He is worthy to
hold a place of dignity aboue the L. Cardinall:
who hath quitted and betrayed his
former iudgement, which was holy and
iuſt. Their motions are contrary, their
markes are oppoſite. The one reclineth
from euil to good, the other declineth from
good to euill.
               At laſt his Lordſhip commeth to the
cloſe of his Oration, and bindes vp his
whole harangue with a feate wreath of

praiſes, proper to his King. He ſtyles the
King the eldeſt Sonne of the Church, a
young ſhoot of the lilly, which King Salomon
in all his Royaltie was not able to
match. He leades vs by the hand into the
pleaſant meadowes of Hiſtories, there to
learne vpon the very firſt ſight and viewe,
That ſo long, ſo oft as the Kings of France
embraced vnion, and kept good tearmes
of concord with Popes and the Apoſtolike
See; ſo long as the ſpouſe of the Church
was paſtured and fed among the lillies, all
ſorts of ſpirituall & temporall graces abundantly
ſhowred vpon their Crownes, and
vpon their people: On the contrary, when
they made any rent or ſeparation from the
moſt holy See; then the lillies were pricked
and almoſt choaked with ſharpe thornes;
they beganne to droope, to ſtoope, and to
beare their beautifull heads downe to the
very ground, vnder the ſtrong flawes and
guſts of boyſterous winds and tempeſts.
               
               My anſwer to this flouriſhing cloſe and
vpſhot, ſhall beno leſſe apert then apt. It
ſauours not of good and faithfull ſeruice, to

ſmooth and ſtroake the Kings head with a
ſoft hand of oyled ſpeech, and in the meane
time to take away the Crowne from his
head, and to defile it with dirt. But let vs
try the cauſe by euidence of Hiſtorie, yea
by the voice and verdict of experience; to
ſee whether the glorious beauty of the
French lillies, hath been at any time blaſted,
and thereupon hath faded, by ſtarting
aſide, and making ſeparation from the holy
See. Vnder the raigne of King Philip the
Faire, France was bleſſed with peace and
proſperity, notwithſtanding ſome outragious
acts done againſt the Papall See, and
contumelious crying quittance by King
Philip with the Pope. Lewis 12. in ranged
battell defeated the armies of Pope
Iulius 2. and his Confederates: proclaimed
the ſaid Pope to be fallen from the Popedome:
ſtamped certaine coynes and peices
of gold with a diſhonourable mot, euen to
Rome it ſelfe, Rome is Babylon: yet ſo much
was Lewis loued and honoured of his people,
that by a peculiar title he was called, the
Father of the Country. Greater bleſſings of

God, greater outward peace and plenty,
greater inward peace with ſpirituall and
celeſtial treaſures, were neuer heaped vpon
my Great Brittaine, then haue been ſince
my Great Brittaine became Great in the
greateſt and chiefeſt reſpect of all; to wit,
ſince my Great Brittaine hath ſhaken off
the Popes yoke; ſince ſhee hath refuſed to
receiue and to entertain the Popes Legats,
employed to collect S. Peters tribute or
Peter-pence; ſince the Kings of England,
my Great Brittaine, haue not beene the
Popes vaſſals to doe him homage for their
Crowne, and haue no more felt the laſhings,
the ſcourgings of baſe and beggarly
Monkes. Of Holland, Zeland, and Friſeland,
what need I ſpeake? yet a word and
no more. Were they not a kind of naked
and bare people, of ſmall value, before God
lighted the torch of the Goſpel, and aduanced
it in thoſe Nations? were they not an
ill fedde and ſcragged people, in compariſon
of the ineſtimable wealth and proſperity
(both in all military actions and mechanicall
trades, in trafficke as merchants, in

marting as men of warre, in long nauigation
for diſcouerie) to which they are now
rayſed and mounted by the mercifull bleſſing
of God, ſince the darknes of Poperie
hath been ſcattered, and the bright Sunne
of the Goſpel hath ſhined in thoſe Countryes?
Behold the Venetian Republique.
Hath ſhee now leſſe beautie, leſſe glory,
leſſe peace and proſperitie, ſince ſhe lately
fell to bicker and contend with the Pope?
ſince ſhee hath wrung out of the Popes
hand, the one of his two ſwords? ſince ſhe
hath plumed and ſhaked his Temporall
dominion? On the contrarie; after the
French Kings had honoured the Popes,
with munificent graunts and gifts of all the
cities and territories, lands and poſſeſſions,
which they now hold in Italy, and the auncient
Earledome of Avignon in France for
an ouer-plus; were they not rudely recompenced,
and homely handled by their moſt
ingratefull fee-farmers and copy-holders?
Haue not Popes forged a donation of Conſtantine,
of purpoſe to blot out all memory
of Pepins and Charlemaignes donation?

Haue they not vexed and troubled the
State? haue they not whetted the ſonnes of
Lewis the Courteous againſt their owne
Father, whoſe life was a pattern and example
of innocencie? Haue they not by their
infinite exactions, robbed and ſcoured the
Kingdome of all their treaſure? Were not
the Kings of France, driuen to ſtoppe their
violent courſes by the pragmaticall ſanction?
Did they not ſundrie times interdict
the Kingdome, degrade the Kings, ſolicite
the neighbour-Princes to inuade and lay
hold on the Kingdome, and ſtirre vp the
people againſt the King, whereby a gate
was opened to a world of troubles and parricides?
Did not Rauaillac render this reaſon
for his monſtrous & horrible attempt,
That King Henry had a deſigne to warre
with God, becauſe he had a deſigne to take
armes againſt his Holineſſe, who is God?
This makes me to wonder, what mooued
the L. Cardinall to marſhall the laſt ciuill
warres and motions in France, in the ranke
of examples of vnhappie ſeparation from
the Pope; when the Pope himſelfe was the

trumpetor of the ſame troubleſome motions.
If the Pope had beene wronged and
offended by the French King, or his people,
and the Kingdome of France had been
ſcourged with peſtilence, or famine, or
ſome other calamitie by forraine enemies;
it might haue been taken in probabilitie,
as a vengeance of God for ſome iniurie
done vnto his Vicar. But his Holineſſe beeing
the root, the ground, the maſter-workman
and artificer of all theſe miſchiefes;
how can it be ſaid, that God puniſheth any
iniury done to the Pope? but rather that
his Holineſſe doth reuenge his owne quarrell;
and which is worſt of all, when his Holineſſe
hath no iuſt cauſe of quarrell or offence.
Now then; to exhort a Nation (as
the L. Cardinall hath done) by the remembrance
of former calamities, to currie fauour
with the Pope, and to hold a ſtrict vnion
with his Holineſſe, is no exhortation to
beare the Pope any reſpect of loue, or of
reuerence, but rather a rubbing of memorie,
and a calling to mind of thoſe grieuous
calamities, whereof the Pope hath been the

onely occaſion. It is alſo a threatning and
obtruding of the Popes terrible thunderbolts,
which neuer ſcorched nor parched
any skinne, (except crauens and meticulous
bodies) and haue brought many great
ſhowres of bleſſings vpon my Kingdome.
               As for France, if ſhe hath enioyed proſperitie
in the times of her good agreement
with Popes, it is becauſe the Pope ſeeks the
amitie of Princes that are in proſperitie,
haue the meanes to curbe his pretenſions,
and to put him to ſome plunge. Kings are
not in proſperitie, becauſe the Pope holds
amity with Kings; but his Holineſſe vſeth
all deuiſes, and ſeeketh all meanes to haue
amitie with Kings, becauſe hee ſees them
flouriſh and ſayle with proſperous winds.
The ſwallow is no cauſe, but a companion
of the ſpring: the Pope is no worker of
a Kingdoms felicitie, but a wooer of Kings
when they ſit in felicities lap: he is no founder,
but a follower of their good fortunes.
On the other ſide: let a Kingdome fall into
ſome grieuous diſaſter or calamitie, let
ciuill wars boyle in the bowels of the Kingdome;

ciuill warres no leſſe dangerous to
the State, then fearefull and grieuous to
the people; who riſeth ſooner then the
Pope, who ruſheth ſooner into the troubled
ſtreames then the Pope, who thruſteth
himſelfe ſooner into the heate of the
quarrell then the Pope, who runneth ſooner
to raiſe his gaine by the publike wrack
then the Pope, and all vnder colour of a
heart wounded and bleeding for the ſaluation
of ſoules? If the lawfull King happen
to be foyled, to be oppreſſed, and thereupon
the State by his fall to get a new maſter
by the Popes practiſe; then the ſaid new-maſter
muſt hold the Kingdome as of the
Popes free gift, and rule or guide the ſterne
of the State at his becke, and by his inſtruction.
If the firſt and right Lord, in deſpite
of all the Popes fulminations and fireworkes,
ſhall get the honourable day, and
vpper hand of his enemies; then the holy
Father with a cheerfull and pleaſant grace,
yea with fatherly gratulation, opens the
rich cabinet of his iewells, I meane the treaſurie
of his indulgences, and falls now to

dandle and cocker the King in his fatherly
lap, whoſe throat if he could, he would haue
cut not long before.
               This peſtilent miſchiefe hath now a long
time taken roote, and is growne to a great
head in the Chriſtian world, through the
ſecret but iuſt iudgement of God; by
whom Chriſtian Kings haue beene ſmitten
with a ſpirit of dizzineſſe. Chriſtian
Kings, who for many ages paſt haue liued
in ignorance, without any ſound
inſtruction, without any true ſenſe and
right feeling of their owne right and power:
whileſt vnder a ſhadow of Religion
and falſe cloake of pietie, their Kingdomes
haue beene ouer-burdened, yea ouer-born
with tributes, and their Crownes made to
ſtoope euen to miſerable bondage. That
God in whoſe hand the hearts of Kings are
poiſed, and at his pleaſure turned as the
water-courſes; that mighty God alone, in
his good time, is able to rouze them out of
ſo deepe a ſlumber, and to take order (their
drowzy fits once ouer and ſhaken off with
heroicall ſpirits) that Popes hereafter ſhall

play no more vpon their patience, nor preſume
to put bits and ſnaffles in their noble
mouthes, to the binding vp of their power
with weake ſcruples, like mighty buls lead
about by litle children with a ſmall twiſted
thred. To that God, that King of Kings I
deuote my ſcepter; at his feet in all humblenes
I lay downe my Crowne; to his holy
decrees and commaunds I will euer be a
faithfull ſeruant, and in his battels a faithfull
champion. To conclude; in this iuſt
cauſe and quarrell, I dare ſend the challenge,
and will require no ſecond, to maintain
as a defendant of honour, that my brother-Princes
and my ſelfe, whom God hath
aduanced vpon the Throne of Soueraigne
Maieſty and ſupreame dignity, doe hold
the Royall dignity of his Maieſty alone; to
whoſe ſeruice, as a moſt humble homager
and vaſſall, I conſecrate all the glory, honour,
ſplendor, and luſtre of my earthly
Kingdomes.
               FINIS.
            
         
      
   