
      
         
            
            
            Hierons laſt Fare-vvell. A SERMON PREACHED AT MODBVRY in DEVON, at the Funerall of that Reuerend and faithfull Seruant of IESVS CHRIST, Master SAMVEL HIERON, ſometimes Preacher there.
            By I. B.
            
               
                  IOB 1.9.
               
               Doeth Iob ſerue God for nought?
            
            LONDON Printed by William Stansby for William Butler, and are to be ſold at his ſhop in Saint Dunſtanes Church-yard in Fleetſtreet. 1618.
         
         
            
            
            TO THE MVCH HONOVRED LADY, AND MY VERY GOOD FRIEND, THE LADY MARGARET HELE, of WINBVRY in DEVON.
            
               MADAME, its well knowne, that Apologies are, (for the moſt) of ſmall praiſe, or profit; being but either excuſes of precedent euill effects; or future bad accidents likely to follow: yet ſeeing neceſſity is put vpon me; I muſt ſay ſomewhat, though, to vſe the Apoſtles phraſe, I ſpeake like a Foole. Your Ladiſhip cannot be ignorant, how Satan and his inſtruments, in all Ages haue indeuoured to hinder both

the libertie, and dignitie of the Word, that it might not runne and be glorified. Hence ſprang theſe bitter ſpeeches: Is not this the Carpenter, the ſonne of Mary? Can any good thing come out of Nazaret? Is Saul among the Prophets? How know theſe vnlettered men the Scriptures? When went the Spirit of God from me, to thee? Is not this Sect ſpoke euill againſt euery-where? Was not John ſaid to haue a Deuill? Paul reputed a peſtilent fellow? and Ieſus Chriſt the righteous a notorious ſinner? One cryeth out, He deceiueth the People: another, He is an enemy to Caeſar: a third, And hath he not ſpoke blaſphemie? And, let theſe men alone, all the world will follow them. And as it hath beene, ſo it is: for as Iannes and Iambres withſtood Moſes: ſo doe many in our dayes, reſiſt the truth. And marke their cunning, labouring to bring the Prophets, and Preachers to be contemned; that the doctrine might not take effect, and be entertayned. Who then muſt ſtand in this gap, role away this ſtone, and preuent this euill, ſtop thoſe

wide mouthes, plucke the venom from vnder their tongues, and be able to keepe in grace, the Word of Grace, but you and ſuch as be of your Worth, Ranke, and Profeſſion? Therefore I haue made the more bold, to prefixe your Ladiſhips name, in the front of this my weake and pale Infant; as a ſpeciall remedy, to make all his enemies, at the very ſight thereof to fall backward; their tongues to cleaue to the roofes of their mouthes, and their very hearts to tremble: ſo that none dares ſtretch forth a hand, or bend his brow, to hinder him in his pretended iourney, vntill he haue paſt in peace, and ſaluted his deareſt friends. More reaſons might bee added, for to excuſe this my boldneſſe. The great loue you euer bare to him, for whoſe ſake it was conceiued: Your perſonall preſence at its birth: And was it not hee that fetcht mee from the Fountayne, cōducted me from thence to your Countrey, counted me worthy, and euer gaue me countenance vntill his change? Why then (though moſt vnworthy worke in reſpect of its worth) yet ſhall it not finde

fauour at your hands for his ſake? Let him doubt that liſt, I will not: except change of time giue iuſter occaſion. And thus commending you to the protection of him that ruleth all in all things, theſe my firſt fruits to your Patronage, with my ſelfe to your ſeruice and cenſure I humbly take my leaue: From my ſtudie at Plymouth: euer remayning
            
               
                  Yours to his poore power to be commanded, Io. B.
            
         
         
            
            To the Reader.
            
               
                  READER, This report hath beene publiſhed: that the abundance of Sermons (by ſome, and of ſome) preached, and printed, haue brought both the Word of God, and his Ordinance to be contemned; either, through the inſufficiency of the Authors, or, the corruption of Readers, and Auditors. For when the Word is not diuided aright, men of the beſt apprehenſion will not, cannot, giue approbation. And on the other hand, ſuch as cannot diſcerne betwixt good and euill, ſit at home, with a printed paper, dreaming that will ſuffice to get faith for ſaluation: and ſo abſent themſelues from the more powerfull meanes in the publike Congregation. Doſt thou expect my reply? Shall I take in hand to giue thee ſatisfaction? No: for if I can but cleere my ſelfe from being the iust cauſe of the one (the which (likely) will be hard) Let him that list, and can better iudge, reſolue the other. Now if it be demanded of thee, that knew vs both; why by me, for him, (whoſe ſhoo-latchet, I was not worthy to vnlooſe) this Sermon was first preached; then printed: take one anſwere for all: which is, that a kinde of neceſsity was the cauſe, both of the one, and the other. If thou iudge this darke: Conſider, that God doth not alwayes render (and why may not man then ſometimes conceale?) a reaſon of his proceedings. For the worke it ſelfe, what ſhall I ſay? but as Naomi to her Daughters at their departure: It grieueth me much for your ſakes, that I could conceiue no better: yet

as Peter ſaid to the Cripple, ſuch as I haue, ſuch haue I giuen. I deny not but thou maiſt finde words, phraſe, matter, and method, that may not content thee: what then? why, try all and keepe that which is good, for he that offends not in tongue, is a perfect man: but where is he?
            In my opinion I haue ſeene this euill vnder the Sunne: Men in hearing, and reading, if they diſlike any thing either in ſpeech, or perſon, like little children, that haue many things in their hands they like well, yet if their Parents doe but either adde or detract one, contrary to their minds, throw all away in diſpleaſure. Wherefore let me learne thee this leſſon, Get a ſound mind, that thou maiſt be able to iudge betwixt the perſon, and his ſpeech, doctrine, and doctrine. For it is the perfection of a man in his calling, to know the worth of a commodity, though ſet to ſale by the pooreſt perſon; and the baſeneſſe of that which is bad, though proffered, and proclaimed for good, by the hands of Princes: ſo is it for a Chriſtian to diſcerne the true Word, from the falſe, whether it come from him that weareth the courſeſt rags, or Kinglyeſt rayment. This is to iudge righteous Iudgement. Furthermore, for doctrine, ſome may be Corne, other Chaffe; therefore thou art to ſeparate the precious from the vile, by the fan of thy vnderſtanding, and hauing winnowed it well, treaſure it vp as good graine in the Garner of thy Memory. This is to haue a mans wit rightly exerciſed, when in the multiplicity of opinions, Truth is elected, error reiected. And thus wiſhing thee no worſe, then willingly I would receiue from thee my ſelfe, I ceaſe and reſt:
            
               The ſame thou takeſt me for toward God, and thy ſelfe: in truth (I hope) though not in meaſure. Io. B.
            
         
      
      
         
            
            HIERONS laſt Fare-well. A SERMON PREACHED AT MODBVRY IN DEVON, at the Funerall of that Reuerend and faithfull Seruant of Ideſus Chriſt, M. SAMVEL HIERON.
            
               
                  2. TIMOTH. 4.7.
               
               
                  I haue fought a good fight.
               
            
            
               THeſe words may haue a double conſideration; either Relatiuely, or abſolutely: Relatiuely, hauing dependance on the precedent verſes, and ſo they ſeeme to be a motiue cauſe, or argument to moue Timothy, to goe on in the conſtant and ſincere Preaching, and profeſſing of the Goſpell. Abſolutely, and ſo they are a teſtimonie, or confeſſion, which the Apoſtle giueth of himſelfe. Now confeſſions be of two kinds; voluntary

or violent; and this is of the firſt ſort, being free & without any coaction, or cōpulſion vttered. In the words we may obſerue two things: Firſt, the perſon confeſſing; Secondly, the thing confeſſed. The perſon confeſſing, may be conſidered in time paſt, or time future. The thing that he confeſſed, is laid downe firſt generally, then ſpecially. Generally, that he had fought. Specially, that (he had not onely fought, but) he had fought a good fight. If Paul had ſaid, I haue fought, & ſtaied there, how many might truly haue took vp the ſame ſpeech, and with the yong man in the Goſpell replied: All this haue I done from my youth vpward? But if a good fight be added, the anſwere of the Apoſtles to their Lord, concerning the fiue Loaues and few Fiſhes, may (by way of alluſion) ſeeme to bee of force; What are they among ſo many? Many fight, few a good fight. In briefe, the cauſe in theſe words, is argued by the effect; and the effect, by the kind or qualitie, bountie or goodneſſe.
            Now would you haue the true ſence? Shall I open the plaine meaning? This it is, for the partie; hee may haue a manifold conſideration. Firſt, for his name, it was twofold, Saul, and Paul: for his nature, corrupt, ſanctified: for his Profeſſion, both the Righteouſneſſe of the Law, and the Goſpell: for his Function, a Phariſe, and an Apoſtle: for his conuerſation, a deſtroyer of the Saints, and a builder of them: A Murtherer, and a Martyr: This is the worke of God, and ought to bee maruailous in our eyes. Thus can the Creator of time alter the creature in time, though Time of it ſelfe change nothing.
            For the word fight:] vnderſtand that fights are either Corporall,
               Epheſ. 6.12.
                or Spirituall, with fleſh and bloud: or principalities and powers, the latter heere meant.
            For goodneſſe:] that may be twofold; Naturall, or Morall: Naturall is alſo double. Firſt, the Eſſence of

things, by which I vnderſtand, matter, and forme, for whatſoeuer in the beginning was created, of theſe two principles was conſtituted: yea, the very Angels themſelues, though ſome otherwiſe iudge. For, are they not perfect effects? Why then muſt they not haue all the foure cauſes? Againe, they are finite, therefore terminated in their Eſſence: If terminated in their Eſſence; then by matter and forme; for what elſe doth terminate things? And there is nothing without Limits of Eſſence ſaue only God, the firſt efficient of all things, being one moſt ſimple and pure act.
            The ſecond naturall good, may be ſaid to be the end; that is, the fitneſſe, and aptitude of a thing to accompliſh that for the which it was firſt framed, and wee are to know this, that the end, and goodneſſe of a thing, are one and the ſame. As for example, wee ſay that is a good Ship, that is fitted to ſayle well, a good Knife, made to cut well, or a good Pen, that hath in it ſelfe an aptitude to write well. Now Sayling, Cutting, Writing, are their ends; and if they haue in them a power, or abilitie to accompliſh theſe ends, they may bee ſaid to bee good, elſe not, in this ſecond ſence,Gen. 1. vlt. 
               Thus in the beginning, were all things made good, and very good. Good for Eſſence, for end; And a thing may remayne good for it Matter, or Subſtance; but not for it qualitie, or end. Satan is ſtill a good ſubſtance; for his materiall ſubſtance remayneth; But he wants this ſecond goodneſſe, to doe the will of God: he neyther now hath power, or will to accompliſh that end, for the which he at the firſt was formed. A fine Watch may catch a fall, all the Wheeles by it may bee ſtrooke out of order, yet is it good ſtill, for the matter of it: An Inſtrument, may bee good for ſubſtance, yet, make no ſweet or pleaſant Muſicke, becauſe the ſtrings are not rightly ſet and tuned; ſo is the condition now with Sathan; And of man

alſo; for vntill the Lord tune the iarring ſtrings of mans heart fit, and frame euery Wheele of the Soule, his beſt Muſicke is not pleaſing to God, and all his Courſe, and Motion, doth but runne to diſcontent his Maker: for Adam our father, clyming ſo high into the Tree of Life, and eating of the forbidden fruit, catcht ſuch a fal, (with whom (being in his Loynes) wee fell alſo) that all the Strings, and Wheeles of Soule and Body, were ſtrooke quite out of tune and order.
            Now for a Morall good, it may alſo haue a twofold denomination: Firſt, the act, or ſecondly, the conſequent of the act. That may (I take it) bee called a morall, or diuine act, that is guided by the morall and diuine precept, as that may be called a Grammaticall art, that is ruled or done by the art or precept of Grammar.Mich. 6.8.
                
               He hath ſhewed thee, O man, what is good; namely, to doe Iuſtice, to loue Mercie, to humble thy ſelfe, and to walke with thy God. And this muſt needes be good, becauſe the rule is good that guides the action. For euery thing is ſo farre good, as it is anſwerable to its rule: And Diuinitie is the only rule of all Morall and Diuine goodneſſe; ſo farre as a man both in the integritie of his nature, and the conuerſation of life anſwereth to this rule, hee is ſo much and no more neerer to all perfection of goodneſſe. Adam was very good by Creation, but hee neuer was abſolutely good by action: Becauſe his actions were not guided by the Law of God; the only rule of all ſpirituall goodneſſe.
            The conſequent or ſucceeding good that followeth the Morall act, I vnderſtand to bee, the bleſſing which the Lord hath promiſed to conferre, and beſtow vpon all ſuch as loue him and obey his Commandements; And in this ſenſe,Pſal. 73. vlt. 
               It was good for Dauid to draw neere vnto God.
               
                  Pſal. 37.37. 
               For the end of the iuſt man, (whatſoeuer his preſent condition be) ſhalbe bleſſed.
            
            
               
               In a word, this is the ſumme, the true ſence. I Paul, who once was a proud Phariſe, called Rabbi, in great eſtimation with the High Prieſts, breathing out threatnings againſt the Saints, perſecuting them to ſtrange Cities, making hauocke of the true Church, cauſing ſome to blaſpheme, perſwaded that I ought to doe many contrarie things againſt the Name of Ieſus of Nazareth; yet now being extraordinarily conuerted, by his powerfull voyce from Heauen, and being appointed, and called, to be his Apoſtle: One that ſaw the Lord Ieſus in the fleſh, had the Goſpell by Reuelation, freed from the ſpirit of Error, power to worke Miracles, skill in all Languages, and whoſe Commiſſion was to preach through the World; haue fought, that is, powerfully and plainly preached the glad tydings of Peace, gone on alſo thorow good report, and euill report, bonds, impriſonment, and innumerable euils, in the ſincere profeſſing of the ſame, from the verie time of my Conuerſion to this preſent: I would haue thee my Sonne to know this fight, this my courſe is good, for act, for end, and profitable euery manner of way. And furthermore, let this then, my example, of Ʋalour, and Reſolution, who am thy friend, thy Father, who am now to take my laſt farewell, whoſe face till that laſt day, thou muſt ſee no more, imbolden, encourage, quicken, and ſtirre thee vp to walke, preach and profeſſe, vntill thy changing come alſo. This is that one thing I only would, this is that one thing thou oughtſt and onely ſhouldſt.
            
            And thus, you ſeeing the plaine meaning of this parcell of Scripture, many things may bee obſerued for our inſtruction: And firſt, from the Relation with the other, we note, that,
            
               
                  Doct. 1 Paul muſt be imitated of Timothies in preaching, profeſſing. The beſt patternes are beſt worthy our practice. Hence it is that Chriſt left vs an example,
               
                  Iohn. 13.15. 1. Pet. 2.21. 1. Cor. 11.1. Phil. 3.17. 
               that wee might tread in his ſteps, And walke (that is, preach and profeſſe) as you haue vs for an example, and as we follow Chriſt.
            
            
               
               
                  Reaſon. 1 
                Rom. 15.4.
               Becauſe that this is one reaſon why the liues of good men, are left recorded in Scripture, For whatſoeuer is written, is written for our Learning: And what a cloud of Witneſſes hath the Lord to this end committed to eternall memory in the Holy Letters?
            
            
               
                  Reaſon. 2
               Heb. 12.1.
                Againe, if wee doe not this, nature it ſelfe will condemne vs: the very creatures will riſe vp againſt vs: who being yong and weake, imitate their Seniors and Superiors; No bangling Kite, but with a high flyer will mend his pitch; and ſhall not wee, being Eagles Birds, and borne from aboue, ſoare on high, hauing ſo many fore-runners, and excellent patternes ſet before vs?
            
               
                  Ʋſe. 1 And from hence wee may reprooue the Papiſts, that denie the people the Booke of God: ſo that they cannot tell how Paul preached, for matter, or manner, how he behaued himſelfe, either as Preacher or Profeſſor of the Gospell. Yea, and it meets with many in our dayes, that be within vs, that though they be Timothies, yong Plants, yet they will not learne of Paul, either by precept or example: This ſmels of Pride, or Ignorance, or Idleneſſe, or all.
            
               
                  Ʋſe. 2 In the ſecond place, this muſt be to direct the yonger men, that they haue a regard, to bee acquainted with Pauls manner of preaching and liuing: and then to walke in his ſteps. Oh that wee would be wiſe, and not be too proud in our owne conceit! then ſhould wee bee ſtrong when wee are weake, and find Gods Wiſdome manifeſted through our fooliſhneſſe. Could we imitate the beſt patternes, we ſhould liue with credit, and dye with comfort.
            
               
                  Doct. 2 And heere we may obſerue, that,
            
               A mans finall eſtate is not to be iudged by the beginning, but by the end.
               
                  1. Cor. 6.9. Titus 3.3. 2. Chron. 33.11, 12.
               
            
            
               Paul began ſtrangely, yet dyed a Martyr, and though his firſt dayes were bad, yet his latter being better, hee fought a good fight.
            
            
               
               
                  Reaſon. 1 Becauſe all perfection is in the end, not in the beginning: Hence it is that the Scripture runnes ſo much on the end, O that they were wiſe,
               
                  Deut. 32.29. Pſal. 73.17. Iames 5.11. 
               then they would thinke of their latter end: then I vnderſtood their end: you haue heard of the patience of Iob, and of his end.
            
            
               
                  Reaſon. 2 For, becauſe it often falleth out, that Hypocrites, like Saul, and Iudas, and Alexander, may beginne well, and yet prooue Perſecutors, reſiſting the Truth much in the end: And as a man (good only in appearance) may of a truth become naught: ſo may a bad man become verie good. The Sunne may riſe cleere, and ſet vnder a cloud,1. Cor. 6.11. ſhine bright in the morning, yet lowre in the euening: ſo may it be with the ſonnes of men?
            
               
                  Ʋſe. 1 This muſt teach vs to iudge righteous Iudgement: Say not that hee is good, who beginnes well, but ends well: he that putteth on the Armour muſt not boaſt, as he that putteth it off.
            
               
                  Ʋſe. 2 This may much make for the comfort of ſuch, as haue miſ-ſpent the time of their youth; that truly repenting, the Lord accepteth of them in their age, and will not lay their former courſes vnto their charge. I can tell you, that if wee were wounded in Spirit, nettled in Conſcience, and tempted by Satan, that God would not accept of our latter dayes ſeruice; then this Truth would be comfortable: But as to a full ſtomacke, euerie ſweet thing is bitter: ſo it is to him, that feeles not his miſerie, a word, a world of comforts.
            
               
                  Ʋſe. 3 And heere we muſt be exhorted to perſeuere, though we haue begunne well; Beware of imbracing the world with Demas, in thy laſt dayes; haue a care to end in the Spirit: for wee muſt ſayle to the ſhore, runne to the end, and ſtrike the Battaile thorow, if wee will bee landed ſafe, winne the Prize, and be crowned.Reuel. 2.10.
               
            
            
               
                  Ʋſe. 4 And is not here a ſtrong motiue, to mooue impenitent perſons to Repentance? to conſtraine them (as it were

by a forced kind of neceſſitie) with the Prodigall, to returne to their Father: and with Oneſimus to their Maſter? And truely wee neuer make the right vſe of Gods Mercie,
                  Rom. 2.4. vntill his bountifulneſſe lead and allure vs to true Repentance.
            And now to come more directly to the words: wee might handle them two wayes, conſidering Paul as a Preacher in his particular Charge, or as a Profeſſor, in his generall Calling; but becauſe it is true of him in both, we will the rather inſiſt of the latter; to wit, how that all men are conſidered generally (as Chriſtians) Fighters: yea, and in their particular ranckes, and calling alſo. So that the point hence will not to any ſeeme hard, which is,
            
               
                  Doct. 4
               That the faithfull are Fighters, euery Chriſtian is a Souldier.
            
            What though there bee many that goe vnarmed, ſtrike not one ſtroke, refuſe their Maſter, and throw away the Spirituall Weapons, for this Combat appointed? yet the point is plaine, and the proofe of it is at hand. Did not the Lord of old ſet Enmitie, tell vs of a Combat,
                  Gen. 3.15. & 32.24. and that the Seed of the Woman ſhould breake the Serpents head? This Battaile muſt be of force; this Field is to bee fought: for the purpoſe of God ſhall ſtand. And what did the Wraſtling of Iſrael prefigure, but this Fight? Yea Chriſt playeth vpon Earth, and hath his delights with the ſonnes of men.
               
                  Pro. 8.31. 1. Cor. 16.13. 
               Are not we commaded to ſtand faſt, to quit vs like men, and be ſtrong? And what meaneth all this;1. Tim. 6.12. 
               if the faithfull were not Fighters? Fight the good Fight of Faith? I fight not as one that beateth the Ayre:
               1. Cor. 9.26. Phil. 1.29. 
               We wraſtle: You haue the ſame Fight, that you heare to be in mee, and ſaw in me. And the Author to the Hebrewes ſaith,
                  Heb. 10.32. 
               That they, after they had receiued Light, had a great Fight in affliction. Marke, after Light was receiued, the Combat followed; for it is in ſpirituall

things, as in naturall. Firſt, before it thunder, wee ſee a Light, then heare the cracke or noyſe, and after come great ſhowres of wet and water: ſo God (as at the Creation) ſayth, Let there bee light, in the time of our Regeneration; after, we find a ſtrange working in the Soule, a Quarrell, a Wound, and then commeth the ſweete dew from Heauen to helpe vs, to heale vs. Will you ſee the reaſons of this? ſhall arguments further confirme it?
            
               
                  Reaſon. 1 Doe we not read in Scripture of a Prince,Heb. 2.10.
                a Chiefetaine, or Captaine? And ſhall hee haue no followers? muſt he want his Souldiers? No, for if the one bee, the other is. The Father preſuppoſeth a Child, the Shepheard a Flocke, the cauſe his effect, the ſhaddow a body, and ſo doth a Captaine Souldiers; Souldiers a Combat: for theſe are Relatiue Arguments, and the one dependeth neceſſarily on the other.
            
               
                  Reaſon. 2 Againe, is not mention made of weapons? Epheſ. 6.13.
                are wee not bidden to take to vs, the whole or complete Armour of God? If Dauid take his Sling, Peter his Sword, Ionathan his Bow, Sampſon his Iawbone, and Shamgar his Goad, is it not for an end? Why then, to fight: for the Enemies are in Armes, the Philiſtims bee in the Field; Goliah is vaunting, and daring to Battaile; and the Combat prepared.
            
               
                  Reaſon. 3 And haue not the faithfull foes? Doe not the Canaanites campe in the Valleys? Are not the Aramites, and Arabians in the Mountaines? What ſhall I ſay? The ſonnes of Anakim are not all ſlaine; though their father ſleepe. And theſe foes bee, either forraine, or neerer home: within vs, or without vs: without vs, firſt, Satan: ſecondly, all his Souldiers: within vs, firſt, corruption: ſecondly, death.
            
            And firſt for Satan,The firſt enemie. was hee not a Murtherer from the beginning? doth he not daily goe about, Like a roaring

Lion,
               1. Pet. 5.8. 
               ſeeking whom he may deuoure? Is not this that Red Dragon, that coloureth and choaketh himſelfe with the bloud of the Saints? Doe you thinke that this Herod is dead? Will Time alter his nature? or will the death of many ſatisfie him? No, he groweth worſe, and worſe; and hauing the leſſer time to quarrell,
                  Reuel. 12.12. the greater woe ſhall be to the Inhabitants of the Earth. Wee are commanded to reſiſt the Deuill.
               Iames 4.7.
                Then ſhall he not oppoſe? Was Adam, the firſt, Iob, the Iuſt, Paul the Prince of the Apoſtles, and Ieſus Chriſt the Righteous tempted wounded,Matth. 4.
                buffetted, and mooued from place to place by him? and doſt thou thinke to eſcape his hote, his fierie Darts? Let Iſrael goe out of Egypt, to ſerue his God; this Pharaoh will be vp in Armes, and purſue: Let the Babe Ieſus bee borne; The Infants ſhall be beheaded: Let a little corne and good ſeed bee ſowne in the furrowes of the Soule; This enuious man will be caſting in Tares: or elſe hee ſhall haue his Kingdome weakned, his Scepter remooued, and not ſo large a Crop of Cockle, at the time of Harueſt.
            
               The ſecond enemie.Againe, his friends will alſo be our foes, and dare vs  daily to fight. If this Iehu but cry, Who is on my ſide, who? multitudes will follow him: this Ahab hath his hundreds of falſe prophets: this Serpent hath brood of his owne bowels, that like the Want, or Mole, can ſwimme the Sea, creepe vnder the Earth, transforme themſelues into Angels of Light, and bee readie to blow vp Prince and Nobles, with fire and Gunpowder. Hee hath Caine to kill: Iſmael, to ſcoffe: Rabſhakeh to rayle, eſpecially, if they bee intreated to ſpeake in another Language. At a word, he hath Sanballats; Tobiahs Siluer-ſmiths, Copper-ſmiths, and of all kinds of Callings, to ſet vp his Kingdome. Eſau cryed out, hee was vndone: Dauid, Woe is mee: and why? for they dwelt amongſt a people of polluted lips, and that abhorred

peace. Their throats were an open Sepulchre: their Tongues like Razours, hote as the coales of Iuniper, the poyſon of Aspes vnder their lips, and their mouthes full of curſing and bitterneſſe;Rom. 3.
                their feete ſwift to ſhead bloud, deſtruction and calamitie in their wayes, and no feare of God before their eyes.
                  Ierem. 20.10. 
               Ieremiah complained, that his Mother had brought him forth, a man of Contention; he heard the rayling of many, all his familiars watched for his halting; ſaying, It may be that hee is deceiued; ſo ſhall wee preuaile againſt him, and execute our vengeance, vpon him.Iohn 8.4.
                For theſe being of their Father the Deuill, his worke they will doe: though they goe at the laſt to ruine and deſtruction with him. And thus much for our forraine foes, that ſeeme the further from vs: Our home-bred, and more dangerous aduerſaries follow, being two alſo.
            And the one of them is corruption, ſo called,The third enemie. becauſe that he rotteth, and corrupteth, as much as in him is, his contrarie. This olde man will ſend out whole ſwarmes of luſts, to deſtroy the new. Hence wee are bidden, as Strangers,
               1. Pet. 2 11. 
               and Pilgrimes to abſtaine from fleſhly luſts, that fight against the Soule. This pricke, or ſtab was ſent to buffet Paul, and neuer could he be rid of it,2. Cor. 12.7. till death. It is called a pricke in the fleſh: by which I vnderſtand, (omitting all other interpretations) the verie act, or motion of the vnregenerate part, often called fleſh, who, by his contrarie luſting, hindreth a man in the performance of all good duties.
                  Gal. 5.17. And the reaſons of this interpretation, are two; firſt, in all probabilitie that which Paul complaines the moſt againſt elſewhere, is that, that he moſt praid againſt in this place, and it was the bodie of death; the Law in his fleſh,
               
                  Rom. 7.23. 
               rebelling againſt the Law of his minde, and leading him captiue vnto the Law of ſinne, which was in his members.
            
            Secondly, thus I alſo reaſon, that which doth moſt 
               
moleſt, and trouble all Gods Children, is it that did the moſt trouble Paul, (Paul as a Chriſtian.) But this prick, the act of corruption, the ſtab of the old man, doth moſt moleſt all Gods Children, Ergo Paul, why? Aske an experienced Profeſſor, what doth the moſt trouble him in any good dutie? his anſwere will bee, In Prayer, wandering thoughts, carrying the mind from God; ſo that like a man, who maketh a round Circle, fetching a circumference, wee neuer come neere him, but in the firſt word (Our) and laſt word (Amen) as the two points, in the very period of the Motion, and the Circles perfection. Alſo, let a man ſpeake, or preach the Word of God, how is a good man grieued that this pricke buffets him, ſtriking his head awry, that he aimes not at the right end, or marke? weakning the ſpirit, that his ſpeech wants Salt to ſeaſon it, Grace to powder it, cauſing the poore Soule (when ſhe comes to her ſelfe) and viewes her wandering, to cry out, What haue I done? ſo that I had the rather apply it to many, then one particular ſin, or act.
            
               
                  Obiect. 1 But it is called the Meſſenger of Satan?
            
               
                  Anſwere. 
                True; for Satan was the Authour of it at the beginning; ſinne had his originall from Satan, and is the accurſed ſeed of a curſed father. Againe, Satan is no more willing to ſend this Meſſenger, but he is as ready to goe his errand, and in theſe and more reſpects, it may bee called the Deuils Meſſenger.
            
               
                  Obiect. 2 But it is ſaid to bee in the fleſh, not from the fleſh?
            
               
                  Reſolut. 
                Wee muſt note, that it is in it, as the forme in the matter, and from it, as the act is from the forme. Againe, in the fleſh, may be read from the fleſh. Compare the 1. Kings 8.30. with 2. Chron. 6.21.
            
               
                  Quaeſt. 
                But here a queſtion may bee demanded, viz. how grace and corruption,
                  Reſolut. 
                being adiuncts, and adiuncts being conſentany arguments, can fight, being in the ſame

ſubiect. I anſwere, Firſt, that they may haue a double conſideration, not only as adiuncts, but alſo as owners of the ſame ſubiect, in which they are, and to which they adhere; as two men in the ſame Boat, may diuerſly be conſidered, for they are but adiuncts to the Boat in one ſence, and in another, it may bee an adiunct to either of them. The one laying title to it, ſaith it is his, and he wil goe Eaſtward: The other denieth that, and ſaith it is his, and he wil carrie it Weſtward. Thus the arguments being altered, and the one rowing one way, and the other another, comes the Combat.
            So Grace like an Owner, ſaith, that hee hath a true title to the man (for God hath put him into poſſeſſion) and would carrie him to Heauen. Corruption denyeth that; (for ſayth he) I haue been owner longer then thee; therefore he is mine, and ſhall to Hell-ward; and hence from their contrary luſting, may grow a quarrell.
            Againe, though they be contraries, yet they may be  in the ſame ſubiect, and more, in the very ſame part of the ſubiect, at the ſame time, but not in the ſame degree or meaſure, but more weake and remiſly; as white and black, heat and cold or diuers colours in varniſh, mixed, and mingled together: but at the ſame time, in the higheſt degree, to bee in the ſelfe-ſame part of the ſubiect, is impoſſible.
            
            The ſecond internall Enemie is Death,The fourth enemie. againſt whom we are to warre, and combat; as this foe came firſt into the World, ſo muſt he goe the laſt out of it;1. Cor. 15.26. 
               For the laſt Enemie to bee deſtroyed is Death. This cloſe Aduerſarie comes ſtealing vpon vs at vnawares, and giues vs a deadly wound with his ſting; And euery man muſt haue about and battaile with him, before hee enter into Heauen: except a few that ſhall bee liuing at the laſt Day, yet their change may be called a kind of Combat: and ſtrange is this to thinke: for although this Warriour,

with Dauid, hath ſlaine his ten thouſand, yet hee neuer hath enough.
            And whatſoeuer the great Gallants of our dayes, in their hot bloud, and height of their valor, may imagine; yet the verie ſight of this foe, will make the ſtouteſt, and ſtrongeſt of their hearts to tremble. PHARAOH, but hearing, (yet hee was a King) that hee was come neere his home, could then cry, Let Iſrael bee gone, and ſerue his God, when all other iudgements would not worke effectually with him. Let Nabal that drunken Foole, bee come to his wits, and ſober, the tydings of ſuch a Meſſenger to fetch him, will make him as cold as a ſtone, and his liue heart to dye within him. But yet heere is comfort for a Chriſtian; for Chriſt, their Captaine, hath bruiſed this Serpents head, depriued him of his ſting, and remooued that bitter and poyſoned water from vnder his tongue: he hath changed his nature, put the glorious vayle of the Goſpell ouer his vgly countenance, through which, they that with the eye of Faith behold him, though they may feare at the firſt, as Moſes, to touch his Rod, yet at the laſt, they ſhall haue boldneſſe, and imbrace him.
            
               
                  Reaſon. 4 And laſt of all, Chriſtians muſt be Souldiers: for otherwiſe they cannot obtaine the Crowne.
                  Reuel. 2.10. 
               He that ouer-commeth, muſt be clothed in white: And ſuch as fight manfully vnder their Captaine, ſhall haue the Garland of Life. So that you ſee, that the faithfull are fighters: for they haue a Lord Generall: Secondly, Weapons and Armour: Thirdly, Enemies without them, and within them; without them, Satan, and his Souldiers: within them, Corruption, Death. And laſt, which is not the leaſt, no Combat, no Crowne: And from this point thus proued, many profitable Corrolaries ſpring, & like ſtreames, from their fountaine, doe flow.
            
               
                  Ʋſe. 1 And firſt of all, heere is confuted that fond opinion

of the vulgar, that thinke Heauen may bee had, without warre, and garments, tumbling in bloud: theſe Dreamers imagine, that the Deuill (to vſe the Worlds Prouerbe) is dead, or that he hath no power to preuaile againſt them; defying, ſpitting, and ſcorning, yet alas, they are tooke captiue of him at his will, and with Simon Magus, in the gall of bitterneſſe and bonds of iniquitie. They dreame, that they are borne to a Kingdome, and cannot miſſe of the Crowne; and where is their ground? why, Gods eternall Election. O, ſay ſuch, If I be ordained to life, then ſhall I bee ſaued: if predeſtinated to death; why it is in vaine to fight, for I muſt be damned; But theſe muſt learne, if they haue a luſt to doe it; That Gods Decree excludes not, but includes the meanes, that leade to the end. Iobs dayes are numbred,
               
                  Iob. 14.5. 
               his bounds he cannot paſſe: What? ſhall he therefore neither eat, drinke, ſleepe, or vſe lawfull recreation?
                  Acts 27. 
               Not a haire ſhall fall from the heads of all the men in the Ship, for the Angell of God hath ſayd it: ſhall Paul therefore let it ſinke or ſwim? no, if theſe abide not in the ſame; yee cannot be ſafe.
            Therefore, bee it knowne, that if God haue choſen thee before eternitie, thou muſt bee created, called,
                  Rom. 8.30. iuſtified, ſanctified, and fight manfully, before thou bee ſaued Lay thy hand now vpon thy mouth, ſome out no more ſuch mud, caſt farre this filth from thee, and learne at the length, leſt it prooue too late, That the faithfull are fighters, and all Chriſtians bee Souldiers. It is true that the Lord knoweth who are his, his foundation remaineth ſure: yet euery one that deſireth to bee ſealed, ſaued, muſt depart from iniquity: for as he hath his ſeale,2. Tim. 2.19. we muſt haue ours.
            
               
                  Ʋſe. 2 Againe, here is reprehended a ſecond ſort, that thinke it the eaſieſt matter of a thouſand, to go to Heauen. It is a queſtion amongſt ſome, whether it be harder, to enter

into the Kingdome of God, or goe to the Church, and publike Congregation: And too many there bee, that iudge the one as eaſie as the other, making in their ſhallow concluſion, the like equall proportion.
            To what end then is it, that wee are bidden to ſtriue, worke, proue, reſiſt, ſtand faſt, fight, quit you like men, let no man take away your Crowne? If it were ſo eaſie a matter, ſhall we thinke that Satan will not reſiſt, tempt, and caſt his fierie and fierce Darts at vs, if we warre againſt him? Will not the beaſts of Epheſus yell, roare, and deuoure ſuch as doe awake them out of the ſleepe of ſinne? Who will, that is wiſe, imagine, that corruption will not ſprawle, like Eſau? kicke with the heele, and cuffe vs on the face, as the High Prieſt bid Paul? and is it poſſible to liue in Meſhek, and Kedar, and not to bee oppoſed? breathe in the Ayre, and feed on the Creatures, and not to be mortall? Away then with this fond conceit; for they that thus erre in vanitie, vanitie ſhall bee their change. Theſe Sleepers Crowne ſhall, like Sauls Speare, be ſtolne from them; their beſt hopes ſhall make them one day aſhamed, their candle muſt bee put out, & their houſe, like the Spyders Web, periſh: for hee that doth not ouercome, ſhall not be crowned; Heauen ſuffereth violence, and the violent take it by force.
            
               
                  Ʋſe. 3
                And in the third place, I might ſoundly leſſon ſuch, that haue no care at all to bee acquainted with their Enemies; or that thinke all the World is at peace with them; or that like a Child being offended, caſteth downe his weapons, as it doth all things in the hand. Fye, what a multitude of theſe haue wee? of whom we may ſay, that they are like Laiſh, a lazie people: ſome haue the eye of the minde put out, and like Saul at his Conuerſion goe, they know not whither; others like Mephiboſheth, and Adonibezech, are lame both of feete, and fingers: ſome as Samſon, when they bee to fight,

want their weapons, and ſo like puling boyes, put the finger in the eye, and fall a weeping.
            Alaſſe, alaſſe, how many take Caine, for his Keeper, the Wolfe, for the Sheepe, and in ſtead of the true Shepheard, an Hireling! They beleeue euery report, giue credit to each perſon, and ſo like the fooliſh Birds, be inſnared. Satan leadeth ſome blind-folded, as the Prophet did the people vnto Samaria,
               2. Kings 6.19, 20 vnto the land of darkneſſe, before their eyes bee opened, and their Enemies be diſcerned; only heares the diſſimilitude; the one found fauour, the other ſhall not be freed.
            
               
                  Ʋſe. 4 And, ſeeing that the Fighters bee faithfull, and the faithfull Fighters; it may make much for the comfort of ſuch as haue oppoſition within them, or without them; for truly, this is a ſure ſigne, that thou art a Souldier. Doeſt thou imagine, that a man can bee broke out of Satans Gaole, and he not make hue and cry after him? ſhall the Sinner be put into the endleſſe Riuer of Gods running Mercies; and ſhall not the Deuill angle for him? Will not the Prince awake, when the Subiects are at warre with him? And therefore the more that thou art tempted by the Deuill, the more cauſe thou haſt to gather comfort: for after remiſſion of ſinne, is placed, Lead vs not into temptation. Againe, doth the World hate thee, count thee, with Paul, a Play-ſellow, runne with Caine, and ſeeke to kill thee? Why, know, ſhee loueth her owne, cryeth peace vnto them ſhee affecteth, and alwayes lulleth them in her ſoft and lined lap.
            God would haue a wicked one in the Arke, that the Church and Truth might neuer be without oppoſition. Chriſt hath ſaid, that in the World wee ſhall haue many perſecutions: the Seruant is not greater then his Maſter: and if they haue done this to a greene Tree, alwayes fruitfull, what will they doe to a dry that is barren and ſeldome beareth? Therefore neuer bee daunted: Satans

ſeede will ſting, although it cannot kill; it will be like Dan, and the Adder biting vs by the heele: but be thou of good comfort, The elder ſhall ſerue the younger: for Chriſt hath ouer-come the World.
               Iohn 16. vlt.
            
            And what if we finde a ſtrange change in our ſelues, cauſing vs cry with Rebeccah, (when the Twins ſtroue in her wombe) Why am I thus? or with Ieremiah, Is any mans ſorrow like to my ſorrow? Or with Manoah, We ſhall die: for haue we not ſeene the Lord? Yet all this is ground of great ioy, matter of exceeding mirth; for ſaluation is come vnto thy houſe. I know that young Conuerts, in the pangs of regeneration, wonder to ſee ſuch an alteration in themſelues, imagining, that neuer any perſon hath found comfort in that condition. But vſe thou the meanes, and thy feare ſhall be expelled, thy ſpirit healed, thy corruption weakned; and thou, at the laſt,
                  Pſal. 116.7. ſhalt either be able to ſay with Dauid, Now, Soule, returne vnto thy reſt: or elſe with Paul, at the laſt, thou ſhalt heare that pleaſant, and ſtill voice, rowning thee in the eare,2. Cor. 12.9. 
               My grace is ſufficient for thee: for my power is made manifeſt in weakneſſe. And be thou aſſured, vntill Satan rage, the Fleſh pricke, the World perſecute, and Death terrifie, thou waſt neuer a Chriſtian Souldier, entred into the liſts of the fight, and in poſſibilitie of heauen;
                  Reuel. 17.14. 
               For they that are of the Lambs part, are called, and faithfull, and choſen, and therefore, muſt vnder-goe in ſome degree, what the Fore-runner, and Finiſher of their Faith hath ſuffered. Let Satan tempt me; corruption like a body lade me; the World deride me; Death looke grim vpon me; Then will I ſay, I either am, or ſhall be a Chriſtian Souldier.
            
            
               
                  Ʋſe. 5 The fift vſe, is for our inſtruction; that before we beginne the Battaile (for this is Chriſts counſaile) wee would caſt vp our accounts,
                  Luke 14.31. and conſider of our abilitie, leſt we, ſeeming to beginne in the Spirit, end in the

Fleſh. Wee muſt take heede, that wee doe not ruſh into the battaile, without mature deliberation, but well weigh with whom, and about what we haue to deale. Many haue ſeemed reſolute at the firſt, that haue runne away at the laſt, and ſo all their labour hath beene loſt. Young Chriſtians are like young Souldiers, ſtrike hard for awhile, lay on lode, and anon retyre. We ſee in experience, that ſome Gallants ſtanding on the ſhore, and ſeeing a ſhip vnder ſayle, the flags ſpred, hearing the allarum of the Drum, ſound of the Trumpet, and report of the Peeces, lanch out valiantly: But when they, through the ſmell of the Pumpe, or tempeſt and ſtormes of the Sea, haue beene toſſed to and fro, tumbled out of their Cabbin, and Sea-ſicke exceedingly; vow, that if they once come to land, they will be for euer after wiſer: And the very ſame, for want of conſideration, befalleth many, that beginne this ſpirituall combat. We muſt beginne the battell; as men goe into the water to bathe, not too hot, nor too cold: for extremes in all things are full of danger.
            
               
               
                  Ʋſe. 1 And laſt of all, ſeeing that the faithfull are fighters, we muſt labour for what may further vs in this combat, and to caſt off what might hinder vs in winning the field: wee muſt take to vs the whole Armour of God: Our loynes muſt be girded about with Verity:
               Epheſ. 6.13.
                
               the plate of Iuſtice vpon our breſts: the Goſpell of peace muſt couer our feete; aboue all, we must take the ſhield of Faith,
               See Goutch on this place. 
               the helmet of Hope, and the ſword of the Spirit. Who will run into the battell vnarmed? What man is ſo mad, but will haue his weapons with him? elſe, would wee not count ſuch a perſon deſperate? Put on therefore the complete Armour of the Lord: And pray all manner of prayer: for prayer like oyle, and exerciſe, keepeth the furniture, and weapons from ruſting. And take theſe rules for thy further direction.
            
               1. Firſt, know thou thy particular place and ſtanding: learne in what part of the battell thou art to war  vnder thy Captayne; nothing ſooner loſeth the field, but when men preſume aboue their place, and abilitie. Some will command, that are to be cōmanded; Others march in the Fore-front, that ſhould be in the Reareward. A third runneth with a Musket, that ſhould only kindle the match: and ſo brings confuſion, if not death and deſtruction. That may truely be ſaid of the people: that ſometimes the people themſelues vttered: You take too much vpon you, you Moſes and Aaron. For almoſt all will either bee Captaynes, or Coronels, or they will none of the Crowne, recoile, like an ouercharged Cannon, and not fight one ſtroke in the combat.
            
                2. Againe, he that will ſo fight, as he may not beate the ayre, but winne the field, muſt get ſtrength, and courage: we muſt be ſtrong in the Lord, and the power of his might. How often doth Dauid pray for the Spirit of life and power? How doth he preſſe it vpon others, Be ſtrong, &c? For to what end is it to haue weapons, to know his ſtanding, if he want ſtrength to wield them, and wound the Aduerſary? Weakeneſſe muſt be remoued, or willingneſſe will bee to no purpoſe. Wee muſt ſtriue therefore for the Spirit of power, as well as for a ſound minde. Knowledge may guide vs, but ſtrength muſt ſupport our ſelues, and wound others.
            
                3. Beſides, we muſt endeuour alſo for wiſedome: it was Chriſts charge,
                  Epheſ. 5.15. 
               Be wiſe, &c. Wiſedome muſt not be forgotten. Paul, an old beaten Souldier cryes often out,
                  Col. 1.9. 
               Walke wiſely: Be filled with all wiſedome and ſpirituall vnderſtanding. Want of skill is a great want in a man of any calling, and much to be deſired in this; for our Aduerſaries are very politike, and ſo muſt we be, if wee would preuaile. Put a ſword into a mans hand that hath

will without skill, and he will either ſmite flat-way, or wound his friend, for his aduerſary. Therefore (I ſay) Get wiſedome, get vnderſtanding: for when theſe enter into thy heart, they ſhall preſerue thee. Paul was admirable in this; reade but the Acts, and you ſhall ſee, hee killed more by policy, then proweſſe: yet like Simeon and Leui, theſe muſt goe together to ſlay our Sychemites.
            
            
                4. Furthermore, we are to caſt off what will hinder, as to put on what will helpe. We muſt put off ſinne, that hangeth on ſo cloſe, and all other impediments.
                  Hebr. 12.1. 
               Hee that warreth, intangleth not himſelfe with the things of this life, that he may pleaſe his Maſter. Loue of earthly things out of vs, and corruption cheriſhed within vs,2. Tim. 2.4. may not be ſuffred to a reſolute ſpirituall Souldier.
                  Deut. 20.8. As GOD would not haue faint-hearted perſons to fight, no more can he endure ſuch whoſe affections are at home,
                  Deut. 24.5. with wife, goods, &c. when his perſon is in the field.
            
                5. Theſe will faint, and cauſe others, by their cowardly examples, to faint alſo. And (thus beloued) when you know your owne Station, keep it, be not like Iudes Planets, wandring. Chriſtian Souldiers ſhould not neede, like ſpirits, to be coniured in their Circles. Put on the right armour: Dauid cannot walke in Sauls, he muſt not ouer-come with ſuch carnall weapons; no, no, they muſt be ſpirituall, that will wound, and kill our Goliah, the Philiſtim; and when thou haſt done this, labour for skill, ſtriue for ſtrength: for the one would fight, but without the other cannot, the other can and will, but if he be not guided, hurt will follow.
            
               
                  Doct. 4 The next point to be noted, is, That a Chriſtians fight is a good fight. I may ſay of it, as Salomon ſpeaketh of wiſedome; The merchandize thereof is better then ſiluer, and the gaine thereof greater then gold; It is more precious then pearles, and all things that thou canſt deſire, are not to be compared vnto it. Harken what teſtimony this old

beaten Souldier ſtill giueth of it.1. Tim. 1.18. 
               It was propheſied of Timothy, that he ſhould fight a good fight. And he like a grand Captayne,1. Tim. 6.12. or great Commander, chargeth him to fight this good fight of faith: in theſe his words the ſame thing is meant.
                  Hoſ. 2.7. And what ſaith the Campe elſewhere? I will goe and returne to my firſt Captayne; for when I fought vnder his Banner▪ it was better with me, then now. Dauid (or ſome other worthy Warrior) diſputed the caſe, it ſeemeth: whether it was better to fight the battailes of the World, or of the Lord? But at the length, he makes this reſolute concluſion:Pſal. 73. vlt. 
               Its good for me to draw neere vnto God.
            
            Truly (Beloued) it neuer goeth ſo well with a Chriſtian Souldier, as when he is taking of the Lambs part, warring againſt the Dragon & his followers, and manfully fighting the battailes of his Lord. And it may be called good, either in reſpect of the fight, or the effects that follow the very act, or the conſequents that ſucceede, and enſue, the combat being ended.
            
               Reaſons.For firſt: Did not Elohim, who created all things of nothing, garniſhed the heauens, framed the crooked Serpent, gathereth the windes into his fiſt, ſpanneth the great Globe with his hand, and that ſaith to the proud waues, Hither ſhalt thou come, and no farther, appoint the ſame? And how can this God doe any thing that is not good? If he appoint the field, we need not to feare but it is a lawfull,
                  Gen. 3.15. and good fight.
            2. Againe, who is the Lord Generall, and Leader of this Armie? Is it not Chriſt Ieſus, God-Man? Wee may ſay of him, (and more too) as the people did of Dauid, that he is worth a thouſand thouſand of vs all. Who euer vnderſtood this, but with admiration? Surely he neuer ſinned, yet fought this fight: therefore it cannot but be good and very good.
                  Reuell. 17.14.
            
            3. The Spirit alſo doth ſummon theſe Souldiers, and

conducteth them into the field,Matth. 4.1.
                hee leadeth into euery truth; for he is Truth it ſelfe. And what comfort may this yeeld euery Chriſtian Souldier, that he hath ſuch a Guider, and Conducter vnto the combat!
            4. The new man, and firſt-borne, the part regenerate, is the Fighter. Theſe are all of the free-womans ſeede,
                  Gal. 5.17. and haue the marke of Chriſt their Captayne in their fore-heads: and theſe Souldiers cannot ſinne.1. Iohn 3.9.
            
            5. The weapons for this combat, prepared, and appointed, they are not carnall, but ſpirituall, mightie, from God, and able to ouer-throw the ſtrongeſt holds of Satan, either within vs, or without vs.2. Cor. 10.4. Theſe weapons are like the ſword of Saul, and bow of Ionathan, that neuer returned emptie: hee that ſtrikes with theſe, alwayes kils his foe, and wins the field.
            6. And laſt of all; is it not for their owne right,
                  Luk. 12.32. that they thus warre?
                  Iudg. 11.24. I remember what Iphtah ſaid to the King of the children of Ammon: Wouldeſt not thou poſſeſſe that which Chemoſh thy god giueth thee to poſſeſſe? So, ſhall not we fight for that, which our GOD hath commanded vs to fight for? And if it was warrantable for him to doe the one, of a truth its good for vs to doe the other: And thus you ſee, in regard of the act, or fight it ſelfe▪ it is good, and none dares (except hee would make God, Chriſt, the holy Ghoſt, the new Man, the Spirituall weapons, and heauens priuiledges, to be ſins, and ſinners) deny it.
            
               
                  Rea;ſon. 2 Againe, the conſequents of this fight confirme it further. And they bee either honor or profit. For honor, none greater.
                  Gal. 6.17. 
               Pauls wounds that he receiued in this hot skirmiſh, are more honor to him, then if hee had beene adorned with all the ornaments of Nature and the World. The memoriall of the iuſt ſhall be bleſſed,
               
                  Pro. 10.7. 
               and euery faithfull Souldier ſhall be had in euerlaſting remembrance; their names ſhall flouriſh on earth,
               
                  Pſal. 112.6. 
               and be foreuer ingrauen in heauen.
            
            
               
               1. Tim. 4.8.And it is profitable euery manner of way: for it hath the promiſes of this life, and the life to come. And is not that a matter of great worth,1. Pet. 1.4. of infinite moment? They are called great and precious promiſes: for firſt, they bring food and rayment, fit and conuenient. Secondly, the curſe by Chriſt our Captayne is remoued, the infection is tooke away.
            Our father Adam ſteeped all our bread in ſuch a liquor,
                  Reuel. 10.10. as without this fight, it will bee like Iohns little booke, though ſweet in the mouth, yet bitter in the belly.
                  Exod. 18.25. And our drinke, like the waters of Marah, if this tree alter not the taſte, rather kill, then cure vs.
            
               1. Pet. 1.8.3. Wee ſhall haue inward peace, that paſſeth all vnderſtanding. A thing often ſpoke of, but ſeldome felt by experience; this ioy is vnvtterable, glorious.
            
               
                  Pſal. 91.11, 12.4. The good Angels ſhall pitch their Tents about vs, preſerue vs in their hands: ſo that wee ſhall not ſee death, or daſh our foot againſt a ſtone, vntill wee haue finiſhed our courſe, and our beſt hopes be crowned, neuer making aſhamed:
                  Rom. 8.28. 
               For all things ſhall worke together (marke that, not apart) for good, to them that loue God, and are choſen of his purpoſe to this combat.
               1. Tim. 4.8. Beſides, this fight hath the promiſes of the world to come, and they bee many.
            1. Firſt, death ſhall bee to ſuch, aduantage, better then the day wherein they were borne:Eccleſ. 7.3.
                for Chriſt our Generall hath tooke away her ſting,1. Cor. 15.55. like a Droane ſhee may feare vs with her humming, but not hurt vs.
            2. The ſoules, at the ſeparation, by the Angels ſhall be apprehended,
                  Luke 16.22. and inſtantly carryed into heauen, either for our ſafetie and comfort, or in that the ſoules are ignorant of that iourney. God could (we deny not) immediately bring them thither, but hee will not: for his Angels are,Hebr. 1. vlt. and muſt be miniſtring Spirits, for the good of thoſe elect Souldiers.
            
               3. They, then ſhall reſt from their labours, ſing glorie to the Lambe,
                  Reuel. 14.17. and with a rauiſhing and ſpirituall longing, expect the finall end of this combat, and perfection of all things.
            4. In the day appointed, when this quarrell ſhall be ended, (for it ſhall be finiſhed,1. Theſ. 4.6. (to allude lawfully to an vnlawfull recreation) when the laſt of theſe men-ſouldiers are borne, and borne againe) then ſhall the Soule deſcend from Heauen into the Graue, bee infuſed into the ſame bodie, where in former time ſhee had her habitation: But it ſhall bee farre more glorious,1. Cor. 15. for it ſhall be without all corruption, ſpot, or wrinkle: It ſhall be Spirituall, hauing power to aſcend, or deſcend,Phil. 3. vlt. immortall, and abiding glorious for euer: For Chriſt ſhall change our vile bodies, and make them like to his glorious bodie, by that power whereby he is able to ſubdue  all things to himſelfe.
            
               
                  Obiect. 
                But ſome may obiect, What, ſhall that body ryſe againe? how can this be? For ſuppoſe that a Wolfe eat a Man, a Lion the Wolfe, Birds the Lion, and Men the Birds; how can this be poſſible!
            
               
                  Reſolut. 
                I anſwere, that the bodies were at the firſt compoſed, and made of the foure Elements, Fire, Ayre, Water, Earth; and therefore, in the laſt change, they can but be reſolued into their firſt principles; And is it not more eaſie for the Lord, who is infinite in knowledge and power, to recollect this matter, and bring it into forme, then at the firſt, to make all things of nothing? Yes aſſuredly; and no art of man can annihilate one graine of Sand, totally ſeparating the forme and the matter; for it is an infinite power. Some hold, a Palingeneſian, or tranſmutation of Elements, but they are deceiued: for the firſt forme can neuer be totally ſeparated from the firſt matter; in part it may; As for example: Caſt water into the fire, the fire will by its act, eate of ſome of the

matter, and by its owne forme informe it; And then the water contracteth its forme into its owne matter; and ſo in the end, hauing much forme, and little matter, it ſeemeth then to flye away from its oppoſite.
            Therefore this is but a childiſh cauill; for Elements are not annihilated, or wholly tranſmutated, ſo that the ſame bodie may ryſe. What if they were? What, Is any thing impoſſible to God? Shall wee ſo thinke? God forbid, ſo bee it as it doe not (and this doth not) contradict his nature.
            
               
                  Queſt. 
                And here a queſtion may ariſe; Whether hee, that wanted a member, as hand, foot, &c. at his birth, ſhall haue it at the Reſurrection reſtored?
            
               
                  Anſwere. 
                Yes, for it is an imperfection, then a fruit of ſinne; then it came firſtly, from the firſt Adam: Then muſt the ſecond Adam remoue it, (vnderſtand of the Elect only) or hee ſhould not recouer what the firſt loſt: And ſome hold, that the very bodies of the Reprobate ſhall bee made more excellent, that they may vndergoe the greater torment;1. Iohn 3.1, 2. but certainly the Elect ſhall be ſatisfied with Chriſts glorious Image.
            
            
               
                  Obiect. 
                But ſome may obiect againſt this, and ſay, Then ſhall more ryſe then was ſowne; if hee that had not a hand, now haue?
            
               
                  Anſw. 
                No, for man in his Mothers Wombe, is as much in offence, as when he is of age, but not in quantitie.
            Take a Pecke of Meale; Lay leauen of it, it will bee greater in quantitie, not in eſſence or matter.
            Againe, God can make that deformed maſſe, a well formed man, yet adde no matter; as we ſee a Bell miſt in the caſting, of the ſelfe-ſame matter may bee made perfect.
            So God, the great Bel-founder of all the World, ſhall take out the Soule for a time, and caſt the bodie anew, in the Furnace of the Earth, after put them together; and

then Aarons Bels in the Sanctuarie neuer rang ſo ſweet a peale, as theſe Bels ſhall, in the eares of the Lord of Hoſts, for euer, and euer.
            5. Fiftly, then ſhall not only all their wounds and skars bee cured, but they ſhall tread the Prince of the World, Satan, and all their Enemies, vnder foot, yea,
                  Rom. 16.20. they ſhall ſee their foes ſuffer the vengeance of eternall fire, for troubling them in their flight to Heauen. That ſpirituall Pharaoh, with his huge Hoſte,2. Theſ. 1.8, 9. ſhall be ſwallowed vp by the Red Sea of endleſſe deſtruction, without all hope of recouery.
            6. Laſtly, they haue a promiſe that their Habitation, ſhalbe Heauen; their Companions, Chriſt & his Angels,
                  1. Theſ. 4.17. Pſal. 16. vlt. all fellow-Souldiers; their ioy full, and for euer. What a place is this, where all haue fulneſſe of ioy, fulneſſe with conſtancie, and conſtancie with fulneſſe for all eternitie?
            If theſe things now were laid all together, truely vnderſtood, ſeriouſly thought vpon, and without doubting beleeued, who would not, or could not affirme the propoſition for a truth, that a Chriſtians fight is a good fight? good for act, for euer, for both. The vſes in their order now follow.
            
               
                  Ʋſe. 1 This then in the firſt place, iuſtly reproueth ſuch perſons that thinke baſely of Religion, reputing it neyther honourable, nor profitable. How many cry out, that gaine is godlineſſe! no profit had in fighting the Lords Battaile. What is that Captaine, that wee ſhould ſerue him, deſiring to learne another good? Haue wee not too many of theſe amongſt vs that foame out their filthy froth, fight againſt Chriſt, and his Souldiers, whoſe tongues walke againſt Heauen and Earth, crying, What get theſe with gadding to Sermons, reading ſo much; (for they allow ſome Scripture:) being ſo preciſe, and ſtrict? Why, I haue told thee in part what they haue in poſſeſſion, and what in poſſibilitie; for no

tongue can ſpeake, or heart fully conceiue the riches of this ſpoile, man, or Angell.
            Suppoſe, that thou haſt rich attire, but it is infected; daintie dyet, but poyſoned; many things, but all in the end ſhall worke for euill; what a miſerie is this? Yet this is the eſtate of Satans Souldiers. Beſides this, hee deales with his Followers, as the Philiſtims by Samſon, takes away their ſtrength, puls out their eyes, makes them draw in bonds and fetters, and if hee reioyce in any thing, it is in their bloud-ſhed and endleſſe deſtruction.
            But we will leaue them, and pittie them, hoping in time they may take the Lambes part, and fight this good Combat.
            
               
                  Ʋſe. 2
                This may ſerue to incourage all thoſe Souldiers to go on, with an vndaunted reſolution, and not to ſhrinke or ſhiuer, though they be cruſht and diſgraced: euery one cryeth out,
                  Pſal. 4.6. 
               Who will ſhew vs any good? as if then had they found it, they would follow it. Why, this is that good thing ſo many haue groped after; wherefore bee yee of good courage, ſtrike hard, ſtand faſt, and bee ſtrong. If thou be out of heart, thinke what an honour it is to be ſlaine in this field, and that all thy wounds againe ſhall be cured, yea the ſooner thou art killed, thou ſhalt bee crowned; for by death we ouercome, get the victorie.
            When I conſider how the children of Babel, the Papiſts, doe ſpill their bloud like water, on the ground, for their Antichriſt, Lord, thinke I then; what ſhould wee doe, that are the ſonnes of Bethel, for our Chriſt, that hath bin ſlaine himſelfe, to deliuer vs from the ſting of the firſt, and wound of the ſecond death! But (alas) theſe Meditations come not but like Strangers, to our minds, and what cold, and ſhort entertainment haue they! And this the reaſon, that we are ſo loth to leape, or lanch out, ſhrinke at the ſight of a Ship, cry out at the

cracke of a Cannon, and tremble at the report of the narrow mouthed Peece: We (beloued) haue not reſiſted vnto bloud; God hath giuen vs better dayes; fire and faggot haue beene kept afarre, and what a ſhame is it then, that wee are ſo weake, faint, halting, and readie vpon the leaſt aſſault, to be turned out of the way? And therefore if any be giddie-headed in this combat, like a man running through a ſwift water, or ſtreame; let him looke ouer to the ſhoare of Heauen, ſee what a pleaſant landing there is, and thouſands of Angels to giue him entertainment: haue thou reſpect with Moſes, to the recompence of reward: thinke of a better Reſurrection, and with thy forerunner ſet before the eye of thy Soule, that glory prepared for thee. What if thy bodie fall in the Wilderneſſe of this World? The Lord hath it in his keeping; Riſe againe it ſhall; therefore be ſtedfaſt, immooueable, abundant alway in the Worke of the Lord,
               
                  1. Cor. 11. vlt. 
               ſeeing that you know, that your labor is not in vaine in the Lord.
            
            And when our fellow-ſouldiers fall by vs, let vs thinke that our Captaine is alſo a Surgion, a Phyſician, and will one day cure all our wounds, and then ſhall we for euer remaine together. Paul would haue all his fellow-ſouldiers in this caſe, to comfort one another with theſe words, 1. Theſſ. 4. vlt.
            
            
               
                  Ʋſe. 3 And here may be a vſe of inſtruction, to ſuch as haue not yet regarded to fight in this Field: take knowledge of thy ignorance, and careleſſeneſſe, and now beginne to change thy Captaine, thou muſt bee vnder one of theſe Generals: God, or the Deuill the Lambe, or the Dragon; Chriſt, or Belial. Awake therefore, thou that ſleepeſt; ſtand vp from the dead, and Chriſt ſhall giue thee light; all conuenient furniture, Epheſ. 5.14.
            
               
                  Obiect. 
                But ſome may obiect, it was good for Paul, who was an Apoſtle, and excellent in the Church, but not for mee.
            
               
               
                  Anſw. 
                I anſwer, as good for thee as for him, in ſome reſpects, and in others better.
            1. Firſt, thou haſt the ſame Captaine.
            2. Secondly, the ſame pay; for the promiſes are not made to any perſon, for his greatneſſe, and learning ſake: but as hee is a Chriſtian, and for his goodneſſe: Therefore, Paul in the next verſe following my Text, to take away this doubt, addeth, that a Crowne of Righteouſneſſe is by the righteous Iudge layd vp, not for himſelfe only, but for all them alſo that fight, and loue his appearing.
            3. We eſcape many wounds that he had, as Circumciſion: this made Zipora call her Huſband, Bloudie Huſband,
               Gal 6.
                
               Exodus 4.25. How often was hee whipped? bare in his bodie the markes of the Lord Ieſus? which laſhes, and ſtripes, we haue eſcaped. And no doubt but they ſet it on for the hatred they bore him, and as doth appeare, by that impreſſion, and skarres, that were to bee ſeene in him.
            4. He fought with beaſts at Epheſus. Some thinke, after the cuſtome of that Countrey, hee was caſt vnto them: but howeuer, the Fight was fierce, and tart to fleſh and bloud.
            5. We warre a ſhorter time (for the moſt part) then he did; and this is ſome priuiledge, though it were but reſt for a day, or houre; and to the ſpoyle ſo much the ſooner.
            We care not how ſhort a time we ſerue for our freedome, how ſpeedily we haue ended, and diſpatched our daily buſineſſe.
            And is not a fauour, in a ſhort time, to winne the Field, and poſſeſſe the Heauen?
            
            6. He oft fought alone, and had many Aduerſaries; for he confeſſed that at his being at Rome (where then was Peter) all men forſooke him,
               2. Tim. 4.16. not one to aſſiſt him.

And a greater griefe muſt it needs be to him; for company in ſuffering is comfortable: And there is a woe pronounced to him, that is (thus) left alone.
            7. And laſt of all, his triall was ſo hot, his foes ſo fierce, that he reſiſted vnto bloud. What ſhould I more ſay? For if wee would ſeriouſly ponder of theſe things, we could not but gather life and ſpirit, and like Iehu, march on furiouſly: or, Deborah, valiantly. But wee, many of vs, haue the prize in our hands, yet (alas) wee want hearts.
            Well (beloued) I can tell you this, that when death approcheth, and iudgement through her, as through a window lookes vs in the face; then this fight will bee found to be of worth, and a greater good, then all the glorie, and pompe of the world. But if Pauls patterne, the goodneſſe of the fight, and the priuiledges, that we aboue many of our Brethren, in time paſt, and at this preſent partake of, will not moue vs to fight, and fight reſolutely; let vs then ſet before vs the fearefull wrath, and dreadfull vengeance, that is prepared for ſuch as neuer began this fight, or if they haue, yet endure not to the end.
            And let that alſo awake vs with Samſon, when the Philiſtims were vpon him, and cauſe each of vs to flie for his life: For neceſſitie ſometimes makes the faint and fearefull-hearted Souldier, valiant.
            Conſider therefore what I haue ſaid, and the Lord giue you vnderſtanding in theſe things. Amen.
            
            
               
                  Ʋſe. 4 And laſt of all, here might Parents be moued to bring vp their children in the feare of the Lord. It were a bleſſed thing, that we could trayne vp our ſeed vnder ſuch a Generall, to be Captaynes; then ſhould we haue comfort in them at our latter end. But Parents, for the moſt part, buſie not themſelues with matters of that nature: yet they will that their children receiue the preſſe-money,

weare weapons, goe armed; but neuer teach, or trayne them vp vnder whom, or how to fight, the more is the pitty. But now be yee better aduiſed; make thy ſonnes of Gods Family, of Chriſts Campe, of the number of the Faithfull: ſo ſhalt thou bee a louing Father, and tender Mother. Otherwiſe, thou haſt but made him by nature, the Slaue and Souldier of Satan, child of perdition. And what an honor will it be to Parents at that laſt Day of appearing, when they can ſay to this great Captayne,
                  Heb. 2.13. as he himſelfe to his Lord Generall, Here am I, and the Souldiers that thou haſt giuen me? For know, that yet a very little while,
                  Heb. 10.37. and he that will come, ſhall come, and will not tarry.
            
               
                  Doct. 1 Againe, where Paul ſaith, Paul hath fought a good fight; obſerue, That it is not a ſinne ſimply, to ſpeake the beſt of ones ſelfe.
            2. That a Murtherer, may dye a Martyr; a Perſecuter, an Apoſtle; in a word, a great Sinner, a rare Saint. Here we ſee, that a bloudy Perſecuter, dyed Chriſts reſolute Souldier: and the ſame may befall in our dayes▪ Againe note,
            3. That Gods Saints on earth, haue no abiding Citie. Paul muſt depart; his fight is fought, his courſe is finiſhed, calling things that are not, as though (already) they were.
            4. That a well-led life yeelds comfort at the day of death. For Paul ſpeaks this with reioycing.
            5. That a good man in his life, wiſheth the Church might flouriſh after his death. This was the cauſe why Paul ſo preſt Timothy to preach, hee being ready to depart.
            6. That certaintie of perſeuerance may be had, being rightly ſought for. Beſides others that I omit.
            And now all that I haue to ſay, ſeeing wee are fighters, and one of our Worthies fallen, is this, Let vs be

the more watchfull ouer our ſelues, and the cloſer knit together.
            Let vs goe vp as one man, hauing our affections vnited, like the Leuiathans skales, that no ſword can either pierce them, or diuide them. For a Kingdome diuided againſt it ſelfe, cannot ſtand: and the diuiſions of Ruben will but make great thoughts of heart.
            And becauſe the eye that now ſeeth me (in this place) may ſee me no more; and the eare that now heareth mee (out of this place) may heare me no more; my laſt ſpeech to you (my Brethren) ſhall be that charge Ioſeph gaue to his brethren at their parting:
                  Gen. 45.24. 
               Fall not out, neither be ſtirred (one againſt another) by the way. Amen.
            
            FINIS.
         
      
   