
      
         
            
            
               
                  IR
                  DIEV ET MON DROIT.
                  HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE.
                  royal blazon or coat of arms
               
            
         
         
            
            
               HONI · SOIT · QVI · MAL · Y · PENSE.
               royal blazon or coat of arms
            
            THE
PEACE-MAKER:
OR,
GREAT BRITTAINES BLESSING.
            
               Fram'd
For the continuance of that mightie Happineſſe
wherein this Kingdome excells manie Empires.
            Shewing the Idleneſſe of a Quarrelling Reputation,
wherein conſiſts neyther MANHOOD nor
WISDOME.
            Neceſſarie for all Magiſtrates, Officers of PEACE, Maſters of
Families, for the confirmation of Youth, and for all his
Maieſties moſt true and faithfull Subiects:
To the generall auoyding of all Contention,
and Bloud-ſhedding.
            
            LONDON,
Printed by THOMAS PVRFOOT:
An. Dom: 1618.
            
            CVM PRIVILEGIO.
         
         
            
            
            
               
                  HONI · SOIT · QVI · MAL · Y · PENSE.
                  royal blazon or coat of arms
               
            
            
               ❧To all Our truelouing,
and Peace-embracing
SVBIECTS.
            
               THE Glory of all Vertues, is
Action; the Crowne of all
Acts, Perfection; the perfection
of all things, Peace
and Vnion. It is the Riches
of our Beings, the Reward
of our Sufferings, the Muſicke
on our Death-beds:
Neuer had ſo great a Treaſure, ſo poore a purchaſer,
for man hath the offer of it. The God of peace ſent it,
the Lambe of peace brought it, the Spirit of peace confirmde

it, and Wee ſtill ſeeke to practiſe it. With what
power then may the good purpoſe of this worke arriue
at the hearts of all faithfull Christians? and with what
cheerefulneſſe and freenes ought it to be embraſt of all
our louing Subiects, hauing ſo many Glorious ſeales
of Honor, Power and Vertue to strengthen it, all that
is required of Vs from you, is a faithful and hearty welcome,
and that beſtowd vpon mans beſt and deareſt
Freind, either in Life or Death. For peace that hath
beene a ſtranger to you, is now become a ſiſter, a Deere
and Naturall ſiſter; and to your Holyeſt loues we recommend
her.
         
      
      
         
            
            THE
PEACE-MAKER.
            
               The Booke it ſelfe in glory of its name,
is proud to tell from whence the ſubiect came.
               
                  
                     PEACE be to you; I greet you in the
bleſſing of a God, the ſalutation of an
Apoſtle, and the Motto of a King:
My Subiect hath her being in Heauen,
her Theory in holy Writ, and
her practique in England, Inſula pacis. The Land
of Peace, vnder the King of Peace.
               Like Noahs Doue, ſhe was ſent out to ſeeke a reſting
place, to ſee if the whole world were not yet
couered with the perpetuall deluge of Blood and
Enmity, & only here ſhe found the Oliue Leafe;
Hitherto hath ſhe been Pilotto the Arke, & heere
it firſt toucht ſhoare: heere now it hath remained
full Fifteene yeeres, I am proud to report it.
               Reioyce O England with thine eſpouſed Scotland,
and let thy handmaid Ireland ioy with thee.

Let all thy ſeruant Iſlands be glad, yea, let in ſtrangers
to behold and taſt thy bleſſings.
               The diſturbed French, ſeeke ſuccour with thee,
the troubled Dutch fly to thy confines, the Italian
leaues his hotter clymate; Theſe and many more
all ſeeke ſhelter vnder the ſweet ſhaddow of thine
Oliue Branches.
               
               O London, bleſſed Mrs. of this happy Brittaine,
build new thy Gates ther's peace entring at them.
The God of peace hath ſent this peace of God, ô
euer loue her, that ſhe may neuer leaue thee, ſalute
her, and inuite her. Let White-Hall (fit embleme
for her purity) be her chiefe Pallace, and
let it ſay, Ades almaſalus.
               
               
                  Peace and Contention lye heere on earth, as trading
Factors for life and death.
               Who deſires not to haue traffique with life?
who (weary of life) but would die to liue?
               
                  Peace is the paſſage from life to life, come then
to the factory of peace, thou that deſireſt to haue
life: behold the ſubſtitue of peace on earth, diſplaying
the flag of peace, Beati pacifici.
               
               Let Contention enioy (without ioy) large Empires;
heere wee enioy (with all ioy) our happy
Sanctuarie. It was borne with him, he brought it
with him, after Fiue and Thirty yeares increaſe,
and heere hath multiplyed it to Fifty with vs:
ô bleſſed Iubile, let it be celebrated with all ioy

and cheerefulneſſe, and all ſing, Beati Pacifici.
               
               And are not the labours bleſt with the worke-man?
England & Scotland, (though not malicious
enemies, yet churliſh Neighbours) are reconciled.
Feaſt, loue, liue, and dye together, are indeed
no more neither what they were, but a new thing
betwixt them, more firme and neere in their louing
Vnion, then euer deuided in their harty vnkindneſſe;
and now both ſay, with one tongue,
Beati Pacifici.
               
               
                  Ireland, that rebellious Outlaw, that ſo many
yeares cried blood and death (filling her Marriſh
grounds with maſſacres, affording many preys of
ſlaughtered bodies to her rauenous Wolues, and
in their wombes keeping the brutiſh obſequies)
would know no Lord, but grew more ſtubborne
in her chaſtiſement, till this white enſigne was
diſplayed; then ſhee came running with this hallowed
text in her mouth, Beati Pacifici.
               
               
                  Spaine, that great and long-laſting oppoſite, betwixt
whome and England, the Ocean ranne with
blood not many yeares before, nor euer truc'd
her crimſon effuſion: their Marchāts on either
ſide traffiqu't in blood, their Indian Ingotts broght
home in bloud, (a commerce too cruell for
Chriſtian Kingdomes) yet now ſhake hands in
friendly amity, and ſpeake our bleſſing with vs,
Beati pacifici.
               
               
                  
Nay, what chriſtian Kingdome that knowes
the bleſſing of peace, has not deſired & taſted this
our bleſſing from vs? Come they not hither as to
the Fountaine from whence it ſprings? Heere
ſits Salomon, and hither come the Tribes for Iudgments:
Oh happy Moderator, bleſſed Father, not
father of thy Country alone, but Father of all thy
neighbour Countries about thee. Spaine, & her
withſtanding Prouinces (long bruiſed on both
ſides) thou haſt ſet at peace, turning their bloody
Leaguers, to leagues of friendſhip: doe not thoſe
children now liue to bleſſe thee, (who had elſe
been buried in their Parents wombes?) and ſay
Beati pacifici.
               
               
                  Denmarke and Sueuia, Sueuia and Poland, Cleue
and Brandenburg: haue not theſe & many more
come to this Oracle of Peace, and receiued their
doomes from it? If the members of a naturall
body, by concord aſſiſt one another; if the politike
members of a kingdome helpe one another,
and by it ſupport it ſelfe; why ſhall not the Monarchall
bodies of many Kingdomes, be one mutuall
Chriſtendome? if ſtill they ſing this bleſſed
leſſon taught them, Beati pacifici.
               
               Let England then, (the ſeat of our Salomon) reioyce
in her happy gouernment, yea, her gouernment
of gouernments; and ſhe that can ſet peace
with others, let her (at leaſt) enioy it her ſelfe:

let vs loue peace, and be at peace in loue. We liue
in Beth-ſalem the houſe of Peace, then let vs euer
ſing this ſong of peace, Beati pacifici.
               
            
            
               Detraction ſnarles, and tempts faire Peace to ſhow
the plentie of her fruits, and how they grow.
               
                  SEd vbi fructus?
                  Detractiō to Peace. Where are all theſe rich and
oppulent bleſſings that this tender white rob'd
Peace hath brought with her? Aetas parentum
peior auis &c. Our Grandfathers (for the moſt part)
were honeſter men then our Fathers, our Fathers
better then wee, and our Children are like ynough
to bee worſe then our ſelues. Do's Peace keepe
a Pallace where Charity may warme herſelfe?
               Shame murmurer,Peace anſwere. hadſt thou rather with the
forgetfull Iſraelites, go backe to the Fleſh-pots of
Egypt (bought with blowes and burdens,) then
eate Manna in the way to Canaan.
               
               Doeſt thou thirſt heere? tis for want of Sacrifice
to him that ſhould refreſh thee then.
               Thy Grandfather prayed for this that thou
enioyeſt, and though hee had it not himſelfe, yet
prepared it as a bleſſing on thee. The Sunne that
daily ſhines on thee, thou letſt it paſſe with a careleſſe
& neglectiue eye; but were it hid from thee,
the change of a Moone, thou wouldſt then welcome
it, with all alacrity & chearefulneſſe.
               Were blowes more bountifull to thee? Did

bloud yeild thee benefit? Warre affoord thee
wealth? Didſt thou make that thine owne by
violence, which was anothers by right? It may
be, the Hand-maid was fruitfull, and the Miſtres
barraine; But Sarah has now brought foorth, and
in her ſeed are the bleſſings come.
               
                  Hagar is deſpiſed, Peace hath conceiued, and
ſmiling Iſaack hath left vs Iacob, a new Iſraell, a
Prince of God, a man that hath preuayld with
God to plant his peace with vs.
               The trading Marchant finds it, who daily
plowes the Sea, and as daily reapes the harueſt of
his labours. What wants England that the world
can enrich her with? Tyre ſends in her Purples;
India her Spices; Affrick her gold; Muſcouie her
coſtly skins of beaſts; All her neighbour Countries
their beſt traffique, & all purchaſed by friēdly
commerce, not (as before) by ſauage cruelty.
               The feare leſſe trades and handicraft men ſing
away their laborsal day (hauing no note drownd
with either noiſe of Dromme or Cannon) and
ſleepe with peace at night.
               The frolicke Countryman, opens the fruitefull
Earth, and crops his plenty from her fertile
boſome: Nay, even his toyling beaſts are trapt
with bells, who taſt (in their labours) the harmony
of peace, with their awfull gouernors.
               The Magiſtrate, conſtantly drawes his ſword

of Iuſtice on offenders, not ore-awed by party-headed
contentions.
               The Kingdomes beauty, the Nobilitie, who
were wont to bee ſtrangers in their natiue country,
leading the ranks of blood and death againſt
their enemies, haue now no enemy, but keepe
their practiſe amongſt themſelues, to paſtime
with (Nonne haec meminiſſe voluptas?) And now
(more ſweet and holy) are Pillars at home, that
were enforced to be prodigies abroad; all being
(by a heauenly Metamorphoſis) tranſhaped to become
the becomming branches of the great Oliue
Tree of Peace. And doth not Charitie dwell here
with Peace? ô blind detraction. Has not in
foretimes, vnwilling neceſſity, erected two Hoſpitals?
and now moſt free and willing Charity, hath
(in augmentation of her glory) raiſed Twenty
Almeſhouſes; yea, ſo many for one, and giue her
true teſtimony.
               Nay, has ſhe not done the great wonder? built
ſome Churches, repaird many, and ſtill her hand
is dealing? Is not the ſumme of all, Religion, establiſht
by her? Are not the Fleſh-eating fires
quencht, and our Faggots conuerted to gentler
vſes? O, but thoſe Corne-fields muſt neuer be
without ſome Tares, vntill the generall Haruest:
Iſraell muſt not at once, deſtroy all the Inhabitants
of the land of promiſe, but by little & little,

leaſt they boaſt and ſay, it was our ſtrength, and
not the Lords hand that did it.
               Nor ſhall our peace (in her yong Plantation)
enioy ſo full and perfect a tranquillity, but that
there will be with vs contentious Cananites, ſeditious
Iebuſites, crafty Gibeonites, drunken Amorties,
and arrogant Anakims.
               
               
                  Envy ſhall ſtand betweene, and hold two Brothers
of either hand of her; Sectarists and Schiſmatiques
ſhall breake the peace of God, wound the
mother of peace (the Church) and bind together
falſe Brotherhoods, to diſſipate the vnity and
bonds of peace.
               
               Law ſhall wrangle with her; Ebrietie & drinke
ſhall ſtrike her, Pride and Ambition ſhall ſeeke to
ouerthrow her: yea, euen her oylie and moſt dangerous
enemie Hypocriſie, ſhall get within to
ſtrangle her, yet ſtill ſhall ſhe ſtand, and raigne,
and conquer. Inuidiam pax prosternet, ſhe ſhall
mount to Heauen, and throw her enemies as low
as Hell, where peace ſhall neuer come.
               
                  Enuy ſhall gnaw her own entrailes, Schiſme ſhal
periſh, Law ſhal be ſilent, Drunkennes ſhall burſt it
ſelfe, Pride ſhal be humbled in her own habitatiō,
and hollow-harted Hipocriſie, ſhall find no peace.
Vbi Deorū numen praetenditur ſceleribus,
                  Flamin. Conſul. 
                  ſubit animū
timor. Where the Maieſty of God, is made a colour
for miſchiefe, a feare comes into that breſt:

his peace ſhall be tremblings, & doubts, and horrors;
his hart ſhal then faint, that told him before
like hart-ſtealing Abſolon in his Fathers gates, thy
cauſe was good,Ezech. 13. 10. when it was not ſo. Or like the
falſe & fooliſh Prophets, that told the people it
was pax, pax, peace, peace, when it was no peace.
               The wals were daubd with vntemperd morter,
and they ſhall fall, yet ſtill ſhall Truth haue Peace,
and the Peace-maker ſhal preſerue the truth; They
ſhall dwell together, and liue together. The heauenly
Soldiers haue ſung it, the Father hath ſent
it, the Son hath brought it, the bleſſed Doue ſhall
preſerue it; euer comfort vs with it, our Annointed
hath receiued it, wee doe enioy it, and ſee it
plentifull in Iſraell.
               
            
            
               Peace takes a view of ſuch as doe moleſt,
and kindle moſt vnquiet in her breaſt.
               PVt vp the Bel-bearer firſt, then all the flock will
follow: Pride has loſt her place, or comes behind
for her greaterſtate, tis Drunkennes that leads
now; and marke the Heard that troope after her.
Luſt follows cloſe, Contention at her ſleeue. Emulation
on tother ſide; Enuie keepes the ſent like a
Bloodhound; Reuenge and Murder come coupled
together.
               The ſmaller headed Beaſts are vnſeene yet, as
Breach of Freindſhip, vnlocking harty ſecrets,

                  Slaunder, Oaths, & Blaſphemies, fearfull Inuocations,
(all which, cuſtome hath driuen ſo far diſtant frō
the Soules eye, as the Moone from the ocular ſight
whoſe body ouerbulks the Earths large Center, yet
ſeemes as little as her Figure taken on the tauerne
ſigne, where theſe brutiſh orgies are celebrated) abuſe
of Time, Ryot, Prodigallity, and lineall ſucceeding
pouerty; All theſe are peace's profeſt Enemies,
her domeſtique foes, who vnleſſe this fore-battel
be repulſt & ſuppreſt in the firſt aſſault, the reſt
will follow, though to their owne perdition.
               
               
                  Non ignota refero, theſe are no wonders with vs,
there may be Monſters among thē, but too familiar
with our acquaintāce, examine the Ring leader,
Drunkennes is no ſtranger in the world, ſhe came in
with the Earths firſt generall Curſe, and he that
ſcapt that Inundation of Waters, taſted the Deluge
of Wine. Shame fell on him, and his Curſe to poſteritie;
Noah taſted one, and Cham felt the other,
Lot had his portion in her: There Drunkenneſſe
begat Inceſt (an vnnaturall Iſsue of a brutiſh Mother)
and her ſucceſſion, two wicked Generations;
Moab and Ammon. Drunkenneſse played the part
of a Headſ-man with Holofernes, ſtooping his neck
to the weake arme of a Woman, and he that ſtopt
the Waters of Bethulia from others, had ſo much
of his owne Wine as made him ſenceleſſe of eyther
Wine or Water euer after.
               
                  
                  Alexander (inter epulas) clitum chariſsimum transfodit,
the friend hath ſprinkled his Wine-bolles
with the deare bloud of his friend: Oh brutiſh
Sacrifice! Oh Man vnman'd! Oh abſent Man!
where (out of thy ſelfe) doſt thou remaine, while
this Fiend poſſeſſeth thee? But why do we ſeeke
Antiquities for proofe of a practice ſo preſent with
vs? Had Iſrael any ſinne that England hath miſt?
Was Noah drunke, one of the Arke, and one of
the eight reeling there? it is eight to one, that
ſeuen of eight do ſtagger here (if not the whole
Veſſel.) It was a ſhame to one then, but cuſtome
hath made it no ſhame for all now. Did Lot
commit Inceſt with his owne daughters? Could
we not wiſh Drunkenneſſe to excuſe vs now?
Does not Luſt (her helliſh handmaid) challenge
this Weapon hers? The example was too ſoone
found, and yet too late to remember: Oh, would
that had been the firſt, and that we might neuer
know a ſecond. Nec linguam nec manum continet
ebrius, how many boſom'd counſels haue been
vomited out of the mouth of a Drunkard, thogh
to the ruine & deſtruction of his former friend?
Oh Inſania voluntaria! Oh wilfull Madneſſe of
Man, to depreſſe & quench out all thy faculties
of Reaſon with this puddle Drunkenneſſe! Thou
(that armed in thine owne Lordly Fortitudes)
canſt reach the Starres, meaſure the Earths large

Globe, ſearch and vnderſtand the Seas profound
Abyſſe; yet in this ſottiſh Ignorance, canſt not
find the depth of thine owne ſtomack. The Iewes
old Prouerbe hath carried his full ſence quite
through Chriſtendome; Homets Ben Iin. Wine
muſt needes acknowledge it ſelfe the Parent of
Vineger; meaning, that a good Father may haue
a different and ſawcie Sonne: But we haue from
him the Daughter of a worſe haire, this common
Strumpet Drunkenneſſe, whom almoſt all
ſorts do ſleepe with: not Vinum egrum, but aegrotum,
is our Iſſue, a ſick and vnholſome Harlot;
yet hath ſpred her ſelfe into large Off-ſprings,
in moſt lineall and naturall Children, as Luſt,
Enuie, Reuenge, Murder, &c. all impious and
turbulent Peace-breakers.
               Oh Peace! ſhal we not feare thy longer abode
with vs, if we embrace thee with no better loue?
How many louing friends haue broke that Diamond
of Amitie (whoſe pieces once diſſeuered,
can neuer be reconciled) for the embrace
of a laſciuious Curtizan, whoſe armes are like
the Iron Idoll, that cruſtht the curſed Sacrifices
in pieces?
               
                  Enuie! Oh what does that vlcus animae amongſt
vs? That Aetna in a Man, that continually
burnes it ſelfe, intus & extra, within and without,
that (like the Cantharides) found feeding

on the faireſt and flouriſhing Roſes, ſo Enuie is
euer oppoſed againſt the moſt Sweet, Noble,
Flouriſhing, and Peacefull Bloſſomes. Were
ſhe as rare as the Compariſon, I could call her
Phoenix, and wiſh, that this day ſhe would burne
her ſelfe, and leaue her aſhes Iſſueleſſe.
               
                  Reuenge! Whence haue we borrowed thee?
Oh Salmoneus Terror, ſhall we play with Thunder
and Lightning, and follow thy precipitated
Fate? Shall we ſnatch the Sword (the peculiar
Sword) from the Almightie hand? Haue we receiued
wrongs on Earth? Conſider then, if we
haue done no wrongs to Heauen. If we ſtand
guiltie there (as, Quis non?) Doe we then reuenge?
No; we ſtand diſobedient and repugnant
to our owne iuſt puniſhments: We haue
a milder Siſter giuen in her ſtead, Iuſtice, the Arbitrer
of our Iniuries: but Vengeance is Gods
alone; which no man ought to take in hand,
but as deliuered from his hand; nor ſo to imitate
his Maieſtie and Greatneſſe, that does it
not but by Authoritie, and in the way and path
of his Goodneſſe.
               
                  Murder! Oh Cain-created Sinne! Curſed
Cataſtrophe of all the reſt! This is Summum
opus: Here is the full point and end of the Labour;
all the precedent Trauellers are here at

home; the end hazzarding the endleſſe end:
Fearefull Spectacle! Here is capitall Sacriledge;
the Temple of a holy Spirit robbed and ruined:
Here is Treaſon in the higheſt degree;
the Workmanſhip and Image of the Creator
defaced; vnhappie Paſſiue, but more, and moſt
of all, vnhappie Actiue! Thou that doeſt Murder,
doeſt firſt deface him in thy ſelfe; then, in
thy Brother. God is the God of Peace, of Mercie,
Meekeneſſe, Long Suffering, and Louing
Kindneſſe: All theſe haſt thou expulſed from
thy ſelf, and loſt thy ſhape with them; there
is neyther Peace, Mercie, Meekeneſſe, Sufferance,
nor Loue in thee. Then in thy Brother
thou deſtroyeſt them: His Bloud is Vox Clamans;
and he is enforced in Death, from the
many mouthes of his Wounds, to crie out for
Reuenge. But is Heauen farre off, and will
not that moue vs? Looke vpon the Deed then
with Naturall Pitie (or a Conſcience which is
as inſeparable as thy Soule, that ſhall not leaue
thee liuing:) Behold a Brother weeping ouer
his Brother; a diſtraughted Mother tearing
her haire, and rending her heart, for her Childs
loſſe; a Friend (with Teares) embalming his
deare Friends Bodie; a rauing Father, readie
to ſend his Soule after his Sonne; yea, perhaps

his onely Sonne, his Name and Poſteritie deſtroyed
with him. Then Brothers, Friends, Mothers,
Fathers, all their Curſes to be throwne on
thee. Are Heauen & Earth both dull motiues to
thee? O beware the third place; let Hell affright
thee, and let thy conſcience deſcribe it to thee.
               I returne to that which I would wiſh thee
neuer to paſſe, and then thou canſt not come
to the vnbleſſed diſcouerie of it: and it's Pathes
(before recited) that lead thee to it (Peace:) ſtay
and abide with her, and thou ſhalt neuer know
her Enemies, Gods Enemies, and thine owne
Enemies: Let them that ſeeke Peace, find
Peace, enioy Peace, and haue their Soules layd
vp in Eternall Peace.
            
            
               Of Wiſe men I diſcourſe, by Iniuries neuer ſhaken;
What Reputation is, I ſhew, a thing ſo long miſtaken.
               
                  IN this ſmall Particle conſiſts the ground of
all Quarrels whatſoeuer, either by ſuſpecting
falſe things, or by aggrauating ſmall things.
Now how farre theſe two are from the wayes
of a Wiſe man, and how ill becomming, Reaſon
makes manifeſt: for Suſpition and Aggrauation
are the Off-ſprings of Paſſion, and a
Wiſe man is free from Paſſion.
               Nor can there be a greater argument of defect,

and deſpaire of merit in man, then Suſpition;
and marke her Nutriment, what ſtrange
food Paſſion hath prouided for it: It feeds vpon
falſe things; for indeede, true things are not to
be ſuſpected: and how iuſt the puniſhment
meetes with the offence; in erring from the
Truth, it hath Falſehood for a reward. But in
peiora ruunt omnia, the worſe Deuill is behind.
               The Aggrauation of ſmall things, when a
ſparke ſhall grow to a flaming Beacon, a Word
to a Wound, the Lye to a Life; when euery
man will be the Maſter of his owne Reuenge,
preſuming to giue Law to themſelues, and in
rage, to right their owne wrongs: At which
time, the Sword is extorted out of the hand of
Magiſtracie, contrarie to the ſacred Ordinance
of the Almightie.
               Now the wiſe and vnderſtanding man is not
ſubiect or expoſed to any of theſe Iniuries
whatſoeuer; neyther cares he, how many darts
of Malice or Contumelie are ſhot againſt him,
ſince he knowes, that he cannot be pierced: Euen
as there are certaine hard Stones which
Iron cannot enter; and the Adamant will neyther
be cut, filed, nor beaten to powder, but abateth
the edge of thoſe Inſtruments that are
applyed vnto it; And as there are certaine

things which cannot be conſumed with fire,
but continue their hardneſſe and habitude amidſt
the flames; And as the Rockes, that are
fixt in the heart of the Sea, breake the Waues,
and retaine no impreſſion of the Stormes that
haue aſſayled them; ſo the heart of a wiſe man
is ſolid, and hath gathered ſuch inuincible force,
that he ſtands as ſecure from Iniurie, as thoſe
inſenſible Subſtances I made mention of. Not
that Iniuries are not offered him, but that he
admits them not; ſo highly raiſed aboue all the
attaints of worldly wrongs, that all their violences
ſhal be fruſtrate, before a wiſe man be offended.
Euen as Arrowes, or Bullets, that are ſhot
into the Aire, mount higher then our ſight, but
they fall backe againe, without touching Heauen:
And as Celeſtiall things are not ſubiect to
humane hands; and they that ouer-turne Temples,
doe no way hurt the Godhead to whom
they are conſecrated; So, whatſoeuer Iniuries
are attempted againſt a wiſe man, returne without
effect, and are to him but as Cold or Heat,
Raine or Haile, the Weather of the World.
               And for words of Contumelie, it is held ſo
ſmall, and ſo ſleight an iniurie, as no wiſe man
complaines, or reuengeth himſelfe for it: therefore,
neither doe the Lawes themſelues prefixe

any penaltie thereunto, not imagining that they
would euer be burthenſome. Quis enim phrenetico
Medicus iraſcitur? For what Phyſician is angrie
with a Lunatike perſon? Who will interprete
a ſicke mans reproches to the worſt, that
is vext of a Feuer? Why, the ſame affection hath
a wiſe man toward all men, as the Phyſician
hath toward his ſicke Patients; not offended to
heare their outrages, he lookes vpon them, as
vpon intemperate ſicke men; therefore is not
angrie with them, if during their ſickneſſe they
haue beene ſo bold, as to ſpeake iniuriouſly againſt
him. And as hee ſets light by all their
words of honor; ſo torments he himſelfe as little
with all their deſpight & inſolencies. For he
that is diſpleaſed for an iniurie that is done him,
will likewiſe be glad to be honored at his hands
that did it; which a wiſe man is free from. For he
that reuenges a Contumely, honors him that did
it, in taking it ſo much to heart, & reſpecting it.
               Art thou angrie with thy Superior? Alas,
Death is at hand, which ſhall make vs equalls.
Doeſt thou wiſh him, with whom thou art diſpleaſed,
any more then Death? Although thou
attempteſt nothing againſt him, he ſhall be ſure
of that; thou loſeſt thy labour then, in offering
to doe that, which will be done without thee.
               
                  
We laugh, ſayth the wiſeſt of Philoſophers,
in beholding the Conflict of the Bul and Beare,
when they are tyed one to another; which after
they haue tyred one another; the Butcher attends
for them both, to driue them to the
Slaughter-houſe. The like doe we. We challenge
him that is coupled with vs, Brother, or
Friend, we charge him on euery ſide: meane
while, both the conqueror and conquered, are
neere vnto their ruine. Rather let vs finiſh that
little remainder of our life in quiet and peace,
that our end may be a Pleaſure to no man.
               Thou wiſheſt a mans death! and there is alwayes
but a little difference betwixt the day of
thy deſire, and the affliction of the Sufferer.
               Whileſt we are therefore amongſt men, let
vs embrace Humanitie; be dreadfull and dangerous
to no man; let vs contemne Iniuries
and Contumelies; for but looking backe, we
may behold Death preſently attend vs.
               
                  Piſiſtratus, that liued a Tyrant in Athens, being
for his crueltie mocked and reproued by a
druuken man, anſwered, That he was no more
angry with him, then if a blind-fold fellow, hauing
his eyes bound vp, ſhould run vpon him.
               Another ſaid to his friend, I prithee chaſtiſe
my ſeruant with ſtroks, becauſe I am angry, intimating

thus much, That a ſeruant ought not to
fall into his power, that is not maſter of himſelfe.
               But now the compounding of Quarrels is
growne to a Trade: And as a moſt worthie
Father of Law and Equitie ſpeakes, there be
ſome Councell learned of Duells, that teach
young Gentlemen, when they are beforehand,
and when behind-hand, and thereby incenſe
and incite them to the Duell, and make an Art
of it: the ſpurre and incitement, falſe & erronious
imagination of Honor & Credit, when moſt
commonly thoſe golden hopes end in a Halter.
               That Folly and Vaine-glory ſhould caſt ſo
thicke a miſt before the eye of Gentry! to fixe
their ayme and only end-vpon Reputation, and
end moſt lamentably without it; nay, fartheſt
from it: firſt, to hazard the eternall death of their
Soules, and the ſuruiuing Bodies, to die the
death of a Cut-purſe.
               A miſerable effect, and moſt horrid reſolution,
when young men, full of towardneſſe and
hope, ſuch as the Poets call Aurorae filij, the
Sonnes of the Morning, in whom the ſweet expectation
and comfort of their friends conſiſts,
ſhall be caſt away and ruined for euer in ſo
vaine a buſineſſe.
               But much more is it to be deplored, when ſo

much Noble and Gentle bloud ſhall be ſpilt
vpon ſuch Follies; which aduentured in honorable
Seruice, were able to make the fortune of
a Day, & to change the fortune of a Kingdome.
               It is euident then, how deſperate an euill this
is, which troubles Peace, disfurniſhes Warre,
brings ſudden calamitie vpon priuat Men, Peril
vpon the State, and Contempt vpon the Law.
               They pretend aboue all things to regard Honour,
yet chiefely ſeeke the diſhonour of God
and of Iuſtice; and which is worſe then Madneſſe
in thoſe men, that aduenturing to leaue
this life in Anger, preſume to preſſe into the
next, to the Supper of the Lambe, which is all
Peace & Loue, without Peace, Loue, or Charitie.
O that Gentlemen would learne to eſteeme
themſelues at a iuſt price, how dearely they are
bought, how moſt precious their Redemption!
               The root of this Offence is ſtubborne;
for it deſpiſeth Death, which is the vtmoſt of all
Temporall puniſhments, and had need of the
Seueritie vſed in France; where the Manſlayers,
though Gentlemen of great Qualitie, are hanged
with their Wounds bleeding, leſt a naturall
Death ſhould preuent the example of Iuſtice.
               This punctualitie of Reputation, is no better
then a Bewitching Sorcerie, that inchaunts the

ſpirits of young men, like the Smoake of faſhion,
that Witch Tobacco, which hath quite
blowne away the Smoake of Hoſpitalitie, and
turned the Chimneyes of their Fore-fathers, into
the Noſes of their Children. And by all
Computation (if Computation may be kept for
Folly) I thinke the Vapour of the one, and the
Vaine-glorie of the other, came into England
much vpon a voyage, and hath kept as cloſe together,
as the Report followes the Powder.
               For when, but in the laterneſſe of theſe
times, hath ſo much priuate and domeſtique
Bloud beene ſhed? Like the three Iewiſh Brothers,
in that perplexed Hiſtorie of Jeruſalem;
who wanting Enemies, ſtill flew vpon themſelues.
So theſe malicious, vnthankfull Spirits,
fattened with the aboundant Bleſſings of a
mellifluous Peace, diſgorge themſelues vpon
their Chriſtian Brothers; like thoſe that ſurfet
vpon too much Honey.
               And well may this Vaine-glorie, or opinion
of Reputation, bee called a Satanicall Illuſion,
and Apparition of Honour, againſt Religion,
Law, Morall Vertue, and againſt all the honourable
Preſidents and Examples of the beſt
Times, and valianteſt Nations. For hereby
haue Gentlemen loſt the true knowledge and

vnderſtanding of Fortitude and Valour. For
true Fortitude diſtinguiſheth of the grounds
of Quarrels, whether they be iuſt; and not onely
ſo, but whether they be worthie; and ſets a
better value vpon mens liues, then to beſtow
them idly; which are not ſo to be trifled away,
but offered vp and ſacrificed to honourable
Seruices, publike Merits, good Cauſes, and Noble
Aduentures.
               And behold here thy Folly; thou attempteſt
a way, freely to loſe thy Soule eternally, but
not thy Reputation. Foole that thou art, in offering
to ſaue that, which indeed is nothing,
thou loſeſt all! For Reputation is but another
mans Opinion, and Opinion is no ſubſtance for
thee to conſiſt of. For how canſt thou conſiſt
of a thing that is without thee? Which may be
any mans at an inſtant, as well as thine; and
when thou haſt it, it is but a breath: And of
what certainetie or permanence is it, when they
muſt die that giue it thee?
               Perhaps, becauſe ſome haue ſaid, that Fame
hath a perpetuitie; thou haſtenſt to loſe thy
Soule, to prouide for thy Name: How much
thou deceiueſt thy ſelfe? Why, it is no more
then the Eccho of a glory: For as an Eccho no
longer reſounds, then it is fed with a voyce, no

longer does Fame ſound forth mans Prayſes,
then it is ſupplyed and cheriſhed with deſeruings:
For when thy noyſe ceaſes in it ſelfe, it
will quickly ceaſe the noyſe of thee. How euer,
at the fartheſt, a generall Diſſolution will
come, when Fame, that is next to nothing
now, ſhall haue no being then at all.
               Happy is then the wiſe and vnderſtanding
Spirit: for though he be iniured, hee can loſe
nothing thereby, neither his Fame, nor Reputation;
for a wiſe man entertaines nothing that
is ſubiect to loſſe. Fortune takes nothing but
what ſhe hath giuen; ſhe giues not Vertue, nor
Wiſdome; therefore cannot take that away.
               The more thou thinkeſt vpon Reputation,
the farther off thou art from all contention, vnleſſe
cuſtome in Ignorance, or wilfulneſſe in
Nature, make thee throw an abuſe vpon the
Word. For what is Reputation, but Conſideration?
A diligent weighing, conſidering, and
reuoluing in the minde? And that is quite oppoſite
to Raſhneſſe: Truth will ſhame thee, if
thou confeſſe not ſo much.
               There can be then no Reputation in Raſhneſſe,
that is manifeſt: And what are Quarrels,
but the fruits of Raſhneſſe? There can be then
no Reputation in Quarrels
               
                  
And as it is Conſideration, it were dreadfull
to thinke, that any man, in the ſtate of his beſt
counſell and aduiſedneſſe, ſhould attempt to
deſtroy the Image of his Creator, in the life of
his Chriſtian Brother. And therefore diuinely
haue our humane Lawes bent their hate & puniſhments
againſt the abhorred Act, cōmitted
in cold bloud; which is as wilfull an oppoſition
againſt mans life (conſidering what he does) as
Blaſphemy againſt the Word of Truth; the
Conſcience knowing it offends of ſet purpoſe
(the only ſinne againſt the Holy Ghoſt.) And
as the body of euery true Chriſtian is ſaid to be
the Temple of the holy Ghoſt, 1. Cor. 3. 16. What
does the accurſed Man-ſlayer, but in the bloud
of his Brother, deſtroyes the Temple, as the
Blaſphemer wounds the Lord of the Temple?
               Behold then, not without a face of Horror,
the miſerable condition the Sonnes of this Age
runne into. All they venture for, is to bring the
bloudineſſe of their Action into the compaſſe
of Honour (as if Honour conſiſted in deſtruction.)
Now what impoſſibilitie followes that
labour, euen the weakeſt may coniecture. For
Honour is the Rumour of a beautifull and vertuous
Action, which redoundeth from our
Soules to the view of the World, and by Reflection

into our ſelues, bringing to vs a Teſtimonie
of that which others beleeue of vs: which
turnes to a great peace, and contentment of
mind; Bleſſings which were neuer yet found in
a Bloudſhedder, let his cauſe be neuer ſo glorious.
And where there is no Peace, all other benefits
haue a ceſſation. It is the onely health of
thy Soule; and that once loſt, thy ſoule ſickens
immediately, euen to death, and can no more
taſte or relliſh a Ioy after, then a ſick mans Pallet
his Nutriment.
               Is not this then a deluſion of Honour? Nay,
can there be any thing more deluſiue? Alas,
when it is at the greateſt height of humane glorie,
it is of a ſmall and ſlender efficacie, vncertaine,
a ſtranger, and as it were ſeparated in the
Ayre from him that is honoured: For it does
not only, not enter into him, nor is inward and
eſſentiall vnto him, but it does not ſo much as
touch him. A poore and miſerable purchaſe at
the beſt, for ſo great and eternall a hazzard!
               Flatter not thy Soule then to her euerlaſting
ruine, in thinking Reputation conſiſts in Bloudſhedding.
Sanguis clamat, as the Almightie
ſpeakes in the Letter of his owne Law; Bloud
cryes, and with a lowder voyce, to Heauen, then
thy Fame can ſound on Earth, Rumors, tenne

thouſand tongues, are hoarſe to that: they compaſſe
but ſome Nooke, or Angle of the World;
the other reaches from the Field to Heauen.
               
                  The voice of thy Brothers Bloud cryeth vnto me
from the Earth, Gen. 4. 10. And no ſooner the
Crye comes, but the Curſe followes, in the very
next words: Now therefore thou art curſed from
the Earth, which hath opened her mouth to receiue
thy Brothers Bloud from thy hand. And immediately
in the next, AV agabond and a Runnagate
ſhalt thou be on the Earth. Which ſhewes the horror
of the guiltie Conſcience, which after the
deed done, would faine flye from it ſelfe: A diſtraction
which followes all the Children of
Wrath vnto this day.
               Well may peace then haue the excellencie of
her glorious name aduanced aboue all Titles
and Inſcriptions: And ſo much the rather, in
that it pleaſeth the Almighty Creator himſelfe,
to bee called the God of Peace, and the Author,
1. Cor. 14. 33. Nay, Loue it ſelfe, delighting in
the Name. 1. Iohn 4. 16. GOD is loue, and hee
that dwelleth in loue, dwelleth in God, and God in
him. And 1. Theſſ. 5. 23. Now the very God of Peace
ſanctifie you throughout, &c. Chriſt the Sauiour
of the World, the Lambe of Peace. Iohn 11. 29.
Behold, the Lambe of God, which taketh away the

ſinnes of the World. There is Peace made in taking
ſinne away, which is the only fuell of
Wrath. And Epheſ. 2. 14. Chriſt is our Peace, which
hath made of both, one, and hath broken the ſtop of
the partition wall.
               
               Moreouer, the heauenly Souldiers, at the
Birth of Chriſt, prayſing God, ſaid: Glory be to
God, in the high Heauens, and Peace in earth, and
toward men, good will.
               
               And as his moſt bleſſed Natiuitie was the
Fountaine of Peace, there wanted not the fruits
that ſprang from that ſacred Fountaine in his
departure, Iohn 14. 27. Peace I leaue with you, my
peace I giue vnto you. Let not your heart be troubled,
nor feare. Let not your heart, ſpeaking to many,
becauſe all his ought to bee of one heart, which
is a worke of Peace.
               And not leauing, but in the ſame Euangeliſt,
16. 17. I will pray my Father, and hee ſhall giue you
another Comforter, that hee may abide with you for
euer. Intimating thereby, the eternall Peace of
Soule and Conſcience, by the comming of the
Holy Ghoſt: calling him in the words immediately
following, Euen the Spirit of Truth, whom
the Father will ſend in my Name, 26. hee comes all
Peace, and in the name of Peace, of Chriſt our Sauior.
               
               And to adde more glory to the Name of

                  Peace, behold how the incomprehenſible Godhead
deſires to be comprehended, all into Vnitie,
Trinitie in Vnitie: Which ſhewes, that Vnitie
is the Conſeruer, Suſtainer, and Comprehender
of all things, both in Heauen and Earth.
               Thou therefore, that in the madneſſe of thy
bloud, attempteſt to deſtroy Vnitie, thou ſeekeſt
to deſtroy that which Heauen and Earth is ſuſtained
by. Moſt miſerable of Creatures, thy
Soule hath but one Supporter, and in the tempeſt
of thy furie thou ouerturneſt that and all.
            
            
               Peace enters here in Armes, and ouerthrowes,
By force of her owne ſtrength, her ſtrongest Foes.
               ANd firſt behold her contending with her
moſt honourable enemie, euen hee that
with better authoritie may ſlay his tenne
thouſand; then any other his thouſand; I his
hundred, yea, one ſingle life: Eyther the haughtie
Challenge, the curious Duell, or the bloudthirſtie
Reuenge, to wit, Warre it ſelfe: ſometimes
a principall Arrow, ſhot from the heauenly
Bow of Iuſtice, a forced Arbiter betwixt
different Kingdomes, and often prooues the
deare Moderator. Yet this great Souldier, with
all his Attributes of Fame and Honor, fals farre
ſhort of our high-throned Empreſſe, Peace.
               
               
                  
Marke how the Philoſopher hath ordered
this Battell, and giuen the Colonies, to both
theſe great Commanders, Pacem cum omnibus
habebis bellum cum vitijs. Haue Peace with all the
world, only warre with thy ſins. Melior, & tutior
eſt, certa pax, quàm incerta victoria: for more ſafe
and noble is a certaine Peace, then a doubtfull
Victorie, with all his Honours attending.
               But let vs beleeue no cowardly Philoſophers:
let him that in his hand holds both, and from
his hand ſends both, be the Iudge betwixt vs.
               When was Warre ſent as a Bleſſing, or
Peace as a puniſhment? Let his Iudges iudge
our cauſe, Iudg. 5. verſ. 8. They choſe new gods, then
was Warre in the Gates. Here is an Offence, and
here is a Puniſhment, Idolatry, and Warre.
               Againe, They turue to the Lord, and the Land
had Peace fortie yeeres. Here is Penitence, and
here is the Bleſſing, Seruing God, and Peace.
               If then the Generall of Bloud and Death,
euen Warre it ſelfe be a Prodigie, a Curſe, and
not a Bleſſing, What ſhall his baſe Imitator be?
What Honour ſhall the Challenger lay challenge
to? What bloud ſhall the Reuenger dare
to ſhead? or what Fame ſhall the Schoolemaſter
of Duels atchieue, with all his vaine-glorious
and punctuall Orders of firſts and ſeconds;

lengths of weapons, diſtances of place, heights
of grounds, equalities of wind and Sunne? O
wicked Aſhkelon and her Suburbes, let them be
taken, and deſtroyed together. Why doe wee
quarrell? What is the end of the fayreſt Warre?
to enioy Peace: See how the Seruant labours
for the Miſtreſſe, and fooliſh they that enioy
their Inheritance, yet know it not: Thriftleſſe
Gameſters to play for their owne Money.
               Is thy Night quiet, and ſweete with Peace?
Embrace her in the Day, and keepe her continually:
If thou lett'ſt bloud into thy boſome in
the Day, Peace will not ſtay with thee at night:
Peace weares no parti-coloured Coat, no mixt
Scarlet and White, but White in her Puritie,
nor fat, nor bloud, muſt bee eaten in the Peace-offering,
Leuiticus 3. Now aſcend Abarim, and
climbe vp to the Mountaine of Nebo, and ſee
ſome part of the Land of Promiſe, whither this
bleſſed Peace ſhall lead thee, if ſhee bee thy
conduct: but be ſure to look vpwards, and then
thou canſt not feare the depth beneath thee.
               Behold the Father, the God of Peace; the
Sonne, the Lambe of Peace; the bleſſed Spirit,
the Doue of Peace; the Angels, Seruants, and
Miniſters to this power of Peace; Infinites and
all reioycing at one ſoules entrance into Peace.
               
                  
Behold the new Ieruſalem, Kiriath-ſalem, the
Citie of Peace; that which was Militant, and
troubled in the Wilderneſſe (the Church) behold
it there triumphant in euer bleſſed Peace.
That Peace which as it is vn-intelligible, ſo is it
moſt vnutterable.
               Then, if we deſire to be Inhabitants in this
Land of Promiſe & Peace, obſerue our entrance.
We haue yet two Mountaines to paſſe ouer Iordan
by, Gereſim and Ebal; and the twelue Tribes
placed on each ſide, both to bleſſe or curſe vs.
               
                  
                     
                        EBAL.
                        
                           Heere wee haue our
choiſe; and wee are euer
going on, in this Paſſage.
                           O let vs paſſe by Gereſim
the Mount of Bleſſings,
the right Hand, and the
right Hill.
                           Turne thy backe to Ebal,
but let none of her
Curſes fall vpon thee.
                        
                        GERESIM.
                     
                     
                        Pride.
                        Humilitie.
                     
                     
                        Malice.
                        Mercie.
                     
                     
                        Ambition.
                        Charitie.
                     
                     
                        Schiſmaticall contentions.
                        Faith.
                     
                     
                        Reuenge.
                        Peace.
                     
                     
                        Impietie.
                        Pietie.
                     
                  
               
               Be thou ſtrong or weake, thou mayeſt with
more eaſe beare ſixe on thy right hand, then
one on thy left.
               
                  Pride is a great weight, able to ouerthrow

the ſtrongeſt man. Malice, a ponderous Load,
turning thy ſleepes to vnquiet ſlumbers, and
euen there haunting thee in reſtleſſe Dreames.
Ambition, a Mountaine it ſelfe, to ſinke thee.
Schiſme, a Spirit, and Conſcience-troubler. Reuenge,
an Impoſtume of Bloud; which broken
once, ſtrangles thee with thine owne Corruption.
Impietie, a Cloud and Miſt of Darkeneſſe,
turning thee from thy way.
               When as on the other ſide, how light and eaſily
mayeſt thou beare about thee Humilitie?
How ſweet a Companion is Mercie? How louing
a Fellowſhip is Charitie? How ſure a
Friend is Faith? How nourſhing a Cordiall is
Peace? How bright a Lampe is Pietie? And
then, how glorious a Reward is Eternitie, and
Peace in Eternitie?
               
               Now let vs bind our ſelues to the Peace, put
in Securitie for our Good Behauious. Let our
Soules be bound for our Bodies, our Bodies for
our Soules, and let each come in at the Generall
Seſſions, to ſaue his Bayle; where we ſhall
find a mercifull Iudge. If there we can anſwere,
we haue not broke his Peace, our Bonds
ſhall be cancelled. As we haue kept the Peace,
we ſhall be rewarded with Peace, and kept in
Eternall Peace. Amen.
               
            
            FINIS.
         
      
   