
      
         
            
            
            THE HVMBLE AND EARNEST REQVEST OF THOMAS IAMES, Dr OF DIVINITY, AND SVB DEANE of the Cathedrall Church of Welles, to the Church of England; for, and in the behalfe of Bookes touching Religion.
            1 THat the Latine-Fathers workes, (whereof diuers are already done)

the Bookes of Councels, and the body of the Canon Law, may be diligently reviewed and compared With the beſt Manuſcripts; and the Collections and needfull obſeruations thence-from ariſing, printed; together with the pieces and fragments of the Fathers workes (if any ſhall be found.)
            2 That the Latine Tranſlation of the Greeke Fathers may be collationed by able and fit perſons, by reaſon of diuerſe Chriſtophorſons and Ieſuits, that haue too-too much abuſed the ignorant of the tongue.
            3 That the Jndices: Expurgatory
               
may be likewiſe peruſed, all of them, as many as can be gotten, the places forbidden to be tranſcribed, of which labour there is a third part at the leaſt already taken either by me, or my procurement.
            4 That Lyra and the Gloſſe, the Great Bibliotheea ſanctorum Patrum, Platina, Caietan, Alphonſus de Caſtro, and ſundry others of all ſorts of Authors, may be compared with former Editions, and Manuſcripts (if need be) to meet with their ſecret Jndices Expurgatorii, which are the more dangerous, becauſe they print, and leaue out what they

liſt, at pleaſure, and yet make no words of it, neither haue any Commiſſion knowne for to doe it.
            5 That the Authors of the middle age, that wrote in the defence of that Religion, which is now (thankes be to God) publikely eſtabliſhed in the Church of England, for the ſubſtance thereof, may be faithfully tranſcribed, diligently collated, & diſtributed into volumes, whereof many may be made of orthod oxe-writers;; if not ſo many as of their Bibliotheca Patrum Probabilium: adding hereunto ſuch Writers, as being bred and

brought vp in the boſome of the Roman Church ſaw the diſorders, diſcouered their abuſes both in doctrine and manners, and wiſhed almoſt for the ſame reformation, that was afterward moſt happily wrought & brought to paſſe by Martin Luther and his companions: of the firſt ſort are Wickliffe, Peacocke, Gu. de S. Amore, Jo. P. Mi
                  
                     •
                  orita, Normannus Anon, Nic. O
                  
                     •
                  em & ſundry others: of the Later kinde, Weſſelus, Wicelius, P. de Alliaco, Faber, Gerſon, Cuſarius, and ſuch like.
            6 That the Catalogus teſtium veritatis, compiled by Illyricus,
               
may be rectified out of the originals, quoting Booke, Chapter, & Edition; & ſupplyed out of the vnprinted Manuſcripts.
            
            7 That out of all theſe an Anticoccius may be framed out of Fathers, and middle-aged Writers, that were in their times eſteemed of the Church of Rome, and out of them onely: nothing doubting but we ſhall be able to match, if not exceed, his two large Volumes both in greatnes and goodneſſe; quoting as before, preciſely, our Editions, and doing all fide optima & antiqua, religiouſly and vnpartially as becommeth Diuines.
            
               
8 That the ſuppoſititious and Baſtard Workes of the Fathers, noted by Doctor Rivet, or Maſter Cooke, or any other, may be re-examined; their exceptions ſcanned or weighed with indifferency, & other reaſons added to their challenge, if any ſhal be found.
            9 That the ſuſpected places may be viewed in the true Fathers, which are juſtly challenged of corruption, either by our own men, or the aduerſary, with the like indifference of minds, and vnpartiality of judgments, being cōpared with the touchſtone of the old Manuſcripts, and

printed bookes, which are quaſi Manuſcripts.
            
            Tenthly and laſtly, the perpetuall Viſibility of the Church, more or leſſe, and the Hiſtory of the ſame Religion that we profeſſe for the ſubſtance thereof, throughout all ages, may be ſhewed to the Eye, noting when thoſe Noveliſmes & ſuperadditaments of the Church of Rome, came in as neare as may be gueſſed, the time when, and parties by whom they were oppoſed.
            All vvhich 10 Propoſitions, (needfull and important as they are) I doe vvillingly commend

vnto my deare Mother the Church of England, and from her to the Cleargie & Gentry of this Land, to be proceeded in, as they ſhall ſee it moſt expedient for the common good; promiſing nothing but my paines to be commanded in theſe publique ſeruices. And I make no doubt (if God vvill) but that all this may be effected, vvithin ſome fevv yeares, if the Almghty giue grace, the Rich vvhom God hath bleſſed vvith this vvorldly ſubſtance, incouragement; & the reſt their prayers. Of the likelihood hereof I am the rather perſvvaded, becauſe

               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
already by my ovvne meanes, and ſmall endeauours, there is almoſt a fourth part of the Worke done in all theſe 10 Articles. If one alone may doe ſo much vvithin ſuch a time, vvhat may a dozen able Schollers (ſuch as I knovv and could name) doe vvithin 5, 6, 7, or 8 yeares, vvhich is the vtmoſt in my conjecture?
            For the raiſing of the charges, vvhich vvill amount to three thouſand pound Stock, or three hundred pound a yeare at the leaſt, (ſo much ſhal vvell cō
               tent both me and them,) that ſhall be imploied in this happy

Worke: (though if more be offered, vve knovv vvell hovv to vſe and imploy it to the publique benefit:) and of raiſing ſuch a ſumme as this is, I doubt not, if ſome one of the Cleargie or Laitie ſhal not take vpon him the whole charge, as many in this Kingdome are (thankes be to God) able, and would be willing, if they either knew of the good that is likely to come vnto the Church, or the Honor vnto themſelues, and chiefly how much this buſines doth concerne the glory of God, the aſſuring of the moſt materiall points controverted, whiles

there are daily queſtions made, & doubts ariſing either about the Editions, Readings, Tranſlations, Corruptions of whole Bookes in Pſeudepigraphous Writers, or of diuers hundreds of places in the True Bookes, all which difficulties will eaſily be auoided (as I truſt) by this one Worke being once well done. But that ſuch a Stocke or annuall rent may be made, I doubt not; but am ſomewhat confident, when I ſee how fruitfull our Religion hath bin of good Workes, and how many Suttons and Bodleyes, and other godly men it hath yeelded, no

Nation more: and herein no city, (I except not Rome her ſelf) without the hope of pardon, guile of Confeſſours, and feare of Purgatory, is able to match or equalize, much leſſe to ſurpaſſe or exceed our famous City of London in the right vſe and end of giuing as tokens of our Faith, not as the meanes of our ſaluation. What ſhall I ſpeak of the Sages of our Law, or Innes of Court? but my deſire is, and propoſall ſhall be to offer this great Honour, firſt vnto the Cleargie of this Land. The Popiſh Cleargie in France haue (as I am informed) at their

owne charges printed the Greek Fathers, & ſhall not we be prouoked to doe the like for the Latine, and many things elſe that import the Weale Publique of Learning? Twelue pound out of euery Dioceſe one with another, from the Cathedrall Churches, the Reuerend Biſhops and Cleargie, will make vp the ſūme; or if euery one of the Cleargie of this famous Church, will either giue yearely xijd, or but lend ijf, till any thing be printed, he ſhall haue the ſame againe with thankes, (if it be demanded,) deducted out of the Booke, when any thing ſhall be

printed; I meane this xijd or two ſhillings of euery hundred pound, they making their own eſtimates of their liuings, and paying the ſame halfe yearely to the Regiſter of euerie Dioceſe. But my intent is to deſire, & not to preſcribe vnto my Superiours, who know better then I how to manage ſo weightie and important a buſines, reſting theirs
            
               Wholly to command T. I. S. T. P. B. P. N.
            
         
      
      
         
            
               
I Approue of the things here proiected, & wiſh with all my heart they may take good effect
             LV. PRIDEAVX Vicecanc. S. T. D.  Prof. Reg. Theol.
            ROD. KETTELL Preſes Coll. S. Trinit.
             LEON. HVTTEN Aedis Chriſti Praebend.
             GVIL. LANGTON Coll. Magd. Praeſes.
             SEBASTIANVS BENEFIELD Lecturae  Margareticae Profeſſor.
            IO. PARKEHVRST Magiſter Coll. Ball.
             IO. RAVLENSON Principalis Aulae S. Edmundi.
            IO. WILKINSON Aul. Magd. Praep.
             GVIL. PEIRS Decanus Petriburgenſis.
             SAM. FELL Aedis Chriſti Praebend.
             THO. ILES Aulae Cervinae Principalis.
             RIC. ASTELEY Cuſtos Coll. Omnium  Animarum.
            ROB. PINCK Novi Coll. Cuſtos.
             GV. SMYTH Coll. Wadham. Guard.
             IO. TOLSON Coll. Oriel. Praepoſitus.
             PAVLVS HOOD Coll. Lincoln. Rector.
             GVIL. IVXON Coll. D. IO. Praeſes.
            
         
      
   