
      
         
            
            
            A briefe diſcouery of the damages that happen to this Realme by diſordered and vnlawfull diet. THE BENEFITES AND COMMODIties that otherwaies might enſue. With a perſwaſion of the people: for a better maintenance to the Nauie. Brieflie compiled, by Edward Ieninges.
            
            ROMANS. XIIII.
            Let not him that eateth, deſpiſe him that eateth not. And let not him which eateth not iudge him that eateth. For the kingdome of God is not meate nor drinke, but righteouſneſſe, and peace, and ioy in the holy Ghoſt.
            
            Imprinted at London by Roger Ward, dwelling vpon Lambart Hill, neere old Fiſh-ſtreete. 1590.
         
         
            
            
            TO THE RIGHT HONOVRABLE SIR Charles Haward, Lord high admirall of England, knight of the moſte honourable order of the Garter, and one of her highneſſe priuy Counſel. Edward Ienings wiſheth long and proſperous health, with increaſe of all happineſſe.
            
               RIght honourable and my good Lord, after long conſideration had of the ſundrie and great diſcommodities that happeneth to this Realme by the miſdemeanour of diuers diſordered perſons contrarie to manie good & commendable lawes carefully ordayned, heaping harmes on our own heades thorow wilfull diſobedience. As a poore mēber amongſt the reſt lamenting this careleſſe contempt, I pondred earneſtly in my minde, what way to imploy my labour and ſmall skill for ſome redreſſe herein to the benefit of my countrie: and conſidering amongeſt manie other thinges, the great harmes that happen to this realme ſundrie waies by the contempt of fiſh, and inordinate or vnlawfull expence of fleſhe, growing as may be ſuppoſed through want of true vnderſtanding, to what end the law in that behalfe made is ordained, as one amongeſt manie muche vnable effectually to diſcharge ſo great a worke, of a zealous minde I haue compiled this ſmall treatiſe for the perſvvaſion of ſuch as herein will be perſvvaded. And aduenturing to proceede with all humbleneſſe I haue made bold, for the better publiſhing thereof to ſhroud my ſelfe for defence vnder the protection and fauour of your good honour, as a ſpeciall and carefull magiſtrate

for ſuch things as concerne the common-vvealth of this realme, ordained of God vnder her Maieſtie to haue the ouerſight and gouernement in theſe affaires which concerneth moſte chiefly a maintenance to her highneſſe Nauie: beſides the ſundrie and great commodities othervvaies grovving to the vvhole common-wealth. Not onely needfull to be publiſhed, but moſte carefully alſo conſidered and remembred, as by the diſcourſe follovving shall manifeſtly appeare. But the common ſorte of people to auoyd the ceremonicall abuſe heretofore vſed by obſeruation of fish daies, notvvithſtanding the paines and penalties by the lavv threatned, not onely neglecteth, but vtterly contemneth the ſame: nothing remembring the harmes that to them thereby may happen. And ſome reaſon is for that no matter hath heretofore bin shewed, ſo largely explained to perſvvade them as in this my ſmall vvorke is rudely compiled. Moſt humbly crauing your honours fauourable patience in conſidering the contents thereof, not reſpecting the rude ſtill but my affectioned heart and minde for the benefite and ſafetie of my Prince, and country then as vnvvorthie of ſuch acceptation, I ſhall finde my ſelfe for this ſmall paines, moſt bountifullie ſatisfied, and according to dutie pray for your honorable and proſperous eſtate long to continue.
         
         
            
            To the gentle Reader.
            
               Gentle Reader haue patience to peruſe
               The rude contentes which in me are contained:
               My authours faultes very faine I would excuſe,
               But that they are ſo manifestly explayned.
               Iudge therefore the beſt, let rigor be reſtrayned,
               Accept his heart, his hand, and willing minde:
               Then all is well what fault ſoeuer you finde.
            
            
               For well he meant, and well he hopes t'will proue,
               Well to perſwade ſuch as well will be content:
               But thoſe that well nor ill their affection can remoue,
               My author forceth little, he doth him not repent
               Of anie thing here done which he hath ſaid or meant:
               Hoping the wiſe of his willing minde will conceaue,
               To whoſe iudgementes he, that his ſmall workes doth leaue.
            
            
               Much more there might by argumentes be aleag'd
               Then are here ſet downe for proofe ſundrie waies,
               But by fewe thinges the wiſe will be perſwaded,
               Conſidering the contentes, he ſeeketh no further praiſe,
               But good acceptation, graunt therefore no denayes,
               And his ſmall paine, and trauell he hath ſpent,
               He will right well accept and finde himſelfe content.
            
            FINIS.
         
      
      
         
            
            
            CONCERNING OBEDIENCE TO THE polliticke lawes ordained by Princes. Their care for the commoditie of the people. The diſobedient are to be puniſhed, ſome lavves are more earneſtlier to be cared for then other ſome.
            
               AS it hath pleaſed almightie God to ordaine Princes to rule and gouerne. So hath hee alſo commanded that the ſubiectes ſhould obey. For confirmation whereof S. Paule in his 13. chap. to the Romanes ſaith. Let euerie ſoule be ſubiect to the higher powers, for there is no power but of God. The powers ſaith hee that be, are ordained of God. Whoſoeuer therefore reſiſteth that power reſiſteth the ordinance of God. Hee ſaith further, that Princes are not feared for good workes but for eu
                  •
               ill. If therefore thou wilt be without feare, doe well: ſo ſhalt thou haue praiſe of the ſame, for he is the miniſter of God for thy wealth. But if thou doe euill feare, for hee beareth not the ſword for naught, but is the miniſter of God to take vengeance on them that do euill. Further he ſaith obey your Magiſtrates not for feare of vengeance onely, but for conſcience ſake.
            If this leſſen of S. Paule were perfectly remembred there ſhould be little cauſe to put ſo manie pennall ſtatutes in execution as at this day there be. But wee conſider not beſides this good leſſon of S. Paule, what great care, ſtudie and labour

our Prince and Magiſtrates accompanied with the moſt learned of the land, not onely hath, but dayly doth by their earneſt labour, practiſe and deuiſe by ſundry godly and polliticke lawes for the maintenance, preſeruation and continuance of ye whole common-wealth, like as carefull parentes ceaſe not to ſtudie and labour for the education or bringing vp of their children, Gently admoniſhing and earneſtly commaunding to obſerue and keepe the ſaid good lawes and ordinances, which for our owne benefites by them are ſo made and ordained.
            But we like careleſſe children little regarding the carefull trauell that herein by them for vs is taken: looke onely to the time preſent, ſatiſfieng our ſenſuall luſt and deſire, not remembring the dangers and damages that thereby may vnto vs afterwardes inſue and ſo runne headlong negligently and thorow diſobedienee into our owne decay, contemning the princes commaundement which is Gods ordinance. Wherefore diuers pennalties and puniſhmentes are by vertue of thoſe lawes appointed to be laid vpon the diſobedient, which being executed, ſeeme grieuous and painefull and the informer greatly abhorred and euill thought on whereas in trueth, ſuch as giue information to the magiſtrate of offences with an earneſt deſire of reformation, and not only for couetouſneſſe, ought of good men rather to be loued and commended: for the life of the law is execution. Therefore a lawe made and not executed lieth dead, & ſmall auaileth to the intēt for which it was made.
            And as all pennall lawes at this day inforce, appeare verie needefull to be obſerued yet are ſome of them more requiſite to be looked into, for the vniuerſall benefite of a common-wealth then ſome other, for that by proofe they import matters of greater waight, yet the effect not conſidered of, they ſeeme of little valew.
            Amongeſt which there is one a moſt neceſſarie and polliticke lawe, not ſo much eſteemed as the effect doth importe, for diuers benefites that thereby may growe vnto the realme, ordaine moſte ſpecially for better maintenance of the Nauie, a thing earneſtly to be regarded, which concerneth the expence of fiſh and ſparing of fleſh. And the ſame not onely ordayned for

the ſparing of fleſh whereof thorow the great goodneſſe of almightie God we are ſufficiently furniſhed. But for diuers and ſundrie diſcommodities, dangers, and damages which thorow neglecting the times and ſeaſons for expence of fiſhe not onely hath, but dayly doth and will bring vpon our realme and the whole common wealth thereof, except earneſt reformation be had and vſed amongeſt the common people: for whoſe commoditie the ſaid law was made with a great penaltie vpon the offender.
            And for that the greateſt number of people, doth not perfectly vnderſtand the commodities, that may grow vnto them by obſeruation heereof, nor the diſcommodities that may happen by neglecting the ſame, neyther yet the certaine cauſe wherefore this lawe of abſtinence is ordained: For the better inſtruction and peſrwaſion of ſuch perſons hereafter followeth certaine argumentes which concerne a reaſon and cauſe, that this law amongſt others ought moſt carefully to be obſerued: That although feare of the penaltie will not force them or forgetfulnes of dutiful obedience hath cauſed a neglegence, or ye ceremonicall abuſe which in times paſt thereby was vſed, doth perſwade a contempt, yet a conſideration had of the commodities that may therby growe, & the diſcommodities that may happen, wil happily perſwade ſuch perſons as beare a chriſtian and brotherly loue to their countrie, after the counſell of Saint Paul, to obey euen for conſcience ſake, conſidering the ſame doth concerne not onely their owne benefite, but the benefite of their children that ſhall come after them.
            
               
                  Great numbers of ſhippes haue bene maintained by the certaine expence of fiſh. The cauſe of their decay. A remedie ſought to repaire them againe.
               
               TO this realme of England in times paſt belonged a ſtrong nauie of ſhippes maintained chiefly by fiſhing, wherewith the Prince and countrie were compaſſed for their defence, as with a forcible wall, the repaire whereof was very well ſupplied by the certaine vtterance and expence of ſuch fiſhe as was

taken and prouided which grewe by the obſeruation of ſuche daies as was appointed for the abſtinence from fleſhe and eating of fiſh, and thus was this wall or nauie kept in a ſufficient repaire as a redye defence for the Prince, and this Realme agaynſt all forraine aſſaultes, whenſoeuer or howſoeuer the ſame ſhoulde happen, vntill the ſuperſtitious abuſe thereby vſed, cauſed ſome fewe to omit the obſeruation of fiſhe daies according to the accuſtomed order, which at the firſt appeared no harme. Then ſome moe did the like, and yet little harme appeared. But in continuance of time, in maner the whole multitude by enſample of others, did breake that order: ſome in part, and ſome in the whole, whereby the accuſtomed buying and expence of fiſh, whereupon the continuall maintenance of the ſayde Nauie grewe, became ſo ſmall, that there appeared a great decay in the Nauie: neuertheleſſe euerie man proceeded from time to time in breache of the ſaid accuſtomed order, which before was certainely obſerued: and ſo in fewe yeares the Nauie was abated from fiue ſhippes to two in diuers partes of this realme, whereupon the force thereof touching that matter was weakened much, to the great perill of this realme, and incouragement of the enemie.
               In auoiding whereof with earneſt conſideration had by the nobles and commons of the whole realme, conſidering the danger that thereby might enſue, it was by them thought neceſſarie to deuiſe ſome meanes how the nauie might be repaired againe, & being aſſembled in the parliament holden at Weſtminſter the fift yeare of the Queenes highneſſe moſt gratious raigne, a law was there made and ordained, that the accuſtomed order for fiſh daies ſhould be obſerued in abſtaining from fleſh, that fiſh might be the more plentifullier ſpent.
               Which law for a time of great numbers was obſerued: but from thence grewe not ſufficient contribution to repaire and maintaine the Nauie, for that the vniuerſall multitude had litle regard thereunto, whoſe enſample diuers other followed: and ſo manie of the greater ſort ioyning with the leſſer ſort, became more careleſſe (for want of due execution) then anie time before they had bin: And thus the trade of fiſhing and prouiſion of fiſh

out of which exceeding great maintenance grew vnto ye Nauy, was brought frō great to greater decay, which decay increſeth.
               For which cauſe her Maieſtie with the nobles and commons of the realme conſidering the diſordered behauior concerning breach of ye ſaid lawe moſt commonly vſed in many common Iunes, tauerns, tabling-houſes, cookes houſes, and other cōmon vitlers, in which place a wonderful nūber of fiſh might be ſpent if the ſaid law by them were duely obſerued. In a parliament holden at Weſtminſter, the 27. yeere of her moſt gratious raigne a law for the better obſeruation of the ſaid dayes and times was further ordayned againſt them, with a greater penaltie then before had bin ſet downe for the other, that reformation therein might be had, if by anie meanes it were poſſible. But thereof in like caſe ſo little care of obedience is vſed, that the offence in moſt places rather increaſeth then decreaſeth, to the wonderfull great damage of this realme, as by the argumentes following may well be conſidered.
            
            
               
                  Certain arguments concerning vnlawful diet. Reaſons alleaged for the expence of fleſh, with the anſwers to thē. The Nauy may be maintained by other trades then fiſhing, but not without perill, the commoditie of fiſhing.
               
               IF the realme in defence thereof be furniſhed with fiue hundred ſhips, and that we ſhould ſuffer the enemie by pollicie or open force to conſume or deſtroy three hundred of them, were it not a great and a reprooueable negligence. But if the naturall ſubiectes of this realme by their negligent maners, ſhall conſume or deſtroy three hundred of them, is not their ſo doing worthy grieuous puniſhment: But if they ſhall obſtinately or wilfully doe the ſame, what puniſhment ſuch ought to haue, I leaue to the iudgement of thoſe that haue a wiſedome to conſider thereof.
               In aſmuch therefore as by our dyet we abate the Nauie by proportion from fiue ſhips to two, is it not to bee accompted great negligence, and worthie of puniſhment. But after we haue eſpied this negligence wee doe wilfully continue the the ſame, can it bee in trueth any other, then a practiſe to

ouerthrowe our owne countrie by weakening the force thereof, to lay it ſo much the more open to the enemie.
               Further when the Queenes Maieſtie hath occaſion to ſend foorth, and maintaine her Nauie at the ſeas, muſt ſhee not be conſtrained either at the firſt ſetting foorth, or in the ſupplie to furniſhe and man the ſame for lacke of ſeafaring men, with wherrimen and bargemen from the Thames and other Riuers? who although manie of them be tall and luſtie men ſufficient and able, to do good ſeruice in ſuch affaires, Yet the moſt part of them in reſpect of ſuch ſeruice may be accompted but freſhe watered ſouldiers not able to doe ſuche ſeruice at the firſt as ſhall be neceſſarie, for want of ſkill, nor able to abide the Seas in ſuche labour for want of vſe, and therefore wanting ſufficient Seafaring men amongeſt them, their ſeruice is in daunger to turne rather to the carrying and keeping foorth of ſhippes to deliuer vnto the enemie to increaſe hys force, then to reſiſt or diminiſhe the ſame. We therefore bring this to paſſe by our dyet, what other thing then doe we but by our ſayd dyet, ſeeke to ſtrengthen the enemie, and weaken our ſelues?
               Furthermore let vs make another allegation or argument and ſa, The Queenes Maieſtie is head of ye commō-wealth, which the Lord for his mercies ſake long continue. The common wealth is the ſeat that ſhe ſitteth on and ruleth the legges that beare vp this ſeate, are the forces of the ſame, if anie one of theſe legges fayle or decay, it weakeneth the reſt, and putteth all in danger, like a diſioynted frame which reeleth, and is in no certaine ſafetie longer then the ioynts hold ſoundly together. And ſo when anie of the principall ioyntes decay, the whole reſt are in perrill, till that ioynt be repaired and made ſure againe.
               Therefore foraſmuch as the Nauie is one of the principall forces or legges that this common-wealth ſtandeth on, which is the Queenes Maieſties ſeat, & that the people do with their teeth, hale or draw that leg aſunder which wt theyr teeth they are wont to draw & knit togither, faſt ioyned to the reſt of the legs. What other thing doe they but wt their own teeth

vndermine the ſeate of the Prince, putting that in perill to fall to their deſtruction, which ſtanding vpright and faſt, would be their tecture and defence.
               But many there be that perhaps will iudge this argumēt verie vaine and friuilous to perſwade them, remembring the abuſe which in times paſt hath beene vſed in the obſeruation of fiſh dayes. And for that abuſe, ſacke vtterly contemne the ſame without remembring the polliticke deuice for the benefite of the Realme, whereunto at the firſt inuention or ordinance thereof in this lande, it was in ſome part (in my iudgement) ordained, as now it is in the whole: our countrie being an Iland enuironed with the ſeas as our walles.
               Otherſome taking hold on the words of our ſauiour Chriſt in the xv. of Matthew, where he ſaith, That which entreth into the mouth doth not defile the man, but that which proccedeth out of the mouth. And by that meanes take libertie to offende. But they conſider not further, where S. Paul ſaith, all things indeede are pure, but it is euill for the man that eateth with offence. And who thinketh not but that is eaten with offence which is eaten contrarie to the Princes lawes, and to the hurt of a common wealth. Neither doth our Sauiour giue any warrants by theſe words, that the thing which entereth into the mouth with offence doth not defile ye mā: but his meaning in that place is to be conſtred off, according to the words in the text ſpecified, where (in my my iudgement) the argumēt grew about the waſhing of hands, thorough the ſcribulite of the Scribes and Phariſes.
               We haue alſo another note to conſider off, when the wife of Tobias had prouided a Kidde, and brought to her huſbande, ſaying, ſhe would make readie the ſame for him to eate: he cauſed her to ſtay, and would not ſuffer her ſo to doo, vntill he had examined whether ſhe came truely by the ſame or not, fearing it had beene ſtolne, or in ſuch like caſe come by, and ſhould ſo eate of it vnlawfully, which he eſteemed to be an offence to God. Many other places of holy ſcripture may be alleaged in this caſe, which I will at this time omit, and leaue the interpretation thereof to the learned diuines, whoſe office my ſimpleneſſe

cannot attaine vnto, but returne to the matter which I haue taken in hand to proue by argument in temporall cauſes as followeth.
               Others perhaps do thinke and ſome in truth will ſay that concerning a maintenance for the Nauie with marriners, beſides the trade of fiſhing, there be diuers waies to encreaſe and maintaine a ſufficient number of Marriners for ſeruice, whenſoeuer occaſion ſhall require by other trades and traffickes of marchandize: as for enſample, was the Realme euer heretofore ſo well furniſhed with ſeruiceable ſhips, as at this time it is maintained onely by trades of marchandize, wherin alſo are encreaſed great numbers of marriners, more apter men in ſuch ſeruice.
               Vnto which it may be anſwered that many ſuch marriners indeed are increaſed, but yet not ſuch a ſufficient number as warres if they haue any continuance will require, wherein verie manie ſuch perſons are to be imployed, as well in other ſhippes of this Realme, as in her maieſties owne ſhips.
               And if it ſhould be graunted that theſe trafickes ſhoulde encreaſe marriners ſufficiently for the ſupply aforeſaid, yet if we ſhould depend thereon, we ſhould expreſſe our ſelues more to leane to things that bring and breed damage, then to things that bring and breede profite.
               For in truth a great part of our marchandize are rather ſuperfluous then needfull, & more damageable then profitable, for example: is not the one halfe of our ſugars and other groſerie wares, rather daintely conſumed then neceſſarily ſpent? Againe, are not foure parts of fiue of thoſe ſilkes and veluets that are brought into this realme, rather ſuperfluouſly vſed by men of meane eſtate, then conueniently worne by ſuch as are of higher eſtate?
               Further, are not three parts of fiue of the Wines that are brought into this Realme, rather waſtfully conſumed to the decaie and deſtruction of mens healthes, then neceſſarily ſ
                     •
                  ent for the ſuſtentation of mens bodies, to continue or encreaſe their healthes? And for the tranſporting of torne and diuerſe kindes of marchandize out of this Realme, by reaſon

of thoſe trades, if they be done at ſometimes commoodiouſly for the benefite of the Realme, they are done at ſome other 
                     •
                  imes diſcommodiouſly to the damage of the Realme, which hing is well knowne to many.
               Now when all theſe trafickes and trades are compared togither, and their commodities with their diſcommodities, it will appeare that the treaſure and ſtrength of this Realme is by the ſuperfluitie of them rather conſumed and abated, then encreaſed or continued: notwithſtanding I ſpeake not this that it were neceſſarie for ſuch trades to be left off or extinguiſhed, for thereby groweth great benefites to the Realme ſundrie waies, not onely for ſufficient and ſeruiceable ſhipping, but other neceſſarie commodities alſo. But contrariewiſe, concerning the trade of fiſhing, it is all wayes commodious and no wayes diſcommodious, it encreaſeth wealth and prouiſion of ſuſtenance, but abateth none. And the more for that fiſh is alwayes ſpent for the neceſſarie ſuſtentation of mens bodies, and not for ſuperfluitie.
               There is yet another thing to be conſidered off concerning the trade of marchandize, that in all manner of trafickes where marchants muſt come within the Dominions of other Princes, much daunger and perill may happen, for that it is in the wils of thoſe Princes, within whoſe dominions they are to ſtay ſuch ſhippes as there be, and imploy them at their pleaſures in their ſeruice. And ſo England wt great perill may encreaſe mariners & ſhipping to ſerue other Princes, which may happen ſometimes to be againſt our ſelues. Alſo in diuers traficke many mariners trauell far iournies, by meanes wherof it may be that the Realwe ſhal want them whē it ſhould be needfull that they were at home to be imployed for the defence of ye realm.
               Therefore it may plainely appeare that the trade of marchandize only for breeding & maintenance of mariners, though it be neceſſary & needfull to the realme, yet ye ſame is not wtout great doubts & perils. Wheras contrariwiſe by the trade of fiſhing, if ſuch fiſh might be certainly ſpent wtin this realme as might be takē & proued a ſufficient nūber of mariners & other ſeafaringmē for ye ſupply of thoſe ye then may want, might be

much more profitabler, and ſaflier bredde and maintained at home, all times in a readines to be imployed for the neceſſarie ſeruice and defence of the Realme, how ſuddainely ſo euer the ſame ſhould require.
            
            
               
                  Fiſhing is the greateſt Nurſe for to increaſe Marriners: the deere priſes of fiſh, how it may become cheape.
               
               THere is yet further to be conſidered, that the trade of fiſhing is a wonderfull great Nurſe for the breeding or bringing vp of Marrineas, for whereas a Merchants ſhippe vſing the traficke with merchandize, being furniſhed for the voyage with twentie men, there is amongſt them not paſt two or three boyes which in that trade is brought vp and inſtructed. And if it be ſo the daunger of the voyage conſidered, that theſe children can, and commonly do endeuour to be brought vp and inſtructed herein, yet the encreaſe of them will not be ſufficient to furniſh the Nauie, eſpecially in the time of wars.
               But the Fiſherman going to the ſea, or vpon other waters in great or ſmall veſſels, for euerie one man there is of them commonly two boyes, who being trained vp therein, are ſo accuſtomed with the hardneſſe and painefull toile which in that exerciſe they are vſed to, that they are not onely able to ſuſtaine al labour to a ſeafaring man belonging, but in ſhort time become a ſufficient ſailor, maſter, or Pilot, as well for ſeruice in her maieſties ſhippes as in the merchants ſhippes. They are alſo acquainted and know the rockes, ſandes and other daungers vpon the ſeacoſtes: where they lye, and how to auoid them by reaſon of their accuſtomed haunting the ſeas in the trade of fiſhing. And by meanes of their trauell from one port to another for the ſale or vtterance of the ſaid fiſh, and other things wherein at vnſeaſonable fiſhing times they are imployed.
               Theſe and diuers other arguments before rehearſed might be a ſufficient occation to cauſe vs without penaltie or pennall law for the benefite of our countrie, to reſtraine and bridle our ſelues from our accuſtomed and vnlawfull diet, but many

there be that will and may truely ſay, the vtterers of fiſh ſell the ſame at ſuch exceſſiue priſes, diuers and ſundrie times, that it diſcourageth men to buy thereof. And the more for that they can a great deale better cheape make their prouiſion with fleſh as well for their familie, as themſelues.
               Many arguments are to be made that will be ſufficient to anſwere this matter. And firſt we are to conſider the times and ſeaſons of the yeare that it ſerueth not alwaies alike, for ſufficient prouiſion of freſhfiſh, at which time little ſtore being taken by reaſon of contagious and contrarie weather, wherein the fiſherman aduentureth both life and goods, & not onely himſelfe but many other hath their liuings theron depending, great reaſon is that the ſame be ſold the dearer: for beſides his ſaide aduenture, he hath bene at no leſſe charge then though he had taken great quantities. And for remedie hereof, that mē might haue in ſuch a ſcarſitie ſome other good ſorts of fiſh, not commonly vſed. To ſatiſfie their diet in times paſt there hath bene prouided for the markets theſe ſorts of fiſh, that is to ſay, Puffens, Tunney, Porpus, Seall, Holibut finnes, Holibut heads, & many other things, wherof was made fine & delicate diſhes, which now for lacke of vſe is not onely left vnprouided, but alſo vtterly forgotten, how or in what ſort it ſhould be vſed, dreſſed, or ſerued: and worſt of all, how it ſhould be eaten, and diſgeſted, for that the proportion and ſubſtance of them is by many forgotten, and the vſe and taſt forgotten of all. There were alſo the ſounds & heads of the Cods, which in fiſhing time were ſalted and preſerued to be a diet, in ſuch ſcarſitie for the poorer ſort: all theſe things being by Gods creation ordained for our ſuſtenance, ought rather to be thankefully receiued thē contemtiouſly caſt off and refuſed.
               Beſides this, that wind and wether being contrary for fiſhing, is a great cauſe that fiſh is many times very ſcarſe & deere yet the chiefeſt thing that generally cauſeth the ſame, is lacke of certaine vtterance, as by theſe fewe arguments following doth plainly appeare, wherein it may be ſaid.
               As vtterance encreaſeth, or abateth in any trade, ſo the trade will encreaſe or abate.
               
                  The trade being abated, the commoditie therein vſed, will waxe ſcant and leſſe prouiſion thereof made.
               The leſſe prouiſion that therof is made, the dearer the commoditie is.
               The cauſe of ſmal prouiſion is the vncertainty of ſale or vtterance: certaine ſale or vtterance encourageth many prouiders to buy of the commoditie.
               Which in the beginning though it be chargeable to ye buyer or ſpender, it wil by certaintie of vtterance become cheaper.
               For the deareneſſe thereof will cauſe many prouiders of the ſame to encreaſe.
               The encreaſe of thē wil make plentie of the commoditie.
               The plentifulnes whereof doth make cheapneſſe.
               Whē there was ſpent in this realme more fiſh in one yeare then there is at this day in fiue yeare, they might haue had for one ſhilling that which now we pay twaine.
               God is the onely nurſe or heardſman to feed & cheriſh that kind of victuall, without any helpe of man, he bleſſeth & multiplieth thē, according to his good pleaſure & wil. The contempt of whoſe bleſſings may be cauſe of the ſcarſitie that now is in taking of fiſh, more then in then in times paſt hath bin, and no doubt but the imbracing therof with thankfulnes for the ſame, God may and will cauſe it againe to multiply.
            
            
               
                  The harmes that happē to the realme by the vnlawful expence of fleſh, what numbers of people are thereby put frō their liuings, the diſcommodity therof, the remedy.
               
               FVrther and greater matters then yet hath bene ſpoken off are to be conſidered, that by the vſuall and vnlawfull eating of fleſh, the vttrance of fi
                     •
                  h being ſmall & vncertain, hath cauſed a great number to forſake the accuſtomed haunting of ye ſeas, for taking of fiſh, whereby three things doth happen.
               The Nauie decaied, a multitude of perſons are put out of worke, and the prouiſion of ſuſtenance for the people greatly abated, from which other three euils do ſpring.
               The ſtrength of the realme decaieth, much idlenes & many

Rogues and theeues are bred, and famine and diſtres, the rather happeneth amongſt the people.
               Theſe are ſuch euils as bring decay and daunger vnto the common welth: and therefore it may be ſaid that the vſual and vnlawfull eating of fleſh, bringeth decay and daunger vnto the common welth.
               It may further be ſaide, that by the ſmall vtterance of fiſh the accuſtomed haunting of the ſeas for taking of fiſh is abated from fiue parts to one,
               By the abating whereof we may make account that tenne thouſand perſons which heretofore haue & might ſtill liue by fiſhing on the ſeas, are thereby put out of worke and liuing.
               Alſo there were very many beſides fiſhermē, that by means of fiſhing liued vpon the land. As ſhipwrites, cowpars, ſmithes weauers, ſailemakers, netmakers, dreſſars, vtterars, and cariars of fiſh, with ſuch like, which may be accounted to extende in number to other ten thouſand: theſe are hereby in like caſe put from their liuing and maintenance, and ſo in number they are togither twenty thouſand perſons, their wiues, women-ſeruants & children, whoſe liuings did depend on them, & now by their want made deſtitute of maintenāce are thirty thouſand at the leaſt, theſe in the whole extend to fiftie thouſand perſons, whoſe liuings depended on fiſhing, and is now abated.
               Beſides the vallew of the fiſh that was yearely taken and ſpent, more then there is now towards the ſuſtentation of the people, which by eſtimation was worth three hundred thouſand pounds at the leaſt, for there may be verie probable reaſons giuen that there hath bene the vallue of ſo much fiſh ſpent yearely in this realme more then now there is.
               Hereby we may vnderſtand that a great number of able mē for ſeruice in time of war, as maſters, pilates, marriners, & ſailers are greatly decaied & abated, by means wherof ye ſtrēgth of ye realm muſt needs be much weakned & made of leſſe force to encoūter or reſiſt ye enimy vpon ye ſeas, which, is & hath bene great part of defēce & ſeruice to ye realm, by abating ye taking of fiſh & vttrance thereof, ye trade & maintenance of the people on ye ſea coſtes, muſt needs abate alſo, amōgſt al ſorts of people

eſpecially artificers, whereby porte townes hath and dally doth fal in decaie, waxing depopulated & ſo daily grow of leſſe and leſſe habilitie to reſiſt the enemy when neceſſitie ſhall require. Alſo it is to be vnderſtood, that by the vſuall and vnlawfull eating of fleſh, the ſame victuall groweth or becommeth the dearer.
               The dearenes of the ſaid fleſh victuall cauſeth great gaines to be raiſed by the fatting of cattell.
               The raſing of ſuch gaines cauſeth men to conuert their grounds and farmes from tillage to paſture.
               By that meanes a multitude of people are put out of worke and from their liuings.
               Therby a great number of them are conſtrained to become idle Roges or to practiſe other ſuperfluous & vaine things that breede diuers other great vices.
               Theſe be things that bring great detriment and decay vnto the common-welth: and therefore, as afore hath bene ſaide, the vſuall and vnlawfull eating of fleſh bringeth great detriment and decay vnto the common-welth.
               Hereby it may alſo be vnderſtood, that by the decaie of tillage, twentie thouſand perſons which haue and might ſtill liue thereby, are put from their accuſtomed worke and liuings.
               Their wiues, women ſeruants and children, whoſe maintenance did on them depende, are in number thirtie thouſande, at the leaſt, theſe in the whole extend to fiftie thouſande, beſide the increaſe of a great number of ſundrie fortes of victuall which in a farme houſe is encreaſed towards the ſuſtentation of the people.
               For a farme containing ſixſcore Acres of ground, being imployed to paſture onely, for the breeding and feeding of cattell, there doth come no further increaſe of victuall but Biefes and Muttons onely, and yt may bee prooued that the yearely encreaſe thereof will not finde yearely aboue ten perſons of thoſe that make their common and onely foode of fleſh.
               But let this farme be imployed into tillage, & there will be a reaſonable encreaſe of Biefe and Muttons: then is there account to be made of al kind of graine, as wel for bread as drink

which is the chiefeſt victuall for maintenance of the people.
               Further there is in the ſaid farme, rayſed and increaſed, Veale, Porke, Bacon, Pigges, Geeſe, Ducks, Hennes, Chickens, Capons, Milke, Butter, Cheeſe, Egges, and Fruite. Drawe all theſe togither in accompt or compariſon, and they will ſuſtaine and finde yearely twentie perſons at the leaſt, I meane not thoſe onely that are kept in the farme, but ſuch as are ſuſtayned with the victuals that be ſold out of the farme at the markets: whereby it appeareth, that ten perſons that are fed and nouriſhed with thoſe victuals that are increaſed of the farme in paſture doth eate vp ten of thoſe perſons, that ſhould haue bene fed with ſuch victuall as might haue bene increaſed of the ſame farme if it were in tillage. This is a wonderfull decay in a common-wealth: and ought with chriſtian charitie of all men to be lamented. That for the ſatiſfieng of our luſt contrarie to a good and commendable lawe for a common-wealth ordained, we ſeeke our owne hurt, and the vtter decay of our poore chriſtian brethren, may not this be called the eating vp of Gods people like bread agaynſt whome the Pſalmiſt earneſtly crieth. Pſal. 14.35.
               Thus we are to conſider, that by the vnlawfull eating of fleſh, three ſpeciall dammages fall vpon vs.
               The realme is weakened, and made of leſſe force to encounter and reſiſt the enemie, both on the ſea, and ſeacoaſtes.
               An hundred thouſand perſons are put from their worke and maintenance.
               And of the victualles which heeretofore hath bene and ſtill might be increaſed: there is the vallew of three hundred thouſand poundes yearely abated, by reaſon whereof, three greater damages and dangers proceedes, that is to ſay.
               By abating the force of the realm on the ſea and ſeacoaſtes, it is in the greater danger of the enemie.
               Alſo by putting of an hūdred thouſand perſons out of worke and maintenance, there muſt needes grow the greater increaſe of idleneſſe, roges, and theeues, with which ſorte of people, it greeueth them to be indamaged and indangered that breedes them, for we would haue no aſhes and yet ſtill increaſe the fire.

Alſo we would ſayle in ſafetie, and yet bore holes through the bottome of the ſhippe.
               Further by the yearely abating of three hundred thouſand poundes-worth of victualles there muſt of neceſſitie growe a great want of ſufficient ſuſtenance, eſpecially for the common ſort of people. The miſerie whereof, although it be not felt by the rich, yet the ſame greeuouſly lighteth amongeſt the poore, for ponderous thinges fall to the bottome, and they that ſtrike others, feele not the ſmart themſelues.
               For remedie herein, there hath bene diuers deuiſes & plots made, and ſet downe how fiſhermen might be ſet a worke, fiſh might bee taken, brought in, and prouided for ſeruice of the realme, and ſtraight lawes made for the expence and vtterance thereof, but little is ſaid or done, that the ſaid lawe might be certainely executed and obſerued, for as before hath bene ſayd that it is vtterance that maintaineth the trade of anie thing, and as vtterance increaſeth or abateth, ſo the trade will increaſe and abate.
               For enſample, the great increaſe and vtterance of fleſh that hath growne by the vnlawfull eating of fleſh, hath ſo increaſed the trade for graſing and fatting of cattell to be ſpent and vttered, that thereby hath growne all ſuch detriments as before hath bin ſet down to happen by the decay of tillage.
               Alſo therby (as before hath bene ſaid) the vtterance of fiſh is become ſo ſmall and vncertaine, and the trade of fiſhing, and the buying and ſelling of fiſh by the ſame ſo abated, that all the reſt of ſuch dangers and damages as before are ſet down, haue by that meanes growne and happened.
               Therefore as the increaſe of the vtterance of fleſh, and the abating of the vtterance of fiſhe hath bene cauſe of the euils aforeſaid.
               So the increaſe of the vtterance of fiſhe, and the abating of the vtterance of fleſh muſt be cauſe of the remedie.
            
            
               
                  What fleſhe may be ſpared in a yeare by one daies abſtinence in a weeke. For what cauſe there ought to be certaine daies and times appointed for the expence of fiſh.
               
               
                  ANd for that it may the more plainlier appeare what great numbers of Biefes, Muttons, and other kindes of fleſhe victuall may be ſpared in the realme yearely, by one daies abſtinence in a weeke, to the woonderfull great increaſe of the ſaid victuall and comfort of the whole common-wealth, I haue thought good to ſet downe an eſtimate of the ſame ſuppoſed to be ſpent within the citie of London, and the ſuburbes of the ſame to be conſidered of with patience of the gentle Reader,
               Firſt it is to be conſidered, that in the yeare are 52. weekes and in euerie weeke, ſeuen daies, which are in all for the yeare 364. daies.
               The lent with friday and ſaterday in euerie weeke, and the the other accuſtomed fiſh daies, appoynted by the lawes of the realme to be obſerued, being collected togither: extend to 153. So in the yeare there is 153. fiſhe daies and 211. fleſh daies, which amounteth vnto 58. fleſh daies more then fiſh dayes.
               Now touching the expence of fleſh in London, and the Suburbes thereof, and what may be ſpared in thoſe places onely by one dayes abſtinence in a weeke. Firſt the yeare beeing 52. weekes: let ſeuen of them be excepted, for the time of lent, wherein no Biefes ought to be killed, and then remaineth but 45. weekes, wherein butchers doe kill cattell.
               Then let vs ſay there be threeſcore butchers, freemen of the citie of London, that commonly kill Biefes, and euerie butcher to kill weekely one with the other, fiue Biefes, which is for 45. weekes, in the whole 300. Biefes: which amounteth for the ſaid 45. weeks, to 13500. killed by the ſayd freemen.
               The forrenners dwelling in the ſuburbes of London, and ſuch as come out of the countrie to ſerue the markets of the citie, on the market daies, kill and vtter there, as the butchers of London affirme, foure times ſo much as the freemen of the citie, which amounteth yearly to 54000. Biefes, & ſo ioyning the biefes, killed & vttered by the freemen of London & the forrenners together, 
                     •
                  hey extend in al for ye yeare to 67500. biefes.
               It is herein to be noted yt the account by this eſtimat is but for fiue daies in the weeke, for ye friday and ſaterday are daies of abſtinence from fleſhe, and therefore out of the ſayde fiue

dayes we muſt ſuppoſe to take one, and the account aforeſayd is ſo to be made, for that in them fleſhe is certainly ſpent otherwiſe there can no certaine accompt be made.
               Now if we would knowe what number of Biefes might be ſpared as afore is ſaid, let vs ſay there be in the weeke fiue fleſhe dayes, accuſtomably ſerued with the expence of fleſhe whereof one being taken away, there reſteth but foure.
               In like ſorte let vs deuide the proportion of Biefes that are killed for London and the ſuburbes for a yeare into fiue partes. And the fift part ſuppoſed to be ſaued by the fift dayes abſtinence is 13500. the iuſt number killed for a yeare by the freemen of the Citie.
               It is alſo reported and well knowne, that for euerie Biefe killed, there is killed ten ſheep at the leaſt. Then if there might be ſpared yearely in the places aforeſaid by one daies abſtinence, 13500. beaſtes, there will by that reckning bee ſpared 135000. ſheepe, beſides lambes, calues, and hogges, whereof like proportion is to be made according to the times of the yeare wherein they be ſpent or ſhould be ſpent. But the abuſe therein is great by killing them at vnlawfull times contrarie to good lawes and ordinances carefully made and prouided for the increaſe of cattell, whereby woonderfull great dammages groweth vnto the realme, as by ſundrie probable argumentes might be expreſſed.
               Moreouer there is like accompt to be made of ſuch fine fleſh victuall as is vttered by the poultars, which on the faſtingdaies is moſt commonly ſpent. By this eſtimate, concerning the Citie of London and the ſuburbes, it may be eaſily decerned of, what might be ſpared thorow the whole realme, which being well conſidered may happily perſwade ſome men the more to the obſeruation of ſuch good lawes and ordinances as for obſeruation of fiſhdaies is prouided.
               But concerning this the expence of fiſhe, many there be, that perhaps will ſay, we agree that the taking, vttering and ſpending of fiſhe is laudable and well to be liked of: but wherefore ſhould wee make choyſe of dayes or times, ſeeing there is no preſcribed rule from God, for the choyſe of meates at any one

day more then another, and that it hath pleaſed almightie God to giue vs his bleſſinges with multitudes of the ſame in the ſeas, confeſſing the ſame alſo to be giuen vs from God, for our ſuſtenance, which being taken & prouided, may be brought or carried vnto cities, townes, and markets, and there ſold and vttered to ſuch as wil buy on euerie day in the weeke, and at all times and ſeaſons when it is taken.
               Herein we muſt conſider, that if it ſhould ſo be obſerued the vncertaintie of ſale would cauſe the prouiders of fiſhe, to forſake their trades and the fiſherman his fiſhing in a ſhort time: firſt, for that moſt men by nature in theſe daies are affectioned from fiſh for diuers cauſes, by them conceiued: ſecondly, when the ſame is ſolde at a deare price, ſo that their prouiſion may be made of fleſh a great deale better cheape.
               But we muſt conſider, that although wind and weather ſerueth wel at ſome times, that there is great plentie of fiſh taken, and by reaſon thereof ſolde reaſonable good cheape, yet other ſometimes either the winde and weather, or the time and ſeaſon ſerueth not, ſo that little ſtore of fiſh is taken. Neuertheleſſe as afore hath bene ſaid, the fiſhermans liuing depending onely thereupon muſt haue a ſufficient maintenance to liue, for him and his familie, beeing continued therein with great charges diuers waies, and therefore if hee be not certaine to ſell that ſmall ſtore of fiſh which he hath taken in ſuch a time of ſcarſitie and that alſo at ſome good round price to recompence the trauell and charge which with the aduenture of his life and goods he hath obtained, he neither would nor could continue his ſayd trade, and this hath bene, and is the onely cauſe that many ſeafaring men doe leaue the trade of fiſhing, and ſettle themſelues to other exerciſes, rather hurtfull then beneficiall to the commonwealth.
               Further it is to be conſidered concerning the vncertantie of time in prouiding ſalted fiſhe, to be by the fiſhmonger readie ſeaſoned for the peoples diet. As Samon, Lings, Haberdines, Greenefiſh, Heringes and ſuch like: if there ſhoulde not be a certaine time for the ſpending, the prouiders coulde in no caſe

ſeaſon or make the ſame readie to be ſufficient for the eater or ſpender when it ſhould be eaten or ſpent, which being ſeaſoned for one day, will ſcarſe ſerue for another: Eſpecially when the weather is warme, and therefore being vncertaine of his ſale although he make ſome prouiſion of fiſhe to ſell drie, or in the ſalte, yet he will not ſeaſon anie with water, fit to be eaten, for the vncertaintie of his ſale, by reaſon he knoweth not when the people are minded to eate fiſhe except a day or a time bee appoynted certaine for the ſame.
               Alſo it is a victuall, not to be had, as biefes, muttons, veales, and ſuch like in the paſtures feeding, at al times in a readineſſe to be ſpent, but is at libertie in the wide and large ſeas, vppon the taking and prouiding whereof, diligent attendance muſt be giuen, and alſo ſome ſortes or kindes of fiſh muſt be taken and prouided long time before, it will be ſufficient to be ſpent, ſo that if there be not certaine daies and times appoynted for the certaine expence of fiſhe, The fiſherman ſhall be vncertaine to ſell as he may be a gainer thereby when the ſame is taken, the marchant or vtterer of fiſh, vnwilling and diſcouraged, to buy and prouide for the markets, and thereby a more ſcarſitie of fiſhe, and a greater decay of fiſhing will dayly increaſe to the woonderfull decay of the Nauie, and dammage of the whole realme ſundrie waies.
               It may well be thought therefore, that this thing manie yeares ſince was carefully conſidered of, with the commodities and diſcommodities that would grow by the vncertaintie of the vtterance of fiſh, that certaine daies and times might be appointed for the fiſhe to be vttered and eaten, whereby a certaine and ſufficient prouiſion might be alſo made or prouided, and although as before hath bene ſayd, abuſe in continuance of time did growe, by obſeruation of the ſaide dayes and tymes ſo appointed, yet the neceſſarie vſe thereof conſidered, it is not for the ſame to be refuſed, eſpecially for that by the aſſent and conſent of her Maieſties learned and wiſe counſellors, it hath bene not onely thought good for ſpeciall cauſe that the accuſtomed times and ſeaſons ſhoulde bee obſerued, But by her

highneſſe alſo ſtraight commaundement and earneſt charge giuen from time to time for the due obſeruation thereof.
            
            
               
                  Concerning abſtinence from fleſhe, there is a conſcience to bee made in tranſgreſsing the lawe, for what cauſe obedience herein ought to be ſhewed: the iudgement of ſome men which anſwere thereto.
               
               NOw for that I woulde not anie man ſhoulde miſtake me concerning my opinion, and true meaning in the premiſes, I haue thought good (vnder correction of the better learned) to ſet downe the ſame, as followeth. Wherein I doe pronounce that the eating of fleſhe or forbearing to eate fleſhe, is not anie matter or thing concerning ſaluation of man, or that it is the ſeruice of God otherwaies then all other polliticke lawes are, and be: for it is not the abſtinence from fleſh, that pleaſeth God, nor the eating thereof, that offendeth him: But it is the obedience which God requireth to be yeelded, and borne vnto the Prince, and the care of the benefite of hys people that pleaſeth him, and it is diſobedience to the Prince and the neglecting of his peoples benefite that diſpleaſeth hym.
               I doe alſo affirme that there is no conſcience to bee made in eating of fleſhe at anie time, as touching the fleſhe that is eaten, but there is conſcience to be made in that the Prince is diſobeyed, whiche is a contempt of Gods ordinance, and the peoples benefite neglected, which God requireth to bee earneſtly ſought: and therefore a diſobedience of the Princes lawes, cannot bee done without offence to God, for as God hath ordained that Princes ſhould gouerne, ſo hath hee in ſundrie places of the Scriptures commaunded that ſubiectes ſhoulde obey, and the offence in euerie tranſgreſſion is the more by how much the damage vnto the people thereby groweth greater.
               For we are taught to obey the neceſſarie lawes and commaundementes of Princes and not to neglect and contemne

them to labor and ſeeke for publike wealth, and the vniuerſall commoditie of others, with carefulnes & not to be wilfull ouerthrowers and deſtroyers of the ſame: wherby we may gather that a man without offence may do all things which by ye ſcriptures are not forbidden, vntill they are forbidden by lawfull authoritie. Likewiſe what is commanded by lawfull authoritie, and not by the ſcriptures forbidden, a man is bound to obey & cannot without offence omit the ſame.
               We muſt alſo conſider that God hath diſpoſed things ſo by creation, that the encreaſe of the earth doth not ſuffiſe for the ſuſtentation of the people: but ſuch things as he hath created in the ſeas and waters muſt alſo be prouided, and it may be remembred but few yeares paſt, that fiſh did wel nigh as much ſuſtentation to the people of this realme as the fleſh, and therefore to omit this reliefe, muſt needs encreaſe a ſcarſitie of victuall diuers and ſundrie waies.
               Furthermore ſome men more raſh then true in their iudgement, will not onely thinke but ſay, he that thus earneſtly perſwadeth for an abſtinence from fleſh, is either one of theſe three that followeth, or all: that is to ſay, a ſuperſtitious perſon, an hypocrite, or a Papiſt.
               And firſt he is accounted a ſuperſtitious perſon for that he is a forbidder of meates, perſwading the people thereunto, and maketh conſcience where no cauſe of conſcience is, eſteeming that vnlawfull which is not by God forbidden.
               Herein ſuch raſh giuers of iudgement are greatly deceiued for in truth he is a forbidder of meates that forbiddeth it at all times, and in all reſpects like as in the Apoſtles time ſome ſuperſtitious Iewes perſwaded the Chriſtians, but forbidding of the vſe at certaine times appointed by lawfull authoritie done for a common-welth, is not an vtter forbidding of the thing, the cauſe and reaſon being conſidered, and therefore no conſcience to be made in the kinde or nature of the meate, but for the commoditie of thoſe, for whoſe cauſe it is forborne or forbidden, and ſo the meate is not vnlawful but the vſe vnlawfull, being eaten at a time forbidden by ſuch as haue authoritie from God to forbid it, done for the benefite of his people: for

although it be lawfull for a man to ſpend or vſe the things that he commeth lawfully by, it is vnlawfull to ſpende or vſe the things that he commeth vnlawfully by, for then the commandement is tranſgreſſed ſo, although it be lawfull to eate fleſh at all times, as the creatures of God giuen for the ſuſtenance of man, it is vnlawful to eate the ſame at times forbidden by lawfull authoritie, for therein Gods ordinance is contemned and the benefite of his people neglected.
               Secondly, ſome perhaps may name him to be an hypocrite, becauſe he wil not eate fleſh on ſuch dayes that he might ſeeme holy, and one that more careth for his ſaluation then other people, as thinking to obtaine the ſame by abſtaining from eating fleſh on a few preſcribed daies and times: but of wiſe men this is to be conſidered, that hypocriſie is priuie ſinne, couched in the minde and intention of man, and although iudgement may be giuē in or by the dealings of ſome perſons, yet in truth the thing cannot be generally diſcerned in any man but by the wiſedome of God onely.
               For what vertue ſoeuer any perſon vſeth, if it be done for the praiſe of man, and not in conſideration of the duetie which God requireth, is none other but flat hypocriſie: For example, who ſo accuſtometh to reade or heare the holy ſcriptures preached and taught with a ſhew of holines, therby to be praiſed of men, and not learne to liue or bring forth fruites according to the ſame, he may be accounted a meere hypocrite, neuertheleſſe the reading and hearing of the ſcriptures is not hypocriſie, but being vnfainedly and rightly done, is the liuely nouriſhment and foode of mans ſoule. So abſtinence from fleſh is not to be accounted hypocriſie, when it is done for obedience to the law & in reſpect of that law and duetie which God requireth of euery man to be borne towards his neighbour.
               Thirdly he is called a Papiſt, for that ſaith ſome, alſo he thinketh it is neceſſarie to abſtaine from eating of fleſh, & doth like & allow of thoſe lawes and deuices made and vſed in the time of Papiſtrie, and by auncient authoritie of the Pope, whō we ſhould not in any thing imitate, but rather in all thinges be contrarie.
               
                  Here may be ſaid is zeale without knowledge, vnderſtanding blinded, and a great want of true iudgemēt: for enſample, mine enemie teacheth me two things, the one I finde euill by experience, the other good, and becauſe I will not follow the counſell of my aduerſary, ſhall I caſt away the good for the euils ſake.
               Or thus, it may be ſaid I am taught by mine aduerſarie to run into the fire and eſcape the water, but becauſe contrarie to the minde or teaching of mine aduerſarie I haue eſcaped the fire, ſhall I therefore of mine owne will run into the water and drowne my ſelfe: many good lawes and ordinances in the time of papiſtrie was by them made and ordained, but the ſame is not therfore to be contemned or neglected, for that their deuiſe in many things for the benefite of a common welth cannot be amended.
               Much more might be ſaid concerning this matter, but few words are ſufficient to ſatiſfie ſuch as are wiſe and diſcreete, whoſe wiſedome can ſufficiently conceaue by this ſmal treatiſe what thing of the author is intended, whoſe heart and minde is knowne to God, that for the benefite of his countrie he hath taken this ſmal paines, crauing patience of the gentle Reader for his rudenes, being in reſpect of many others, but ſimplie trained vp in learning, requireth herein of the wiſe to be accepted. And that theſe his ſimple perſwaſions might be an occaſion without the paine and penalties of the law, to perſwade an obedience in the premiſes, amongſt his natiue countrimen, both for themſelues and their families. Then the author ſhall thinke himſelfe recompenced: and ſuch as liue but few yeares both ſee and feele the great benefits to them therby growing, not onely for encreaſe of victuall and better maintenance of the people, but great ſtrength to the Nauie for the more ſeruice and defence of this Realme.
            
            FINIS.
         
      
   