
      
         
            
            
            ONE OF
the foure Sermons
PREACHED
BEFORE THE KINGS
Maiestie, at Hampton Court
in September last.
            THIS
Concerning the Antiquitie and Superioritie
of Bishops. Sept. 21. 1606.
            BY
The Reuerend Father in God William
Lord Bishop of Rochester.
            
            LONDON
Imprinted by I. W. for Matthew Law
1606.
         
         
            
            
            To the Kings most Sacred
MAIESTIE.
            
               IT was your MAIESTIES
expresse
Commaundement,
(most dread Soveraigne)
that
this SERMON
should be printed:
your HIGHNES intention therein very
honorable, that neither by misreport
it might bee traduced, nor through
obliuion perish in the ayre wher it was
vttered: but that they which heard it,
might record it; they which heard it not,
might read it; & that almight be satisfied.

This royal purpose of your Maiestie,
either preiudice to the question, or
malignitie to the person, will, I feare
pervert: for more largely and soundly
hath this Theme bin hādled, & yet the
labor lost in fore-stalled cōceits: & by
mē more popularly applauded, & more
profoundly learned, then my selfe; and
therfore smal hope that I shal persuade.
But be the euent as it haps, I haue, in
the meane time, discharged both my
conscience in discussing the point sincerely,
&, I trust, vnoffensiuely; &,
withall, my dutie to your Maiestie,
whose vnworthy seruant I am, and for
your Highnes many gracious fauours
most deeply obliged: in which acknowledgement
I will liue & die; and, which
is the whole requital I can make, heartely
pray for your Maiesties long life,

and prosperous reigne, that you may be
(which, I am sure, your Maiesty desires)
a King of Peace, as in Iuda & Israel,
your temporall state; so in Mount
Siō
                also, in the state & among the Persons
Ecclesiastique; effecting in vs all,
both of Ky
                     •
                  ke and Church, vnitie
in doctrine, vnanimitie in affection, vniformitie
in obedience to your Maiesties
Supremacie, whether in matters,
either absolutely necessary as inioyned
by God, or in themselues indifferent,
but authoritatiuely necessarie,
as Commanded by your selfe; in which
desire, rather then hope, I end and rest
            Your MAIESTIES poore
Chaplein, most deuoutely
bound
VV. ROFFENS.
         
         
            
            TO THE MINISTERS
of SCOTLAND, my Fellow
Dispensers of Gods misteries.
            
               BRETHREN (for as I
esteeme you, so will I stile
you, iudge you of vs as
you please) some of your
sort, being at this Sermon
when it was preached,
were desirous that it might be printed. The
end of their request themselues best know.
If to traduce it in their Preachings (as many
of your Ministers serue other Bookes of
mine, not sparing my self, as I am credibly informed)
they shall do as many vse, but not
as they ought. Charities precept is to speake well
of all; yea, euen Ciuilities rule, not to backebite
the absent. If to read it for their further satisfaction,
as not accustomed to the accent of

our Pronuntiation (for so it was said) it hath
pleased his Maiestie I should yeelde to their
request: although their Notes they tooke,
with some personal conference easie for them
to attaine, might without this noyse haue
effected that. If to answere it (for that also
was giuen out) let it bee with modestie and
learning, nothing shall bee more welcome.
(and yet we may say therin as the Emperor
of the Coblers Crow, Satis istarum auium habemus
domi). Indeed, this purpose for answere I
rather suspect, because I vnderstood of a
Challenge offered in an Admonition Epistolar
to your late Parliament, directly confrōting
the maine subiect of this Sermō, namely, that
the Calling Episcopall hath neither Gods word,
ancient Canon, nor learned Father to abbett it.
To say this, not to prooue it, is but Hercules
tragicall club in the Poet,
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  . massy in shew, but
of cloth & straw, an affrighting vanity; to aver
it,
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  
                & not to be able to maintaine it, were but
Ignorances brood in Nazian: breaking the shel
and cackling afore it be full hatcht,Naz & Thucyd. 
               a praecipitate
boldnesse: to auouch it and make it good,
were a labour worthy your trauaile, and

of vs much desired. And yet neither this your
Challenge, nor the Maintenāce thereof, whē it
comes, might any way concerne vs, it being
a combate within your owne lists: sauing
that the Challengers, not enduring 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               
               Bishops within their owne Church, could
not refraine, but contra
                  •
               y to S Pe
                     •
                  ers charge,
in the very same letter make themselues

                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                
               Bishops and Censurers of other
Prouinces,
               1. Pet. 4. 15. by intituling the Church-gouernors
among vs, PAPISTICALL English
Bishops. A slanderous Epithete (pardon mee
brethren, and yet S. Hierom saith, that hee
which is suspected, much more accused of
Heresie, may without pardon asking, bre
                  •
               k
the bond
                  •
                of patience) a slander, Isay vntrue
and vnchristian. For first, euery opinion or Ce
                     •
                  remonie
which in the Cockpit of Elderlings i
                  •
               
concluded to be POPERIE, is not so Secondly
the world can witnes that English
Bishops haue for Religion done that, which
neuer any Clerolaicall Consistorien, or Bench
Presbyterian, either Southern or Northern
durst, hath, or can performe, viz. written
learnedly and laboriously, disputed soundly

suffered manfully, and died constantly in
defiance of PAPISTRIE, readily inclining
both their heads to blockes, and their
bodyes to stakes, rather then by DECLINATORS
from their lawfull Princes tribunall,
appealing to any Synodicall Conuention
whatsoeuer. This, doutbles, is PAPISTICAL,
the other APOSTOLICAL: for
S. Paul appealed to Caesar his iudgement
seat, as the supreme; whereas PAPISTS
& PVRITANS wil haue the King, but
an HONORABLE MEMBER, not a
ch
                     •
                  ef Gouernor in the churches of his own Dominiōs.
But to return if an Answer hereunto,
be the Babe we must attēd, (and of it I oft
hea
                  •
               e) not 
                  
                     •
                  uno Lucina, but Charitas & Veritas

                     •
                  erte opē. Let loue of truth cōceiue it, truth of
iudgemēt breed it; variety of reading frame
it; modesti
                     •
                  
                of stile deliuer it▪ ornaments of learning
cloath and adorne it, and we will embrace
it: not doubting then, but like a modest
& true borne childe, it will speake in the
language, and with reuerence of Antiquitie. In
the meane time, God grant both you and vs
Obedience and Hume
                     •••
                  y, that, to our Soueraigne;
               
this, within our owne hearts: so shall
we neither vnder-vallue him, nor ouer-weene
our selues. Farewell in Christ.
            
            Your louing friend, and fellowe
Minister in the Gospell
W. ROFFENS.
            
         
         
            Obseruaos Regis, & praecepta iuramenti
Dei. Eccles. 8. 2.
            
         
         
            Escapes made in the Printing.
            Onely one or 
                  •
               . of substance: the rest, which are but in
points or accents, the courteous Reader may please to
amend: in the body of the Sermon
            
               Pag. 16. lin. 
                     •
                  . for Psa 18. read Verse 18.
               
                  Pag. 19. lin. 9. for No meane Praesbyteriall. The professors of Boem,
wish &c. read No meane Presbyterian, the Professor of Berna wisheth
&c.
               Pag. 20. lin. 2. (that his authoritie) read that is, his authoritie,
               
               Pag. 21. lin. 17. of that gift, read of that gesse.
               
            
         
      
      
         
            
            
               Actes 20. 28.
               Take heed to your selues, and to the whole flocke (In quo Spiritus
Sāctus vos posuit Episcopos) in which the holy
ghost hath placed you Bishops, to feed the Church
of God, which he haeth purchased with his own blood.
            
            
               THe Conuenting of Bishoppes
and the inferior Clergie into
Synods, whether Occumenicall,
for whole Christendome,
or Nationall for one Region,
deriues the antiquitie from this
booke of the Acts. The Generall
Councels from the fifteenth Chapter, the Nationall
and Prouinciall from this 20.Naz. ep. 42. ad Procop. And howsoeuer
Greg. Nazian: seemes to decline all Councels,
               1. Cor. 11▪ 17. concluding
of them as Saint Paul of the Corinthian Assemblies,
that they meete together 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               ,
bringing with them more losse then gaine to
the truth; yet the Church hath by experience found,
that as they haue Authoritatem v
                     •
                  errimam, beeing
grounded vpon a practise Apostolicall, so haue they,

                  •
               aith Saint Austen,
               August. 
               Vsum saluberrimum, they are of a
Physicall nature, as necessary for the body of Christ,
which is his Church, as Physicke is for the naturall
body of man: the same two endes beeing of them

both, either to preuent or cure. If any Heresie in
doctrine, or enormitie in manners, like a fretting
Gangrene, haue already eaten into the Church,
(whereof Saint Paul complaines to Timothie) then is
it Synodus 
               
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               ,2. Tim. 
                     •
                  . 17. the Clergie meetes to cure the
maladie, either by incision or infusion; if a feare of a
future disease, whereof those superfluous itching humors,
2. Tim. 4. 3.2 Tim. 4 3. doe occasion the coniecture, then
is it Synodus 
               
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               , the Assembly meetes to preuent
the mischiefe. That this Synode here in this
Chapter met to both these purposes, is the opinion
of some Diuines, Saint Paul the President of the
Conuocation, calling together the Clergie of Ephesus,
verse 17, first cōcerning those beasts of Ephesus,
whereof himselfe speaketh in the Epistle to the Corinthians
(their whelpes are multiplied with vs in
England) which made a iest of the soules immoralitie,1. Cor. 15. 32.
and the bodies resurrection; and so he conuented
them ad Medelā, by cutting off that Strumam to
stay the infection. Secondly, because in the next
verse to my Text, he foresawe daungers, both forraine
and domestique, both Lupos ingredientes Vers.
29. Wolues entring, and deuouring the flocke; and
Canes oblatrantes, euen the very dogs of the flocke
misleading and seducing them, he therefore assembled
them ad Cautelam to make them wary. And
this last is the most apparant subiect of this whole
Sermon ad clerum, and thereunto the most emphaticall
and inforceing motiue, this ergo, this illatiue for
Attention, Take heede therefore &c. Which some, not
vnfitly, doe call Saint Paul his trumpet, not that

whereof he speaketh in the 1. Cor. 14. 8.1. Cor. 14. 8. which sendeth
out 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                a dull and vncertaine sound: but
like the trumpet of Sinai,Exo 9. 16. wherein there is both
Clangor and Horror, the shrilnesse thereof able to awake
the most slumbring spirit, and the horror to amate,
to affright the sturdiest heart. Whereupon
some of the Fathers doubt whither they may call it
Tubam or Tonitru, a trumpets blast, or a thunder clap,
so vehemently it ratleth out this Episcopall, this Pastorall
cautell▪
                First intrinsecally, Take heed to your selues, for
as a City mounted on a hill cannot be hid, but is subiect
to many a flaw,Mat 5. 14. so Qui sibi nequam cui bonus? He
that cannot rule himselfe,1. Tim, 3. 5. is vnfit to rule the Church;
and if the salt it selfe be vnsauery, wherewith then can
it season other things? Secondly, extrinsecally, Take
heed to the (Flock) for Christianity extendeth both her
charitie and industrie to the good of others;Philip 2. 4. yea, to
the (whole Flocke) as Ezekiel doth particularize it,Ezech. 31. 39. to
strengthen the weake, to heale the infected, to splint
the spreined, to reduce the wandring, to seeke the
lost, to cherish the strong: this is the Clangor of the
Trumpet. Sed sonitus buccinae ad huc crescit in maius &
prolixius tenditur, saith Moses of that Trumpet, Exod.
19. 19.Exod. 19. 19. And still Saint Paul raiseth his blast by a threefold
inforcement.
            First, expressing the burthen of the office it selfe,
Posuit vos ad (Pascendum) ye are set to Feede, for God
loues no loiterers, either in the market vnhired, or in
the vineyard inclosed, but Mat. 20. 8. Call the laborers
and pay them.
            
            Secondly, the author of the office, Spiritus Sanctus,
               
for no man, saith Paul, taketh this honor vnto himselfe
but hee that is called of God,
               Heb. 5. 4. who imposeth the office,
and will exact the accompt.
            Thirdly, the qualitie of the flocke which is to bee
fed, euen that which Saint Peter calleth populum acquisitionis,
               2 Pet. 1. 9.
a precious people, purchased with a price
of greater value then a Kings ransome, as it is heere,
with blood, with Gods blood, with Gods owne
blood; (which hee hath purchased with his owne blood)
this is the horror of the Trumpet. Now then, let him
that hath an eare, heare what the spirit speaketh vnto
the Churches,
               Apoc. 2. 7
                     •
                  . saith Saint Iohn; or rather foundeth
out to Churchmen:
                  
                     •
                  say. 51. 17. for there is no Clergie man, vnlesse
he hath, as the Prophet speaketh, caroused the
cup of slumber ad fundum, euen to the very dregges,
but the voyce of this Trumpet will bee vnto him, as
Samuels message,1. Sam. 3. 
                     •
                  . making both his two eares to tingle,
and his heart strings to tremble. Euery blast of
this Trumpet, and part of this Text thus dismembred,
to expresse to the full, I should want both wind
and time. I purpose therefore to take Saint Peters
course in his Sermon, Acts 2. who, though he tooke
a long text,
                  
                     •
                  ct. 2. euen foure verses of the sixteene Psalme,
yet principally insisted vpon one verse, which hit the
point whereof they most doubted: so, to select out
of this long Text a few wordes, which are drawne
into question against the calling Episcopall; for it
hath beene a long time buzzed into the eares of many,
that the function of Bishops is but an humane Inuention.
            
            The wordes therefore are these (In quo spiritus sanctus

vos posuit episcopos. In which the holy ghost hath placed
you Bishops.) The discussing whereof, shall be like
the trial of an Ephra
                     •
                  mite,
               Iudg. 12. 6. by Shiboleth and Siboleth, to
see whether it lisp for the Presbyterie, or speak fully for
the Praelacy. The first is coniectuall, because whom
verse 17. hee calleth Presbyters; them in this verse he
intituleth Bishops, their names not distinct, their offices
therefore are not different: that is their conclusion.
The second, I thinke, is direct, these words describing
fully euery part of the outward function of Bishops.
First, their preeminent superioritie in the word
(Episcopos) for as there are 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                seers Philip: 3. 17.Philip. 3. 17.
which expresseth the duty of each Pastour ouer his
flock, so are there 1. Pe. 5. 2. 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                (
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               )
such as must visit & ouerlook both the Flocke and the
Seers. 2. in the word (posuit) both their Cathedrall
Seate, this word onely distinguishing a Bishop from
an Apostle (setting aside their extraordinary indowments,
and immediate calling) the Apostles function
beeing an vnlimited Circuit, Ite in vniuersum
orbem Mat. 28. 19.Mat. 28. 19. the Bishops a fixed or positiue residence
in one citty: as also (posuit) not a change or regencie
like the Leuiticall seruice, a weekely, monethly,
or annuall course, but (posuit) setled in their persons
during life. Thirdly, their Diocesan Iurisdiction
(In quo vniuerso) for a Parochian assemblie, a petty parish,
came not within S. Pauls cognisance for a Bishop.
Fourthly, the author of these all (spiritus sanctus) this
calling beeing no humane inuention: for euery plant
which my heauenly Father hath nat 
                     〈◊〉
                   shall bee rooted
out.
               Mat. 15. 13. Fifthly, the manner thereof, that is also in the

word (posuit) First posuit actu, he acted it by the hands
of the Apostles, and so the Episcopall function is 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               
an ordināce Apostolical Secōdly, posuit iure,
he hath enacted it for succeeding posteritie, and so it
is 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               , a Canon or cōstitutiō of the whole
Trinity. These are the partes, many in number, easy
for proofe, and yet hard in the taske, onely in this respect,
because of whatsoeuer shalbe vttered by me in
this discourse,Eccle 1. 10. that of Solomon is verified. Non valet
quisquam dicere, ecce hoc recens est: so many treatises
there haue bene compiled, conferences had, bookes
stuffed with proofes in this argument, to which nothing
can bee added and lesse hath beene answered.
(for an answere worse then silence, is lesse then nothing)
Notwithstanding, though Quintiliā
                & Seneca
do both of them repute it to be tardi ingenii, to set a
mans wit working no further then his reading, I had
rather in such a case, which stands vpō authority, Sapere
excōmentario & to be wise by other mens labors,
then sapere prae commentario, as some in this very point
do, who, like vnto him Ezec. 28. 3.Ezech. 28. 3. taking themselues
to be wiser then Daniel, (for he grounded his wisdom
vpon books reading) prefer their owne fancie before
al antiquity.Dan. 9. 2. My humble request vnto you is, it might
please you to cast off all preiudice either to the question
in hand, or the party that handles it; and before
I enter it, to ioyne with mee in humble and hearty
praiers vnto almighty God, that what shal be vttered
by me his vnworthy minister may turne to his glory
and to your instruction in Christ Iesu. In which
praier &c.The praier.
            
            
               
The first thing I am to handle is the prioritie and
superioritie of Bishops ouer their cleargie in this word
(Episcopos)
            
            IT is Saint Pauls rule,1. Cor. 14. 4
                     •
                  . that all things be done decently
and in order, for where there is no order there
can bee no decency: the best means for order, is, when
S. Pauls 
               
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                
               commandement with authoritie,
               Tit. 
                     •
                  . 15. is followed
with S. Peters 
               
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                
               a subordinate obedience.
               1. Pet. 2. 13.
No place doth order become better then the Church
of Christ, which himselfe in the Canticles calleth Aciem
ordinatam,
               Cant. 6. 36. 
               an armie well marshalled, wherein euery
company hath a Captaine, & both Captaines
and companies are vnder one General. For 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               ,
equalitie in government is the entertainer
of confusion saith the Philosopher,
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   polit. & that is so fit
guest for the Churches of the saints saith the Apostle.1. Cor. 14. 33.
Wherefore, as the great shepheard of Israel professed
of himself that he led his people, & gouernd his flock
with two staues,
               Zach. 
                     ••
                  . 7. which, Zachary the eleuenth, he called
the one bandes, and the other beautie: so the great
clauiger of heauen which hath the key of Dauid that
shutteth and no man openeth, openeth and no man
shutteth,
               Apoc. 37. for his Church gouernment hath left two keyes
in the 16. of Matth. the one clauem scientiae the key
of knowledge,
               Mat. 16 19. the preaching of the gospell,Luc. 11. 52. which as
the more essentiall part are the bandes of our function: for that necessitie is laid vpon vs, and wo vnto
vs, saith Saint Paul, if we preach not the Gospel, if wee
turne not that key. The other of power and iurisdiction,
which by distinguishing of functions, causeth
as Saint Paul describes it 1. Cor. 12.Cor. 
                     〈…〉
                  
                a singular decency

in the Church of Christ: the one imposeth a duty, &


haec oportet f
                     •
                  cere; there is Zach. his first staffe. (B
                     •
                  ndes)
the other maketh for the comlines of the regiment,
& hac decet fieri, there is Zach. his second staffe (Beauti.)
And as the Father and the Sonne so the holy Ghost
also would make it knowne, that as in his dedit, Ephes.
4.Ephes. 4. 7. the guifts which he hath conferred vpon Churchmen,
there is an imparitie; and some better then other
couet after the best guiftes 1. Cor. 12.1. Cor. 12. 31. so in this (posuit)
the functions and offices of the Church, hee hath appointed
an inequalitie, and some to be higher then
others, not onely that there be 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                1. Cor. 12. 28.1. Cor. 12. 28.
some to gouerne, some to obay, but that among the
gouernours there should be a disparitie of honour in
the 1. Tim. 5.1. 
                     〈◊〉
                  . 
                     •
                  . 17. some to bee aduanced with double honour
in respect of others. This is the proiect of the
whole Trinitie for Church gouernement, and their
practise was semblable. For God himselfe in the olde
Testament in the paritie of priesthood allotteth an
imparitie of gouernement, one Leuit aboue an other,
Priestes aboue them, and the high-priest chiefe of
them all: So Christ, while he liued on earth, of 84.
whom hee appointed for the generall seruice, which
Saint Luke Act
                     •
                  
                6. 4.Act. 6. 4. calleth 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                the ministration
of the word, he selected 12. to be the principall
and superior to the other; which appeareth manifestly,
Act. 1.Act. 1. For as an Apostles room became void, one
of the 72. was chosen into his place: yea euen of
those 12. there were, as S. Paule intitles them, Summi
Aposto
                     ••
                  
                the chiefe Apostles,
               2. Cor. 1
                     •
                  . 5. by good coniecture
those 3. Peter, Iames, and Iohn, whom in the 2. to the

               Gal.
               
                  
                     •
                  al
                     •
                   2. 9. he calleth Columnas, Pillers. For those 3. alone
did our Sauiour make pertakers of his transfiguratiō
on the mount, Mat. 17.Mat. 17. 1. and of his agony in Geths
                     •
                  many,
Mat. 26. Which Selection did not so much
expresse his loue to them more then the rest,Mat. 26. 37. as,
which Nazian.
               N
                     •
                  z
                     •
                  an. well obserueth, argue their 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               
               prerogatiue & preheminence aboue the rest. An euident
argument (or probable at the least) Epip.
               Epiphan. maketh therof,
in that our Sauiour dignified them and not the rest

                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                with names & stiles of Honour, calling
Simon, Peter, & Iames and Iohn, Boan
                     •
                  rges, the sonnes of
thunder.
               Mat. 3. 16. 
                     •
                  7. So the holy ghost, after Christes ascention,
first Symb
                     •
                  lically 1. Cor. 
                  ••
               .1. Cor. 12. 12. distinguisheth persons ecclesiastical
placing some as the head, others as the
eyes, others as the feete, all together, like members of
the body, with equal concord, but vnequal dignitie, conspiring
together for the safety of the whole. Secondly,
directly, in the word 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                1. Tim. 3. 13.
                  
                     •
                  . Tim. 3. 13. which
the Geneua hath not well translated, They which haue
ministred well. For the words are 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               
Those which haue discharged the office of a Deacon
               
                  〈◊〉
                prepare vnto themsel
                  •
               es, 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                a 
                  〈◊〉
               
to ascend to a higher degree, as first to be Pre
                     •
                  byter,
and then Bishop. Which taketh away that distinction
of Priority in order▪
                not of degree; as if the calling Episcopall
were a Numeral, not a M
                     •
                  nerall function, a
Priority in order, and not a Superiority in degree. For
the word properly signifieth a staire or step, as Act.
21. 35
                  
                     •
                  ct▪ 21. 35. Paule stoode 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               , vpon the staires.
Which interpretation of mine, both Councils and Fathers
do co
                  •
               firme:
                  
                     〈◊〉
                  
                
               Concil
                     •
                  u
                     •
                   African, calleth the

three functions ecclesiasticall, of Bishops, Priests, and
Deacons, 
               
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                the three degrees of the Church.
Conc. Sardicen. No man may be called to be a Bishop,
which hath not risen by euery 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               ,Sardie. 
               ad culmen Episcopatus.
Conc. Calcedō.
               Chal. To reduce a Bishop, 
               
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               
backe to the degree of a Priest is sacriledge. So
Naziā.
               Nazi. vit. Ath
                     •
                  
                speaking of Athanasius saith, that he had 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               ,
as much preheminence
& honor for his virtue as by his dignity, & degrees. Of
Saint Basill also he saith,vit. Basil. that he rose to his Bishoprik,
               
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                by the order and law,
of the spirituall Ascent: which metaphor Saint Hierom
himselfe vseth to Nepotian,
               Hier. ad Nepot. if thou desire the
office of a Bishop, gaudeo de ascensu, I reioyce at thy
Climing: and of the same Nepotian, fit Clericus, & per
solitos gradus Presbyter. In the infancy of the Church,
these degree;
               Idem in epit. Nep. were not distinct, for they were not extant.
The first that were made were Deacons, Act.
6.Act. 66. 
               Presbyters there were none solemnly ordeined
(that we read of) till Act. 14. 23. Ibid. 14. 23. The highest degree
which was the function Episcopal, the Apostles reserued
vnto themselues a long time, and that for 3. maine
reasons.
            First, there was no Church established, and but a few
at the first conuerted, wherefore all their whole labor
they bent in turning the first key, to open that
dore of faith Act. 14. 27. namely the conuersion of
the Gentiles,Ibid. 14. 27: which the Apostle 1. Cor. 16.1. Cor. 16. 9. calleth
a great dore & effectual: & al the help they could make
either by Prophets, Euangelists, Coadiutors, Pastors, Doctors,
Planters, Waterers, or whatsoeuer was litle enough

for that worke.
            
            Secondly after the conuersiō of many people, euen
in setled Churches, they hasted not to place a Bishop, for

                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               . No great thing is suddenl
                  •
               e
brought to passe, saith Nazian. and a Presbyter fit
to make a Bishop,
               Nazi
                     ••
                  . 
                     〈◊〉
                   2. Cor. 2. 16. is hardly found, saide a Carthaginian
Bishop in an open Synod: Nā ad haec idoneus quis? saith
Saint Paule, (though our Church here, for a long time
doubled the Echo with a quisquis) The rule therfore
of the Apostle being vnto Timothie,
               1. Tim. 3. 6. that in no case
he should take him that was Neophytus, a new conuert
and make him a Bishop, of them the Church was at
that time full; euen for that cause also they absteined.
            Thirdly, few being found fit for that high calling,
the Apostles left some Churches to be gouerned by
Presbyters, (reseruing stil the highest command to them
selues) but when they founde that humour whereof
Saint Iames speaketh that euery man would bee a maister.
               Iam. 3. 1.
                     •
                   lin. nat hist.
(like Plinie his Amphisbaena, a Serpent which hath a
head at each end of her body, both striuing which
shold be the maister-head, in the mean time toiles the
body most miserably, & in the end rēts & tears it self
most lothsōly) finding I say those 2. effects which vse
to follow Parity & Plurality, viz. dissention & confusion,
               Hieron in Tit. cap. 1. & epist. ad Euagr.
it was generally decreed, as Hierom confesseth,
Vt vnus caeteris superponeretur, that one should be placed
aboue the rest to gouerne both Presbyters and
Flocke, and that the whole care of the Church, ad vnū
pertineret should belong to one, & he should be stiled
by the name of Bishop: particularly, ouer this Clergy
here assembled, Timothie, who is subscribed in

the end of that second Epistle, 
               
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               
               The first Bishop of the Church
of Ephesus by impositiō
                of hands 
                  
                     〈◊〉
                  
                & so was Titus
also stiled Bishop of Creta, as in the subscriptiō of that
epistle appeareth. Yea but these were S. Paules Bish
                     •
                  p▪
               
(say some) and betweene them and ours a great 
                  〈◊〉
               .
True, 1. For varietie of giftes and graces
of the spirit. A maine difference, as 
                  〈◊〉
                as betwen

                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                and 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               , 1 Cor. 12. 8. their knowledge
for the most part 
                  〈…〉
                
               Reuelation,
               1 Cor. 12. 8.
ours acquired with much study and ndustry.
            
            2. In respect of the honour and reuerence which
their Clergy and flocke performed to them. A great
difference;1 Cor. 5. 13. ye see Saint Paul describes it. 1. Thes. 5. to
be 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                more then a superaboundant aw
and loue.
            For maintenance they and we somewhat semblable,
theirs impeached by persecution, ours exhausted
by Sacriledge.
            
            It is a prety obseruation (though a sharp one)
which a Romish writer of the Church story long since
made,
                  
                     〈…〉
                  
                that the word Conscientia hath had very ill
lucke, in the Church of Christ, it could neuer yet be
at once in full Syllables; in the Apostles time
                  •
               , when
there was Con and Sci, a 
                  
                     〈◊〉
                  
                and a 
                  〈◊〉
                
               Clergy,
then entia was defectiue, they had the 
                  〈◊〉
                of the
Spirit, but no indowment of possessions: Afterwards
when there was Con and Entia a religious (yea a
superstitious) and a very 
                  〈◊〉
                
               Clergy, then Sci was

                  〈◊〉
               , they were not then the 
                  〈…〉
               : And
in my time (saith he) Con and Sci are both gon,

and (like Phil
                  •
               poemenes armie in Plutarch,
               Plut. in Philopae. which had
neither head nor feete, but whole bellie) they be all
Entia, they haue all the Honours, all the Mannors
and all the 
                  
                     •
                  at of the land: But with vs againe it is
come round, for now that we haue Con and Sci, a
learned (God be thanked) and a religious Clergy, the
Entia are gone, our ma
                  •
               ntenance is imb
                  •
               aseled, our
honors enuied: yea, euen that poore Ens & Vrum
which by Gods and the Kinges fauour we enioy, was
of late cast whole into the Kings mercy, as if they
would haue made v
                  •
                
               non-
                  〈◊〉
               . But the authoritie
and preheminence ouer the Cleargie, is all 
               
                  〈◊〉
                in them
and v
                     •
                  , they receiuing it from the Apostles, and wee
deriuing it from them: which is manifest in two principall
things, wherein the Bishops then, and we now,
are Superior vnto the other Clergy which for your
better memorie may be reduced to two words each
very like to other, 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                & 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               .
            First, Collation of Rewardes, which Saint Paul calleth
Ordination, Tit. 1. 5.Tit. 1. 5. (the highest honor that
a Bishop can reward a Scholler of desert withall, to
make him a Priest of the High God.)
            
            Secondly, Iu
                     •
                  iciall Censure, i
                  •
                their Consistorie and
Visitation, not of the Flocke onely, but of the Pastors
also: both which Iurisdictions, Distributiue and Correctiue
the Apostles kept vnto themselues, till they
appointed Bishops either Substitutes in their absence;
or Successors after their death. In the Church of the
                  ••
               alonica,
where there were many 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               
both Preachers & Gouernours;
               1. Thes. 
                     •
                  . 12. yet saith Saint Paul, If
any man obey 
               
                  〈…〉
               ,
                  
                     •
                  . Thes. 3. 14. note him by a letter, and

               shall I come vnto you with a Rod? saith he to the Corinthians,
               1 Cor, 4, vlt,
which Church had many Pres
                     •
                  yters; there is
the Censure reserued. For the other, Philip though
full of the holy Ghost and of power hauing preached
and conuerted many in Samaria,
               Act. 8. yet had no authoritie
to lay-hands vpon any, but the Apostles were
faine to send, from Hierusalem. Peter and Iohn to doe
that office, there is Imposition of hands reserued: both
these they conueyed vnto Bishops.
            
            First, for Ordination by laying on of hands, in this
Church of Ephesus, there were many Presbyters long
before Timothie was appointed their Bishop,
               1. Tim. 5. 22. yet Saint
Paul sent him of purpose to Imp
                     •
                  se handes. 1. Tim. 5.
22.Tit. 1. 5. and for that intent also he left Titus in Creta. Neither
would the Church of Christ succeeding admit
any other but Bishops to that businesse, as not iustifiable
for the Presbyters, either by Reason, example, or
Scripture.
            
            First for Reason, it is a rule which admits no contradiction,Heb. 7. 7.
saith the Apostle, that he which blesseth,
should bee greater then he which is blessed, (taking
it for the benediction which is ex authoritate not deuotione,
for the subiect may blesse the Prince, & man blesseth
God in heartie deuotion, but the blessing of authoritie
comes from the greater, as honour is in him
that confers it, not in him that takes it. And this is
Saint Ambrose his reason.Ambros. in. 1. Tim. 3.
            
            Secondly, for example, not one to bee shewed
through the whole storie Ecclesiasticall, that any besides
a Bishop did it. If some one of the inferior ranke
presumed to doe it, his Act was reuersed by the

               Church for vnlawfull (as in the case of Coll
                     •
                  thus, a
Presbyter of Alexandria,
               Athanas. Apol. 2 in li
                     •••
                  is Pres. whereof Athanasius and
Epiphanius do both make mention,Marit. who took vpon
him to giue orders, for which both himselfe was censured
and what hee did was reuoked,
                  
                     •
                  piphan. 
                     〈◊〉
                  . 69. and they receiued
as meere Lay-men, (and no otherwise) vnto
the communiō, whom he had ordered.
            
            Thirdly, For scripture, there is none, either of Holie
men, or of the Holy-Ghost, not holymen, for all the
Fathers 
               
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                with one consent do contradict it.
Chrysostome vpon the 1. Tim. 3. and 4.Chrysost. Theodoret. Oecumen. Ambros. vbi supra. Hieron. ad Fuagr. 
               Theodoret vpon
the same places.Aiax 
                     ••
                  agel. 
               Oecumenius vpon 1. Tim. 5. Ambrose
is peremptory, that it is neither Fas nor Ius, consonant
neither with Gods nor mans law, that any besides
a Bishop should do it. Yea, Hierom himselfe who
setteth a Presbyter like him in Sophocle, 
               
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               
& aduanceth him as high as he can to make him
go aequis ceruicibus with a Bishop, yet takes him this one
peg downe, Excepta Ordinatione, what is it saith he,
that a bishop doth which a Presbyter may not do, sauing
Ordination? No scripture of the Holy-ghost, either analogically
by consequent or directly by precept: For analogie,
none but the Apostles did it, or might do it,
(as before you heard) not directly, for to what Presbyter
was the authority committed as a Presbyter?
               1. Tim. 5. 21. vnto
Timothy a Bishop of Ephesus it was said (lay hands hastily
on no man) And to Titus a Bishop of Creta I have left
thee here to ordaine presbyters.
               Tit. 1. 5.
            
            But to each of these there is an obiection, First for
example, that of Ananias Act 9.Act. 9. who being neither Apostle,
not Bishop, onely a disciple, laide his handes vpon

               Paul, and had a commission for it. True, but they were
Manus curatoriae, not confirmatoriae, as appeareth verse
12.verse. 12
                     •
                  
                to restore his sight, not to giue him his function. Els
should he haue beene first actually consecrated an
Apostle of Christ, before hee had beene baptised
into Christ, which was Psal, 18. Secondly for scripture,
Saint Pauls precept seemes to imply a practise of
consecration by the Presbyteri,
               1. Tim. 4. 14▪
                in those wordes (neglect
not the grace which is in thee, and was given thee [cum
impositione manuum presbyterii] faire colours in show,
but they will not hold. Shall the Fathers b
                  •
               e iudges?
They al, with one consent, interpret the Presbytery by
the Praelacy, that is by the Bishops, for they onely (say
the Fathers) may doe it. Shall moderne writers, and
the best of them Maister Caluin (presbyterii) nor the
Colledge, saith hee, is here meant, (for the Bishops had
then and after a colledge of priestes to assist them in
their sacred businesse,Hierom in Esa. 3. which Saint Hierom calleth (Senatum
ecclesiae) but the office, as if Paul shoulde haue
said (neglect not the grace which was giuen thee, when by
imposition of handes thou wert made presbyter) which
interpretation he borrowes from Saint Chrysost. Shal
Saint Paul himselfe determine it?2. Tim. 1. 6. In the second Tim
1. 6. (Stirre vp saith he the grace which is in thee by the
laying on of My hands) So that either Saint Paul was
himselfe that whole Presbyter 
                     〈◊〉
                  , as hauing in him (being
an Apostle, which Bishops also haue) all the fūctions
Eccl
                     •
                  siastical, as the Philosopher speaks of anima rationalis,
that it hath in it all the inferior faculties both sensitiue
and vegetatiue. Or at least he was principal in the
action, & without him it might not be done. Which

were it so, (yet Master Caluin
               Caluin. stands resolute that S.
Paul alone did it) it preuentes a third obiection taken
out of the 4.Iustit. lib. 4. c. 3. 
               Carthaginian Councell, where there is a
Canon that when a Bishop laies handes to giue Orders,
all the priestes present do withall lay their handes iuxta
manum Episcopi. True, First (iuxta manum) so that
the Bishops hand must necessarily and 
                  〈◊〉
                b
                  •
                on. Secondly
there is 
                  〈◊〉
                scripture a twofould 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                or
stretching forth of the hand, the first, extended to cō
                  secrate
and b
                     •
                  esse. So did the 
                  
                     •
                  a
                     •
                  ria
                     •
                  chs and priestes in
the ould testament: our Sauiour and his Apostles in
the new. The other, stretched out, ad testimo
                     •
                  um, for
a witnesse and assent.
               rod. 29. 1. The Bishops hand is the first, for
that blesseth and consecrateth, the pre
                     •
                  byters assisting do
with their handes 
                  〈◊〉
                and approue what hee doth.
How will that appeare? demonstratiuely, because if
there were an error in the ordination, as that a man, either
insufficient for learning or scandalous for life, or
otherwise Canonically impeached, were admitted
into Orders, the Bishop only was censured, the assisting
presbyters neuer called in question: whereof the examples
are infinite, and therefore the diuines haue very
well obserued out of that place,1. Tim. 5. 22. 1. Tim. 5. 22. (lay
handes hastily on no man) that the Bishop as hee hath manū
porrigendā
                he only hath authority to impose hāds, so
he hath also manū corrigendam (if as S. Basil speaketh)
he hath 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                hands too hasty and easy for admittance
into orders without triall and testimony, his
hand onely is to bee corrected. For 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                it is
thou Timothy (not the Presbyters) that communicatest
with their sinne whom thou so admittest. So then

since neither the error was imputed vnto the Clergie
assistant nor the Censure inflicted vpon them, the cō
               clusion
is found, therefore the authori
                  •••
                not committed
vnto them. Whereupon some, because if they
grant Imposition of handes; they see a superioritie must
needes follow,
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   Act. and Monument. haue therefore done as it is recorded
of a Painter in the time of Queene Mary; who hauing
drawne King Henry the 8. against the Queenes comming
through the Citty in Triumph, with a Bible in
his hand beeing checked by a great Counsailor of
State, and willed to wipe it out, because he would be
sure to leaue no part of the booke visible, hee wiped
out Bible & hand withall so they, with the superiority
haue remoued also the 
                  
                     ••
                  remony, insomuch that in
some Churches, as it is well knowne to your Maiesty
when they admit any into Orders they shake hāds
with them; as bidding them welcome into their cō
               pany,Gal. 2. 9.
grounding it vpon a Text of Scripture (to say no
more) wrongfully interpreted Gal. 2. 9. where it is
said that the 
                  •
               . chiefe Apostles gaue vnto Paul and Barnabas,
dextras societatis, the right han
                     •
                  s of fellowship, as if
they at that time had either giuen or confirmed vnto
them their function. Where, as the truth is, that
the Apostles finding the doctrine of Paul and Barnabas
to bee all one with theirs, and al
                  •
               o their preaching
very effectuall in conuerting many to the faith, thervpon
they entred a Couenant that Paul and Barnabas
should take the charge of the Gentiles, and they them
selues would be Apostles of the Circumcision, and vpon
this they strooke handes. But Paul and Ba
                     •
                  nabas Act.
13. 2.Act. 13. 2. receiued also imposition of handes at Antioch:
               
If before they came to the Apostles, (as some thinke)
then this shaking of handes (be it for ordination) was
superfluous: If after (as others more probably coniecture)
then were this defectiue. The truth is that the A
               postle
Paul receiued not his function by handes either
imposed or stro
                     •
                  ken, but by especiall reuelation, Gal.
1. 1. 2. The handes imposed Act. 13. were commendatiue,
the right handes stroken Gal. 1. were stipulatiue,
and therefore no meane Praesbyterial. The Professors of
Boem wish Imposition of handes in consecration to be
retained, as signifying 4 thinges fit for a Minister, for
some of them will haue Ceremonies to bee significant:
And so much shall serue for the first part. We come
now to the second that is to Correctiue iurisdiction,
which Saint Paul to Titus 1. 4.Tit. 1. 4. in one worde calleth

                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                
               a setting of things to rights. Correction iudicial
is either Correctiue or Coactiue, either restraining,
where there is too much forwardnes, or inforcing
where there is a slacknes, this the Rod, that the sworde
Apostolical.
               1. Cor. 4. 
                     〈◊〉
                  . 
               Veniam ad vos in virga? 1. Cor. 4. there is the
po
                  •
               . v
                     •
                  inam abscindantur qui perturbant vos, there is
the sword Apostolique, 
               
                  •
               al. 5. 12. Both these the Apostles
kept in their owne handes;Gal. 5. 12. as will appeare, for
example, in the Church of Corinth, where there were
many excellent Preachers, Presbyters, of eminent gifts,
yet none of them could proceede against the incestuous
offendor,
               1. Cor. 5. before they had receiued a Commission
from S. Paul, who beeing offended that they had
no sooner informed him, Iam iudic
                     ••
                  i (saith hee) as
soone as he heard it [I haue already decreed to deliuer
him to Satan] He did not say decreed that you shall deliuer

him: and therefore willeth them in the name of
Christ and his spirit (that his authoritie) being with thē
to execute that his decree, and deliuer him vp, whether,
by excommunication or corporall infliction, is not to
this purpose. But where they placed Bishops vnto thē
they transmited the same preeminence. Against an elder
receiue no accusation,
               
                  
                     •
                   Tim. 5. 29. saith Saint Paul to 
                  
                     •
                  imothy,
he saith not against a Co-Presbyter, as his equal, but he
speaketh vnto Timothy a Bishop as a Iudge of Presbyters
saith Epiphan.
               Epiph. lib. 
                     •
                  . In particular,Hae
                     •
                  . 75. if any of the Clergie, do 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               ,
preach any other doctrin thē that which
is 
                  •
               ound,1. Tim. 1. 4. 
               prohibe, command him not to do it. If any of
them do preach prophanely or bablingly,
                  
                     •
                  . Tim. 2. 16. 
               Cohibe, restraine
him, that their doctrine spread not to further
hurt. If Timothy might not thus censure alone (which
is the opinion of some) without the consent of the
bench, what needed that dreadful charge vnto him 1.
Tim. 5. 21.1. Tim. 5. 21. I charge thee before God, Christ Iesus, & his elect
Angels that thou proceede in this order, without preiudice
or partialitie (the 2 cu
                  •
                thro
                  •
               es of al vpright proceedings.)
For had hee bin to sit in the Consistory; only
to cap voices, himselfe hauing no Negat
                     •
                  ue, scarse a
casting voice, allotted him, what feare might bee either
of his preiudice to the cause, or partiality to the accused,
sithence that, as in Arithmet
                  •
               ke, the number of voices
do there ouer sway, and not the waight of reason.
Again of al Presbyters is expected the abi
                  ••
               ty,Tit. 
                     •
                  9. & to ech
of thē cōmitted the authority 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               
to censure gaine-
                  •
               aiers, but with force of argument,
not in place of iudgement.Tit. 2. 15. For vnto Titus alone, a Bishop,
was that 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                that vniuersal authority Tit.

2. 15.Tit. 2. 15. commended, both for pulpit & Consistory, [for I
haue lef
                     •
                   thee at Creta to reas esse thinges amisse] saith the
Apostle vnto him Tit. 1. 5.Tit. 1. 5. For particulars if any preach
otherwise then becomes him 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                it is thy
du
                  ••
                to put him to silence Tit. 1. 10.Ibid. vers. 10. And 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               
               reproue some of them sharpely▪
                as the word signifieth, euē
with cutting them short, that their vnround doctrine
infect no further. And againe, if an Heretique, after
the first and second admonition recant not 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                
               av
                     •
                  yde
him, that is excōmunicate him, Tit. 3. 10.Tit. 3. 10. To say
this authority was committed vnto either of them as
Euangelistes
            
            First, that is but a coniecture, for there is as good
proofe that Timothie was an Apostle as that he was an
Euangelist; for he that sayde vnto him, 2. Tim. 4. 5.2. Tim. 4. 5.
               Fac opus Euangelistae, Doe the worke of an Euangelist,
(which is the ground of that gift) the same sayd also
of him 1. Cor. 16. 10.1. Cor. 16. 10. 
               Operatur opus Domini sicut
ego, Hee worke the Lords worke euen as I; And we all
know Saint Paul was an Apostle.
            
            Secondly, the worke of an Euangelist ceased with
the function, as beeing but temporarie and personall,
but these things which Saint Paul inioynes to
Timothie, as a Bishop, must remaine in the Church gouernment,
to perpetuall succession. For so the Apostle,
1. Tim. 6. 14.1. Tim 6. 14. 
               chargeth him before God and his sonne
Christ that hee keepe these In
                     •
                  unctions without stayne, or
chang
                     •
                  , ill the comming of our Lord Iesus Christ. Which
ti
                     •
                  othie could not performe in his own persō, who
(as the Apostle knew) could not liue so long:Ambrose in 
                     〈…〉
                  . cap. 6. therfore
as S. Ambrose well obserueth, it is spoken to Timothie
               
a Bishop, as a precept for those that should succeed
him in the same function, much lesse were they imposed
vpon him as a Presbyter; for though the names
in Scripture be often confounded, yet the functions
are distinct, For in the 24. of Matthew, Verse 45.Mat. 24. 45.
               hee that was appointed Rector super familiam, Steward
of the houshold: vnder the chief Lord, was in the 49.
verse called 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                a fellow seruant with the rest of
the Meany: all seruants vnder one Lorde, but yet
some superior to other in Office. In the Ciuile state,
being more familiar vnto you, this distinction will
be more apparant. For the stile of Bar
                     •
                  n is a ti
                  •
               tle belonging
to men of great Honor, and of noble birth,
but yet communicable to men scarse of meane Worship,
Yea, euen in that honourable rank, both Earles, and
Lords are called Barons, yet their places and Dignities
vnequall: euery Earle being a Baron, but euery Baron
not an Earle. So in this case, both Bishops and
Priests, in respect of that generall seruice to our
Lord,1. Cor. 4
                     •
                  . the Dispensation of his word and mysteries, are
all Presbyters and fellow-Presbyters, but the stiles being
communicable the tearmes are not conuertible,
for euery Bishop is a Presbyter, but euery Presbyter is
not a Bishop. For S. Peter calleth himselfe a Presbyter.
1. Pet. 5. 1.1. Pet. 5. 1. and yet he was an Apostle, the communitie
of names confound not the offices. Neither shal
we euer read, that any of those things inioyned by
Paul to Timothie, were committed to Presbyters, either
to a singular person, or to a whole Colledge,
where there was not a Bishop. Wherevpon the very
same authoritie, both of Ordination and Iurisdiction,
               
the Churches succeeding reserued to their Bishops
onely. I maruaile, saith Hierom, that the Bishop of the
Diocesse wherein Vigilantius is a Presbyter doth not crush
that vnprofitable vessell with his Apostolique rod.
               Hierom. ad 
                     •
                  iparium. And it
is thy humilitie,
               Cyprian. ad Rogat. saith Saint Cyprian to Rogatianus a Byshop,
that thou wouldest complaine to me of the con
                     •
                  umelie
offered vnto thee by a Deacon, whereas thou mightest
pro Episcopatus tui vigore & Cathedrae authoritate, that
is, through the strength of thine office, as thou art a Byshop,
and the authoritie of thy Chayre, haue power sufficient
to reuenge thy selfe on him: And therefore willeth him

                  •
               hat if the Deacon doe still persist in that his malipert
cariage, he should either Deponere, or abstinere, Depose
him from his Ministerie, or suspend him at his pleasure.
And thus much of the Superioritie of Bishops ouer
their Clergie: the nature whereof, what it is you
see.
            Wee must nowe come to examine the authoritie,
whereon it is grounded, and that is, in these wordes,
Spiritus sanctus, the Holy Ghost, For his authoritie
runs through all the partes, as in the beginning I
told you. Of his immediate disignment, of any to
the place, we speake not yet, though 
                  •
               ome referre the
calling of Timothie, to his Bishopricke, vpon those
words,1. Tim. 1. 18. 
               [per Prophetiam] thereunto. Oecumenius vpon
that place,Oecumen. ibid infers that generall conclusion, that Bishops
were not made 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                
               pell-mell, at all aduentures,
but by the Commandement of the Holy Ghost; wee
speake of their appointment, by men indued with
the Holy spirit from aboue,Luc. 24. 49. that is, the Apostles, (for
euery ordinance Apostolick, wee take to be the action

of the Holy Ghost) In triall whereof we will follow
M. Beza.
               Ad tract. de diuersis grad. cap. 23. Surely, saith he, Si ab ipsis Apostolis profecta
esset &c. If I could finde this superioritie of a Bishop
ouer the rest of his Clergie, to haue proceeded from the Apostles,
I would not feare to attribute it Divinae in solidum
dispositioni, Wholly and fully to the diuine Institution;
               August. de bapt. contra Donat. ca. 24. lib. 4.
Let vs then ioyne that issue. Saint Augustine▪
                shall
beginne. That which the whole Church reteineth, and
no Councell hath first decreed, and was neuer al
                     •
                  red, must
be beleeued to be an Apostolicall ordinance. Now 
                  •
               or this
particular,Hier. ad Euag. Saint Hierom himselfe c
                  •
               nfesseth
                  •
               , that not
one Church onely, but the whole world decreed the
superioritie of Bishops, Vt vnus coeteris superpo
                     •
                  er
                     •
                  tur.
As for a Councell that first erected it, there is none.
The Canons,Can. Apost. vbique. which for the antiquitie of them, are
called Apostolorum Canones,
               Nicen. Con: 4. distinguish the
                  •
               . Degrees
as we now haue them. The Nicen Councel, which is
the first generall we haue in print extant,Can. 6. &c. 7. reckoneth
them in the same order, with the same prerogatiues,
and establisheth them to be continued according to
the ancient and former custome, with this short Aphorisme,

                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               . For alteration there was
none for 1500. yeeres together; vntill young Iosua
his emulation, enuying that some had the Key of
Knowledge,
               Numb. 11. 29 more then other, [Enuiest thou for my
sake?] ioyned with Corah his repining, that some
had the Key of power and Iurisdiction aboue others:
[You take too much vpon you,
               Numb. 16. 3. 
               Moses and Aaron.] I say,
not for 1500 yeeres did any Church alter that Gouernment
or opinion: perhaps a pedling Heretique
or two, The
                     •
                  al
                     •
                  s in the Church of Ierusalem, and Aerius
               
else-where, fancied vnto themselues a Paritie,
but their ground was Malecontentment, as Eusebius,
and Epiphanius both witnes,Epiphan. haeres. 75. because they could not
be made Bishops, which they earnestly affected. Egesippus
the ancienst Historian cited by Eusebius hath
branded Theblis,
               gesip. apud 
                     〈◊〉
                  . lib. 4. cap. 22. with a marke that will not out,
while there are bookes extant, viz. That the Church
of Ierusalem, remained no way infected with error
in so much that she was by men stiled a Virgin: the
first that corrupted her was Thebulis, because he
was not made Bishop: So that by Saint Augustines inference,
the Institution is Apostolicall, and therfore by
M. Beza his concession, Diuine. But this is perhaps
but an oblique and indirect proofe.
            Surely, we are no Arcadians, to fetch our Pedegree
from beyond the Moone: shall Histories of fact,
or Testimonies of the auncient, be our Heraldes for
record?Euseb. hist. 
               Eusebius, the most auncient of the Historiographers,
that wee haue,Eccles. 
                     •
                  par
                     ••
                  m for 300. yeeres succession
nameth the persons and calculateth the times of the
Bishops of foure principall Churches of the worlde
Ierusalem, Antioch, Rome, and Alexandria;
Socrates,
               Socrat. and Theodoret the rest,Theodoret. who lineally succeeded
the Apostles in those Sees, vntill the Councell of
Nice, who with 314. Bishops more subscribed vnto
that Generall Councill. And that which Eusebius witnesseth
of those foure,
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   lib. 4. ca. 63. the same doth Irenaeus, more
auncient then hee, by almost two hundred yeeres,
iustifie to bee the case of all the Churches in the
world, that the Bishops thē gouerning, could deriue
their succession from them, to whom the Apostles by

hand, deliuered the saide Churches, to gouerne in euery
place.August. ep. 42. 1. Which certeine successiue propagation,
Saint Augustine maketh the maine roote of
Christian societie:Tertul. de prescript. and Tertullian, the maine proofe
of true doctrine. And heere if I would seeme ambitious,
in heaping Authors, I might goe downeward
from Irenaeus, through the whole course of
the Fathers, delineating this succession, and thereby
trouble rather your patience, then mine owne
memorie.
            The best course therefore to determine this question,
in this short time allotted mee, will bee, as I
think, if we make him the vmper, whō they make our
Accuser, that is S. Hierom, whom Master Beza, with
others doe principally relie vpon.Pag. 145. in resp. ad Sarav. 
               Nam cui notior?
For who, saith Beza, was better acquainted with the Historie
of the age succeeding the Apostles, then Hierom?
Yes surely, a dozen more in print, of as great note
and truth, as hee; who all concord the Succession,
and Superioritie of Bishops, to bee Apostolicall. But
what sayth Hierom?
            
            First, hee will haue this same, Excelsiorem gradum,
of Bishops ouer the Clergie, to beginne in Alexandria,
               Hier ad euagr.
               à Marco Euangelista: Aster S. Marke the Euangelist
(for they would make the preposition to bee
exclusiue) as if in Saint Markes time, neither that
Prelacie was heard of, nor then els-where, but in
the Church of Alexandria onely. Well, could Bishops
goe no higher for their Superioritie, they need
not bee ashamed of their Progenie: for Saint
Marke dyed,Euseb. li. 1. cap. 24. and Anni
                     •
                  nus presently succeeded

him, sixe yeeres before the death of either Saint
Peter, or Saint Paul: thirtie fiue yeeres before the
death of Saint Iames the Apostle: fortie fiue yeeres
before Simon Cleophas, who was one of our Lordes
disciples, of whom we reade, Luke 24.Luke 24. Who was
Bishop of Ierusalem after Saint Iames: and therefore
made Bishop, because hee was our Lordes kinsman,
as Eusebius witnesseth.Euseb. li. 4. ca. 22. So, that this Superioritie,
(though it began, as they say, in the next Successor
to Saint Marke) was extant in the Church,
these Apostles viventibus, videntibus, approbantibus;
liuing, seeing, approouing it: (for silence argues,
if not an approbation, yet no dislike) But
Hierom confesseth, that Saint Marke himselfe, the
in
                  •
               erpreter of Saint Peter, (for the Gospel, which
beareth Saint Markes name, hee receiued from
Saint Peters owne mouth, as some write) was
the first Bishop of Alexandria.
               Hieron. p
                     •
                  o
                     •
                  em. in Euang. Matthei. Hieron. de scriptor. Eccles. in lacobi. And were there Bishoppes
onely in Alexandria? No, for Hierom also
witnesseth that Iames the iust, our Lordes brother,
was the first Bishop of Ierusalem, and so ordayned by
the Apostles, presently after our Lordes passion: yea,
Bishops doubtlesse, but not Superiors, ouer their brethren,
before that time which was after Saint Marke.
Ignatius,
               Hieron. in 
                     •
                  gnatio. who as Hierom himselfe recordeth, conuer
               
                  •
               ed
with the Apostles, and saw Christ in the flesh (by
good likely-hood, as some thinke, one of those fiue
hundred brethren, of whom Saint Paul, 1. Cor. 15.1. Cor. 15. 6. Ignat. ad Smyrn.
6. speaketh) Or, rather, as Ignatius of himselfe witnesseth,
euen then, when Christ sayde to his Disciples,
Handle mee and see, for a spirit hath not flesh

& bones &c, Luke 24. 
                  •
               9. The second Bishop of Antioch,
               Ignat. ad Antioch.
after Saint Peter, writeth to the An
                     •
                  iochians, for
amongst them hee was a Presbyter, to remember
Euodius their Bishop, who first receiued from the
Apostels, 
               
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                the Praelacie, and Superioritie
aboue vs:Idē ad Trall. for Episcopus est sacerdotum Princeps,
saith the same Father els-where. And afterwardes,
when himselfe came to bee Bishop of the same
Church (beeing ca
                  •
               yed to Rome to bee martyred
for his profession) hee writeth vnto the Pastors,
and Clergie of Antioch, that they would be diligent
in feeding the Flocke, committed vnto them, vntill
God did shewe vnto them,Ignat. ad Antiochen. 
               
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               ,
him that should rule ouer them,
               Idem ad sar. after his death. But
in his Epistles, ad Sarsenses, inioyning in particular
each order his subiection: Presbyters, be obedient to
your Bishop; Deacons, be subiect to your Presbyters:
and Lay-men to all. His conclusion is very patheticall,
My soule for theirs, who obserue this order, the
Lord will be alwayes with thē. This was blessed Ignatius,
to whom our Sauiour appeared, and spake in the
flesh. And Clemens of Alexandria, in a Storie that hee
rehearseth of S. Iohn, reporteth that the said Apostle,
after his returne from Pathmos,
               Euseb. lib. 3. cap. 23. in some places where
he came, made Bishops, and chose into the Clergie,
such as the Holy-Ghost thought fit: and vpon occasion
of a yong man, of whom he tooke especial liking,
turned vnto a Bishop, who was, as the story speketh,

                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                
               Superior, or set ouer them all, committed
the youth to his Custodie: which Bishop after his returne,
he called Caput illius Ecclesiae, the head of that

Church.
               Hieron. aduers. 
                     〈◊〉
                  . Yea Hierom himself acknowledgeth, that vnles
to the Bishop there be giuen Exors quaed
                     •
                  m & ab omnibus
emi
                     ••
                  ns potest as, an extraordinary & pe
                     •
                  reles preheminence
aboue the rest, tot essent schismata, quot sacerdotes,
there would be as many schismes as there are Preestes. And
this shall serue fo
                  •
                the first obiectiō out of Hierom. But
the second is that which they vrge most, for that seemeth
to strike home, namely, that this Maioritie of
Bishops came rather ex consue
                     •
                  udine Ecclesiae, by the
Churches custome, quam dominicae dispositionis veritate,
then by the truth of the Lordes ordinance. Some, I know
both Papists and Protestants,
               Hierō. in Tit. 1. are so angry with Hierom
for this, that they ranke him with Aerius in the number
of rank Heretikes, as maintaining, by this speech,
the Parity of ministers; A wrong to that Father
doubtles. For what Church meant he to whose custome
he ascribed it, the church in the Apostles times
or after? if in the Apostles times, shall wee thinke S.
Hierom wold fasten vpon them such a crime, as that
they would erect such an office contrarie or not consonant
vnto their Maisters prescript? And yet it is
certaine hee meant of that Church,
               Hieron. ibidē. for in the same
place shewing what occasioned this Preheminence
of one aboue the rest, he saith it began when the Divell
made that faction in the church, that one wold
say I am of Paul, and another I am of Apollos, a thirde I
am of Cephas, and an other I am of Christ, and this was
as appeareth 1. Cor. 1.1. Cor. 1. in the time and prime of the Apostles.
Yea indeede, Hierom is direct, that the suppressing
of schismes occasioned the first sourse and
erection of Bishops as the best remedy against them.

And when were schismes more rise then in the Apostles
times? There is no Church to whom Saint Paul
writeth an epistle but he complains of them. Where,
by the way, two thinges wee may obserue here-hence
by this occasion of Saint Hieroms speech.Cypr. ad Rogat.
First that of Saint Cyprian, that this maligning the
superiority of Bishops is an infallible note of Schismatikes.
For as you might know, that Demetrius and his
fellow Goldsmiths, by raising a tumult against Paule
were Dianaes tradesmen, because they foresaw if
Christ were preached,Act. 19. downe must Diana, and withal
their gaine: so may wee descrie who are inclined to
Faction by their spurning against this superiority, because
if Bishops bee raised, their Schismes must bee
scattered. Secondly, if aduancing of Bishops bee
the suppressing of Schismes (as their owne author
affirmeth) and Saint Paul prophesieth 1. Cor. 11.1. Cor. 11. 
               Oportet
haereses esse, that there must and will be heresies and
Schismes while the world standeth, then surely, it behoueth
your Maiestie (to whome the care of Church
and kingdome is committed) if you will haue Schismes
abandoned, to maintaine and continue this government
Episcopall: vnlesse, as it pleased you to
write to your most noble sonne, you wil retaine factions
in your kingdome,
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  . P
                     •
                  . 
                     •
                  2. as Socrates did his wife Zantippe,
to try your owne patience, and the Churches
constancie. But to answere the point, if this superioritie
came by a custome in the Apostles times, and
they, wee must thinke, did nothing derogatorie to
their Masters precept, why then should Hierom say it
came not by the truth of the Lords ordinance? Clemens

Alexandrinus, by a pretty distinction vpon that place
1. Cor. 
                  •
               .1. Cor. 
                     •
                  
                
               [yee are Gods husbandry] giueth mee a good
hint for a fit resolution. The Apostles, saith hee
manured the Church with a double tillage: there
was 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               ,Ioan. 
                     〈◊〉
                  . the first, that of the Euan.
Iohn. 20. Haec scripta sunt, direct written precepts which
our Lord had left them:1. Cor. 
                     〈…〉
                  
                the other, which Saint Paul
1. Cor. 11. calleth 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               , things vnwritē
                which they
either did, or spake as the times occasioned, and the
holy Ghost directed. If any thinke that this maketh
way to Popish traditions, vnwritten verities, It is no other
then Saint Pauls owne distinction of Praeceptum
and Concilium out of his owne practise. 1. Cor. 7. 6.
that hee spake some thinges by permission, some things
by precept.
               1. Cor. 7. 6. 
               This speake I, saith hee againe Verse 1
                  •
               . not
the Lord,
               Psalme 12. did Paul vtter any thing contrary, or not agreeing
to the Lorde his Maisters doctrine? No, but
perswading himselfe Verse fourtie,verse 40. 
               that hee also had
the spirit of God,
               vers. 25. 
               though I haue, saith hee Verse 25.
no commandement from the Lorde, yet I give this aduise.
So meaneth S. Hierom, that this Matority of Bishops
is that 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                that vnwritten husbandry whereof
Clemens speaketh, vz that there is no written precept
or expresse rule from Christ, but yet that it is an Apostolicall
tradition, and grew to be a custome euen then
in all Churches,
               I
                     •
                  enae. for so Irenaeus long before him calleth
it Traditionē Apostolicā toti mundo manifestā. Neither
doth this obiection out of Hierō
                make more against
the Priority of Bishops then against the obseruing
of the Lordes day, wherof that speech of Saint Hierom
               
may be as well, yea more truely verified, that it is rather
ex consuetudine Ecclesiae quam Doninicae dispositionis
veritate. That the seuenth day shou
                  •
               de bee kept holy
there is expresse scripture both afore the lawe vpon
the Creation,Gen. 2. Exod. 20. and in the lawe at the fourth commandement,
but where is there any place either in the
Gospels that our Sauiour comanded, or in the Acts
and Epistles that the Apostles ordained the alteration
of Sabatumin Dominicā, the first day to be sanctified
for the seuenth? In the first of the Reuelation it is once
named and called Dies Dominicus,
               Apoc. 1. which by all testimony
was not the seuenth day, and so in the ould
testamēt there is a day which David so intitl
                  •
                t
                  •
               ,Psalme. 118. 
               hic est
dies This is the Lords day, he hath made it, we will reioice
and be glad in it, and that by all assurance was not the
Sabboth. The truth therefore is, that the Church
finding the obseruation, but not the first ordinance
thereof, continued it to be kept, and accounted it as
an Apostolicall institution. And the very same is the
true sense of S. Hieroms speech in this point of praelacy,
sauing that the placing of Bishops is more apparant
in the epistles to Timothie and Titus: Otherwise hee
shoulde much haue forget himselfe,Herō. ad Ma
                     •
                  . for in his epis
                  •
               le
to Marcella confuting or rather contemning the errors
of Montanus, this he puts for one. With thē, saith
he, the Bishops are thrust into the third place, but with vs
(in the Christian orthodoxall Churches) Apostolorum
locum tenent Episcopi, The Bishops haue the Aposils room,
that is, the first place. Yea els-where he acknowledgeth
it to bee Dominica dispositio, The Lordes own ordinance,
though indirectly & obliquely, & that out of the old testamēt

1. alle
                     •
                  orically out of Ps. 45. wherin the Church
of Christ is rep
                  •
               elēted in the person of Salomōs Queen:
               Aug. in 
                     •
                  s. 44.
vpō those words, ver. 16. Prepatribus 
                     •
                  ati 
                     〈◊〉
                   tibi 
                     〈◊〉
                  ,
Let it not gree
                  •
               e thee, saith S. Austen that the 
                  〈…〉
               
not Peter & Paul, by whom thou wast bego
                  ••
               ē for o
                  •
               
thine own brood, a fatherhood is grown vnto thee: Insteed
of fathers, childrē are borne vnto thee: Quos 
                     〈…〉
                  
principes s
                     •
                  per omnē 
                  
                     •
                  errā,
               
                  
                     •••
                  ron. ibid. that is, saith S. Hierō, The Gospe
                     •
                  
being spred through all quarters of the world, in them
Bishops are placed rulers of the Church. Secondly, by cōparis
                     •
                  n,
(wherein he plain
                  •
               ly 
                  〈…〉
                what he meant
by those wordes,
                  
                     〈…〉
                  
                
               the Custome of the Church: namely
an Apostolike ordinance) Vt Sc
                     •
                  amus saith he Apostolicas
traditiones sumptas de vete
                     •
                  i testamento &c. That
we may know how the Apostles grounded their
traditions, or ordinance vpon the old Testament, and
from thence fetcht their Modele, this is one particular,
That which Aaron, his sonnes and Leuites were in
the Temple: the very same let Bishops, Presbyters, and
Deacōs challenge in the Church to thē sclues. T
                  •
               is were
sufficiēt, if we should rest here: but neither S. Hierom,
not they must so passe, as if it were not directly the
Lords owne institution. For Spiritus sanctus, not onely
by the Apostles, who had receiued him in great measure,
but euen by Christ himselfe, who, Ioh. 3▪
               
                  
                     •
                  oh. 3. was
indued with the spirit without measure, ordained this
Superioritie, if we will credite S. Hierom his ancients
by many yeeres. S Cypri. Let the Deacons remember,
that Apostolos,
               Cyp
                     •
                  . ad rogat. 
               id est. Episc
                     •
                  pos Do
                     •
                  inu ipse eleger
                     •
                  t:
The Lord himselfe choose Apostles, that is Bishops; but the
Apostle after our Sauior his ascention, choose Deacons to

serue them at the Altar, &c. For, that the Apostles were
Bishops, besides the rest of the Fathers, Hierom himselfe
by allusion confesseth. Non om
                     •
                  es Episcopi, Episcop
                     •
                  s
                     ••
                  t,
               Hieron. ad 
                     •
                  liod.
               All that are in the place, and carry the name of
Bish
                     •
                  ps, are not Bishops Atte
                     •
                  de 
                     •
                  etrum, sed & 
                     〈◊〉
                  
consider; Looke vpon Peter, but withall behold Iudas.
For they whom we now call Bishops,
               Theodo
                     •
                  . in 
                     •
                  hilip. 1. were then called
Apostles. saith Theod. Yea, though they all were
silent in that point, the Holy g
                     •
                  ost will confirme it;
who speaking of Matthi
                     •
                  s choise into Iudas his
roome in expresse termes calleth Apostolatum Episcopatum,
Actes 1. 20.Acts. 1. 20
                     •
                   
                  
                     •
                  sal. 109. 
               
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                out
of the Psa. 109. Let another take his Bishopship. Saint
Hilary with many of the Fathers 
               
                  •
               f
                  •
               irme, that our
Saui
                     •
                  r in direct words appointed this superioritie Episcopall
ouer their brethren, in that place and part of
his last Sermon,Hilar. in Math. 24. Mat. 24. 45. Who is a faithfull and wise
seruant quem Dominus constituet [super familiam?] whō
the Lorde shall make ruler 
                     •
                  uer his houshold? But that,
which is in the Apocalyps, is 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                admits no
contradiction, where our Lord himselfe, willeth S.
Iohn to write vnto the 7. Angels of the 7. Churches.
Wherin 3. things are very worthy obseruatiō. First,
he calleth them Angels, there is their eminence, both
for dignitie, and integirtie, Secondly, they had the
tryall, both for proofe, and reproofe of their Clergie
Apoc. 2. 2. [Thou hast examined them which professe
themselues Apostles, and are not] there is their preeminence
for iurisdiction ouer their brethren.Apoc. 
                     •
                  . 1. 2. 5 Thirdly,
the perpetu
                     •
                  tie of their place during life: Else, what need
that threat, ver
                  •
               e 5? I will remo
                     •
                  ue thy Candlestick. For

had he but st
                  •
               ied a month, or a yeer, the Presbytery
would haue turned him out of his socket, when his
turne was expired.Instit. lib. 4. cs. 
                     •
                   Sect. 1. But as with M. Beza we begun, so
will we cōclude al with M. Caluin, who d
                  •
               rects vs, for
the finding out of Church gouermēt according to the
diuine Institutiō, vnto veterē Ecclesiā, the anciēt Church,
wherin we shall see, Imaginē quanaā, a certain representa
                     •
                  ion
thereof. For howsoeuer, saith he, the Bishops of
that time made some Canons exorbitant frō Scripture,
yet with such caution, did they constitute their
Discipline vt facile videas ni
                     •
                  il 
                     •
                  ere hac parte ha
                     •
                  uisse a
verbo Dei alienū: that it may easi
                     •
                  y appeare nothing therin
almost to differ frō the writtē word. For this particular in
hand,Sect. 
                     •
                  . in the next Paragraph, he exēplifieth the forme
therof. Out of their nūber of Presbyters, Pas
                     •
                  ors, & Doctors
in euery city, they chose one to be the chief, whō
they entituled a Bishop, (for which he adds a reasō) Ne
ex 
                     •
                  qualitate, vt fier
                     •
                   solet, dissidia nas
                     •
                  erentur. And
lest you should think (as some do) this Bishop to be
but a Parsō
                of a Congrega
                     •
                  iō,
               
                  
                     〈◊〉
                  . he proceedeth to tell vs,
that to euery such cit
                     •
                  e attributa erat certa regio, an whole
territory or Country was annexed, the villages wherof,
set their Pastors that fed them from the Cathedrall
Church, or Colledge of Presbyters, whereof the Bishop
was chiefe, and where he sate. A liuely Idea thereof
still remaineth with vs in the Churches of the olde
fundation. And this makes way to the partes ensuing,
namely, first [Posuit] their Cathedrall Seat: and
Secondly [In quo] their Di
                     •
                  cesan iurisdiction But I
feare, I haue beene too troublesome already, and
therefore will here stay my course.
            
               
God, for his great mercies sake, grant that
the wordes which haue beene spoken,
may turne to his glory, and our Instruction
in Christ Iesu, To whom
with the Father, and the
Holy Ghost, &c.
            FINIS.
            
         
      
   