
      
         
            
            
            
            
            SEAVEN Helpes to Heauen. Shewing

                  1. How to auoid the Curſe.
                  2. How to beare the Croſſe.
                  3. How to build the Conſciencè.
                  4. How with Moſes to ſee Canaan.
                  
                  5. Simeons dying Song, directing to liue holily and dye happily.
                  6. Comforts for Chriſtians againſt diſtreſſes in Life, and feare of Death.
                  7. Feruent Prayers, to beare ſickneſſe patiently, and dye preparedly.
               
            
            The ſecond EDITION: much enlarged by Steuen Ierome, late Preacher at S. Brides.
            
            Seene and allowed.
            
               IOB 14.14.
All the dayes of my appointed time will I waite till my change come.
            Naſcentes morimur, finiſ
                  
                     
                  
                  que
                ab origine pendet.
            LONDON: Printed for Roger Iackson, and are to be ſolde at his Shop, neare to the Conduit in Fleetſheete. 1614.
         
         
            
            
            TO THE RIGHT HONOVRABLE, MY HONOVrable good Lord, RALPHE, Lord Eure, Baron of Malton and Wytton, and Lord Preſident of his Maieſties Honourable Councell, within the Principalitie of Wales, and the Marches of the ſame: all Bleſſings be multiplyed temporall, and Graces ſpirituall.
            
               MY Honourable good Lord, it was once an Axiome in the Ethnicke Schooles To a hominis vita mortis meditatio., that the whole life of a wiſe man ſhould be a continuall meditation of Death; which, as it was a Principle amongſt them, ſo it was the practiſe, not onely of the Saints and Seruants of GOD, the auncient Patriarkes, Primitiue Chriſtians, retyred Hermites, mortified Anchorites, and zealous profeſſors of Religion: but euen of the wiſeſt and worthieſt of the Heathens themſelues. The euidence of which will eaſily appeare to thoſe that are ſtudious in the Word diuine, or conuerſant in Authors Eccleſiaſticall or humane. Let vs reflect vpon Gen. ch. 1. ch. 2. ch. 3.
                
               Adam, the firſt man, as his name ſignifying Red earth; the Command giuen him, mixt with the curſe of tilling the earth; his Sinne, the cauſe of the diſſolution of that part which was earth; his Garments, made of the skins of dead Beaſts, cloathing his members which were (like the reſt of the Creatures) nought but earth;

his Sickeneſſe, and Diſtempers, the fruits of his ſinne, and preambles of his death; Gods Statute-Law, that he ſhould returne to his earth, tolde him truely (contrary to the S
                  •
               rpent and the Woman) that he was a ſinfull man, and therefore mortall: ſo, it ſeemes theſe remembrancers not onely occaſioned, but cauſed his meditation of his death. For, though he called his eldeſt Sonne Caine 
               
                  Gen. 4.1.2, or Poſſeſſion, yet he called his younger Sonne Abel, or Vanitie; as being now experienced and ſchooled in that miſery in life, and mortalitie in death, which was incident to him and all his originally and actually ſinning ſeede 
                  Gen. 3.19.
            In this Meditation to omit Noah the worlds reſtorer; Sem, or Methuſha
                     •
                  em, that Prince of peace; Enoch, that walked with GOD, with the reſt; Abraham, the Father of faithfull men, imitated Adam the Father of men, who in his ſuite for Sodome, confeſſed himſelfe to be but duſt and aſhes 
               
                  Gen. 18.17.; Iſaack, who after the death of his Mother Sarah, went out to meditate, no doubt, as of her death, ſo of his owne 
                  Gen. 24 63; Iacob, that in his greateſt croſſe & humiliation, thinkes how his gray head ſhould be brought to his graue 
                  Gen. 37.35; and in the height of his earthly ioy and contentation, ſpeakes from the abundance of his heart, of the few and euill dayes of his Pilgrimage
               
                  Gen. 47 9.; Ioſeph, tha
                  •
                amongſt all his honours in Aegypt, thinkes and tels 
                  Gen. 50 25 of the carrying his dead bones into Canaan; ſo, the reſt had their thoughts mortified from the world, and fixed on their mortalitie: which appeares as by other proofes, ſo by two demonſtrations in their Buildings in their Buyings. The firſt being not ſeiled houſes or gorgeous Pallaces, (like Nabuchadnezzars Babell. Nim
                     •
                  ods Tower, or Cyrus his Houſe) but ſilly Tents
                  Gen. 18 9, like Shepheards Cottages, or Boothes in a Faire, or Lodges in the Campes ſuch as the Zwitzards vſe, ready euery inſtant for remouall. The ſecond being onely limited in a burying place for their dead: for, that is the greateſt purchaſe that euer wee reade any of the

Patriarkes made 
                  Gen. 23.4 5., and the poſſeſſions which they moſt frequently mention.
            What ſhould I mention theſe Fathers that liued vnder the Law; Ioſhuah the ſonne of Nun, the Seruant of the LORD; faithfull Caleb; Aaron the Lords high Prieſt; or Moſes himſelfe, the greateſt of Legall Prophets, who mindefull of his mortalitie, euen before the Lord tolde him (as hee did Ezekias) that hee ſhould dye, made that Prayer, which the Fathers ſay the people of GOD vſed daily as a forme of Prayer, pathetically inſerting this Petition 
                  Pſal. 90.12, that God would ſo teach them to number their dayes, that they might apply their hearts to wiſedome: the reſt ſucceeding ſympathizing in the like thoughts? Iob wayting till his changing ſhould come 
                  Iob 10.14; Dauid making no more reckoning of himſelfe then of a Pilgrime, and ſtranger here amongſt men, ſummoning others alſo to the conſideration of their vncertaine condition, and certaine end 
                  Pſal. 120.3. Pſal. 49.1.2.3..
            I might extend the line of this vnlimited practiſe from the Patriarkes to the Prophets, from the Prophets to the Apoſtles. Paul as oft deſires, as hee deliberates of his diſſolution 
                  Phil. 2.23: Peter counts his continuance here but as an abode in a Tabernacle 2 Pet. 1.3. Reflect backe to Chriſts Diſciples: hee no ſooner ſpeakes of the death of Lazarus, but their thoughts worke vpon dying with him 
                  Iohn 11.15.16.; nay, CHRIST himſelfe as moſt frequently hee talkes and diſcourſeth of his death in the Goſpell, ſo in that Transfiguration of his 
                  Mat. 17. v. 4. v. 9., the reflection and Idea of his Glorification, to ſtrengthen his Diſciples in their dying meditations, hee not onely tels of his owne death when he comes from the Mount, but euen in the Mount there appeares two dead men with him, Moſes and Elias. And, with the reſt, here old Simeon, the ſubiect which in all obſequious dutie, ſubmiſly I preſent to your Honour, as deſiring your Honourable patronizing, and deſeruing your holy practiſe, euen when hee had in his armes the Lord of Life, ſeeing Canaan with Moſes 
               
                  Deut. 32.49., and

the Heauens open, with Steuen 
               
                  Act. 7.56, to receiue his flitting ſoule, as Abrahams boſome did Lazarus 
               
                  Luke. 16.22., thinking of his death and diſſolution to his duſt, hee ſings that truely Cygnean and Swan-like ſong recorded Luke 2.29. Which Song I haue diuided into his parts, and according to thoſe talents and parts which Grace and Nature hath lent mee, haue deſcanted vpon, by Illuſtration, Explication, and Application, to our ſecure, ſenſuall, and ſinfull times: wherein I haue reuealed to the world, what GOD hath reuealed vnto mee by all meanes vſed, ſpeculatiue, and practicall, from Reading, Study, Meditation, Conference with the Learned, and Reference of the Labours of approued Authors, both teſtimonially and exemplarily, to the ſacred Cannon of the Orthodoxe Truth; but principally from that young, yet true experience, which GOD hath taught mee by obſeruing (as a Phyſitian his Patients) the ſeuerall carriages and conditions of diuers men, in their healths, ſickneſſes, liues and deaths, occaſioned by thoſe frequent viſitations of the ſicke; which, by reaſon of my place, I vſed theſe laſt yeeres, in a great and populous Pariſh: in which particulars the ſearcher of the heart and reynes, and the intelligencer of all Spirits, euen the Father of Spirits, knowes that I haue not aymed at any baſe, ſeruile or ſiniſter ends, as gaine, profit, prayſe, neyther am fed with any ſuch ayerie and froathy conceits, being ſo conſcious to mine owne imperfections, that I haue been by the importunities of others, rather paſſiue then actiue in this kinde, as is well knowne to ſome who are acquainted with my, more then Fabritius-like, lingring, euen to the preiudice of the Printer, who expected and prepared the Preſſe for mee much ſooner: but my onely end and ayme is Gods glory, his Churches good, conuiction of the World of Sinne, conuerſion of the Wicked from ſinne, confirmation of the Weake in grace, diſcharge of my Dutie in my generall and ſpeciall Calling, furthering mine owne Account in my particular

and generall Iudgement, deſiring, and with all the powers and parts of ſoule and body endeuouring (as I purpoſed and propoſed betwixt GOD and my owne ſoule, in my firſt ingreſſe into this ſacred Function) to imploy my Talents to my Maſters beſt aduantage, painfully and gainefully as I could, ſo farre as a wearyed (if not weakened body,) would hold any proportion with a willing ſoule. Further good, further gaine then theſe, in theſe I deſire not, I require not, beſides ſatisfaction to mine owne ſoule, and comfort in my conſcience, in deliuering in this Tractate, the very Image and Idea of mine owne thoughts, which as conſtantly as vehemently worke vpon this ſad and ſable ſubiect of Death, euery day more and more occaſioned by the preparatiues to it, and ſummons of it, the croſſes of life, chiefely from the diſcouragements and diſcomforts of an vngratefull and vngratious world, in that part of my life, which is eyther Morrall or Miniſteriall, concerning my Perſon or Profeſſion. 2. In reſpect of others, from the obligation of loue, I deſire to lend the beſt light that is in mee (being originally fetcht from the word) to lead them thorow the darke wilderneſſe of the world, euen in the very ſhadow of death, to their Canaan, ſhewing all along in this Paſſage and Pilgrimage, to the weake and willing Chriſtian, the Amalekites, and the Amorites, &c. the World, with her warres, weapons, horrours, terrours, breuitie, miſerie, vanitie; fitting them to fight, and incouraging them to their deſired reſt, by meditating of death, and preparation for death.
            Which points and parts, with their ſeuerall adiuncts, as they are penned and publiſhed for the behoofe and benefit of all in generall, ſo more ſpecially (as in my firſt deſignes and deſires I did both pretend and intend) in all dutious and deuoted affection, I humbly recommend them vnto your Lordſhips peruſall, protection, and practiſe, and that for ſundry and weighty Motiues.
            Firſt, in reſpect of the ſubiect here intreated of, which

is not light and triuiall, ſuch as Virgils Gnat, Eraſmus his Mori
                     •
                  , or commendation of Folly, Sir Thomas Moores Eutopia, or the generous Sidney's Arcadia, or ſuch as Lucians Flie, Apuleius his Golden Aſſe, Plutarkes Gryllus, &c. nor ſuch friuolous and licentious ſtuffe as our Poets and Poetaſters, Comedians, and Pamphleters, ſtaine ſo much Paper withall, and adulterate and defile the minds of ſo many: but the ſubiect is graue, ſad, waighty, ponderous, euen that which is the ſuburbs eyther of heauen or hell, the Prologue to euerlaſting ſollace or ſorrow, as it is good or euill, euen Death, worthy your Honours Grauitie, Graces, Yeeres, Place and Iudgement; beſeeming your moſt retyred Meditations, ſincereſt Thoughts, greateſt Priuacies, and deuouteſt Soliloquies; yea, euen in the confluence of theſe earthly Honours, and Bleſſings, which you haue receiued from your King, your Country, your late happy Eſpouſals, &c. euen as Ioſeph of Arimathia made his Sepulcher in his Garden; as the Heathen Emperours were wont to be crowned amongſt the ſepulchers of the dead, as the Nobles of Aegypt were wont to banquet, beholding the Anatomie of Death: as King Agathocles was wont to drinke wine out of a Cruize of earth: as Philip of Macedons eares were euery morning ſaluted that hee was mortall: as S. Ieromes thoughts were euery houre poſſeſt with that imaginary ſound; Ariſe you dead and come to Iudgement; that ſo with theſe thinking of Death, amidſt your earthly Honours you ſhould ſo moderate or mortifie all earthly deſires and delights, that liuing holily, dying happily, you ſhall be rightly Noble in life and death, with God and man.
            Secondly, in reſpect of the ſympathie and proportion betwixt your Honour, and thoſe Heroes, Moſes, and old Simeon; the one a Magiſtrate, the other a Miniſter, both Prophets, both great, both good, both truely Noble, (like thoſe Beraeans x,) in the beſt and new birth: the one walking with God, and comming in as

neare priuacie and familiaritie with GOD, as euer did meere mortall man 
                  Acts 17.11. Heb. 3.2.5.; the ſecond a man venerable amongſt the Iewes, called Simeon the righteous 
               
                  Luke 2.25, fearing God, repleniſhed with the Spirit of God, fellow-Diſciple with that great Ionathan, to that famous Hillel
               Zanc. de ſacr. Scrip., of whom euen their owne Rabbies haue writ, and they belieuedSee the Iewes Talmud in the Treatiſe Iomach, cap. Tereph B
                        •
                     
                     calphi.
               , that the Diſciples of Hillel ſhould neuer faile, till Chriſt were come: in which Simeon the ſpirit of the great Synagogue vtterly failing and ceaſing, as is vrged againſt them 
                  See Morneyes trueneſſe of Religion. Pag. 500.
               , it is an euident ſigne both that our and their Meſſias is come, which they deny; as alſo that God doth vtterly abhorre that Synagogue and Sanctuary which they condole. Now, both theſe holy parallels (as propounded, and in ſome meaſure expounded, in their perſons, in their practiſe) I by theſe Preſents propoſe as Patternes worthy your Lordſhips Imitation and vertuous Aemulation, liuing and dying; as your Honour is a ſhining Preſident to others (euen of your place,) of Wiſedome, Iuſtice, Clemencie, Sinceritie, Moderation, Affabilitie, and other Vertues both Morrall and Chriſtian.
            Thirdly, this poore Orphan of my Intellectuall powers, and firſt mentall Childe as it were of my Vnderſtanding part, wrapt in theſe ſhedules and ſheetes (which Trauell and Time, as the Mother and the Midwife haue brought to light) in a dumbe and ſilent Oratorie, ſeemes to call your Lordſhip Patrone, both in Dutie and Deſire, of Right and of Neceſſitie: for hauing (as its inchoation in the Citie) ſo continuation and perfection in that place of the Country,M
                     •
                  lton in Yorkeſhire. where I my ſelfe had my firſt breathing, beginning, production and education, euen within the confines of your owne territories: to whom doth it owe as due, his firſt dutie of Homage and Fealtie, but to your Lordſhip? Beſides, it being ſtrayed from mee (whither and to whom GOD knowes) being as Wafe and Straife, to whom belongs it but to the Lord of the ſoile? Neyther doth it leſſe incline

to your Honour in neceſſitie, leaſt it be abaſed and abuſed of the iniurious world, in the nonage and minoritie; leaſt it be torne and rent with Doegs, or Dogs like Euripides; leaſt it be poyſoned and enuenomed with the black and Theonine teeth of Enuie,Dente Thae
                     •
                  ino. Ignorance, Aemulation, or their Daughter Detraction, Monſters that I haue alwayes fought withall in humane ſhapes, as Paul did with Beaſts at Epheſus: therefore leaſt ſome Flyes buzze, ſome Snakes ſting, ſome Crittiques carpe, and Cynickes ſcoffe; leaſt it finde his Hieronomaſtix (as Homer found his Homer
                     •
                  maſtix, and Virgil his 
                  •
               
               
                  
                     •
                  neidomaſtix) it appeales not onely to your Honourable, but Learned and iudicious p
                  •
               otection.
            Fourthly, and eſpecially, that I might at laſt accompliſh not the leaſt of my earthly deſires, to ſhew my ſelfe in ſome meaſure gratefull to your Lordſhip, for ſo many and manifold a
                  •
               cumulated fauours, euen to my deſires, exceeding my deſarts: from whom, and from whoſe Honourable Houſe, as primarily from God, ſo inſtrumentally (next vnto my King, from whom I draw the common ayre; my Parents, from whom I had my being; the Vniuerſitie, my Mother, and Tutors, from whom I had my education and well-being; beſides thoſe that are my ſelfe and from my ſelfe in my Familie,) as I know I haue receiued moſt good, ſo I acknowledge my ſelfe to be moſt oblieged for that good: not onely participating in thoſe generall and common fauours with my friends and bloud, but in ſpeciall reflecting vpon thoſe by whoſe meanes I was firſt furniſhed with meanes in the Miniſterie, competent and certaine, vnder the ſhadowes of whoſe wings I haue been protected, by whoſe Graces I haue beene countenanced; by whoſe countenance encouraged; nay, by whoſe very counſels I haue beene directed in my beſt courſes in my calling: and laſtly, by whoſe largeſſe I haue beene prouided for, not onely for the preſent, but with a free donatiue for the future. For all which fauours, if I ſhould not thinke my

ſelfe as much indeared and indebted as Virgil to his Auguſtus, Horace to his M
                     •
                  c
                     •
                  nas, Varro to his Aſinius Pollio, Cicero to his Pomponius Atticus, Oppian to his Anthome, Euripides to his Archilaus: or (to leaue Heatheniſh Parallels) as a Preacher can be to his Patrone; I ſhould ſhew my ſelfe as Viperouſly vngratefull as the continuation of theſe fauours is ſubmiſly deſired. Accept therefore, Right Honourable, and in my heart, truely honoured Mecaenas, this Rapſodicall poore Paper preſent, this Perſian gift, as an argument of my vndoubted and redoubled Loue and Dutie to you and yours, my much reſpected Lady, your Honourable Coniugall Yoake-fellow; my Honourable Fauorites, Sr. William Eurie, together with his no leſſe wiſe then religious Lady, with my vnfayned Prayers to the God of Heauen, for the continuation and augmentation of all Bleſſings temporall and ſpirituall, with accumulation of all Graces externall, internall and eternall, vpon your Honours, and vpon thoſe pleaſant and fruitfull Oliue branches, the hopefull Honours of the Houſe of the Euries, in all humilitie I take my leaue, ſubmiſly reſting in all duties to be commanded,
            
               Old Malton. 
                  
                     March 10.
                
               
                  Your Lordſhips truely deuoted Chapleine, STEVEN IEROME,
            
         
         
            
            To the Readers: chiefely, his late Auditors at S. Brides in London.
            
            
               CHriſtian Friends, whom I loue vnfainedly, in truth, and for the Truth, as I haue publiſhed this myrrhour of dying Moſes, and Song of holy Simeon, for the good of Gods Church in generall (to whom I haue deuoted my ſelfe, my life, my labours) ſo in my reſerued thoughts, more peculiarly, I tender and preſent it vnto you, my late Auditors, aboue the reſt. Firſt, as your due by right, being ſome few Gleanings after the Harueſt, and ſome few Grapes of the Ʋintage of my Miniſtery amongst you, or more plainely and properly the flowers of ſome Funerall Sermons, occaſionedly preached, now printed for you. Secondly, that you might receiue by this ſingle and ſimple labor a double benefit, by a redoubled reflexion vpon your vnderſtandings, memories and affections; as through the organ of the eare, by hearing, ſo of the eye, by reading: both which, Philoſophie cals Senſus doctrinae, the ſenſes of learning. For which reſpect I haue turned my tongue into a penne, and the geſture of a liuing man into a dead letter, writing the ſame things with Peter, as Paul ſpoke twiſe the ſame words. Which penning, though in reſpect of preaching, it be but as a painted fire, to the powerfull Element; as the dead portraiture,

to the liuing perſon; like the dead corps, to fighting Hector, yet the ſame things red to thoſe that before heard them, haue the place of the Moone, at leaſt to enlighten the brain, though Hearing, the power of the Sunne to heate the heart. Beſides that, you may act the noble Beraeans part the better, in trying the ſpirits; more retentiuely, and deliberately examining the Truth, then infirme and weake memories could conueniently from a voluble tongue. Thirdly, they are as deſiredly ſo deſeruedly yours, euen as my ſelfe was, with my labours, by mutuall conſent: and therefore I ſend you onely backe thoſe Exerciſes which you haue payed for: and withall (in my occaſioned corporeall abſence) the preſence of my ſpirit, the pledge of my heart, the argument of my well-wiſhes, and conſtant deſires towards you, an Epiſtle of that zealous affection which I iuſtly beare you, a teſtimonie of my gratefull remembrance of all thoſe true effects of your Chriſtian loue towards me: the anſwering of which loue is not the leaſt of my earthly deſires. As a true ſeale whereof, I ſend you this poore Paper-preſent, deſiring your acceptance, as of the gift, ſo chiefely of the heart of the giuer. Good it may doe you, if God concurre with his grace and his ſpirit; weake meanes may worke Mortification, euen the Cockes crowing may awaken Peter: hurt it can doe none, vnleſſe accidentally the fault be in your ſelues; euen as to ſome the Word it ſelfe and the Sacraments, with all holy things, are the ſauour of death; euen as meates and medicines to a weake

ſtomacke and diſtempered body, turne to diſeaſes and Anguors, by reaſon of vicious humours.
            To giue you a fore-taſte and reliſh of what you ſhall further finde in theſe vnited Treatiſes, the chiefe marke that I ayme at, is (after the patterne of two myrrours of men; the one, the Pronouncer of the Law, the other a Trumpe of the Goſpell,) to teach you how to dye as well as willingly. A Leſſon which the wiſeſt amongst the Heathens, euen their Sages, Philoſophers, and Gymnoſophiſts; nay, many learned Scribes, Diſputants, and great Rabbies amongst Chriſtians, eyther neuer knew preecptorily, or forgot to pr
                  •
               ctiſe, as their Tragicall ends (ſome whereof I haue exemplified) doe demonſtrate. A point taught onely in the Theorie, in the Schoole of Chriſt to his Diſciples, his docible Simeons; wrought in the practicke part by his ſpirit▪ in the hearts of the Saints of Sion.
            Further, I haue let you ſee your owne faces in two examplary Glaſſes, what you ought to be, euen Gods Seruants, righteous with m
                  •
               n, religious with your God, that ſo your worke may receiue the reward, euen true beatitude, the ſoueraigne good. Labouring moreouer ſo to waſh the foule ſpots and 
                  •
               ſp
                  ••
               ſions of your ſinne-ſoyled ſoules, that you may appeare beautifull and gracious, as Heſter to A
                     ••
                  ne
                     ••
                  s, when Death Gods Purſeuant fetcheth you to ſtand before the King of Kings: being not defectiue, (at leaſt in deſire and endeauour) to lay before you the true exemplary forme and perfect model
                  •
                how to liue holily, ſo to die happily.
            
               What I haue done further thouſands will iudge, I neyther prayſe nor diſprayſe mine owne doings, a Heatheniſh Maſter tels mee, Ariſtotle apud Val. Max. lib. 7. c. 2.
                the one were vanitie, the other folly: onely I may teſtifie thus much truely, that I haue not beene penurious in paynes. For, ſince I vndertooke this taske, in as many weekes as Virgils Poems yeeres, I haue poliſhed it, as I could, (as the Beare her Whelps by licking) pervſing ſome Authors for this purpoſe, drinking deeply at their Wels, where I thought the waters ſweet, decking this for Gods Iſraell, with Aegiptian Iewels, euen ſome Heatheniſh Illuſtrations, as is lawfull and laudible in this kinde.
            For the manner of penning, you haue my good will, if not skill in cooking what is catered; if I adde ſometimes ſowre Sauce, let it reliſh the better with you, what is vntoothſome to a fleſhly palate, will proue wholeſome to a ſound ſoule. For my words, I haue not beene very curious though cautelous, God and Nature haue adminiſtred them to my Pen, as to my Tongue, without martyring my ſelfe about them: if I haue erred, it is rather on the right hand then the left, in the exceſſe then defect, (as ſome haue taxed the one in Oſorius; others, the other in Lipſius) rather chuſing to flow and ouerflow (as Tully once did, before Athens brought him within his banckes) that I may be intelligible in expreſſing the notions of my ſoule, then with an affected conciſe Lipſian and Laconian breuitie to be obſcure, as is ſaid of Ariſtotle, Theophraſtus and others, who for their ſtiles are ſaid to write to torment their

Readers; I haue laboured to giue a good garment, to a good body; to clothe a good ſubiect in words fitted, not affected.
            For the matter; you haue here not what Sathan ſhewed Chriſt, the World with her glory and her pompe: but a Map of mans Miſerie, a Modell of his Mortalitie, of the Worlds Vanitie, Lifes Breuitie, ſo brittle, ſo briefe, ſo ſhort, ſo certainely vncertaine in his flitting, in its fading, that the Word intitles our life in this world, a Pilgrimage, Gen. 47.9. a Flower, Eſa. 40.7. a Smoke, Pſal. 102.3. a Weauers ſhittle, Iob 7.6. a Houſe of clay, a Shepheards Tent, Iob 4.19. Eſay 38.12. a Shadow Iob. 8.9. a Dreame, Iob 20.8. Vanitie, nay, Nothing, Pſal. 39.5. All which points, with ſundry moe, I haue according to my Talent, laid open at the full, with ſundry incouragements, euery where inſerted againſt ſuch feares as the thoughts of theſe things naturally poſſeſſe men withall.
            It was my purpoſe alſo to haue added ſome comforts, as againſt the feare of death naturall, ſo of death ſpirituall and eternall, in the corroberation of the weake Chriſtian againſt Sathan, the wounds of Conſcience, and terrours of his owne Soule: but the length of theſe Lines, already extended beyond their propounded limits, ioyned with weakneſſe of body, cauſe me to omit or pretermit this, till ſome other occaſion; where I ſhall, if it be requiſit, reueale what I know in this practicall part of Diuinitie, in the meane ſpace I referre you to draw cooling waters from thoſe Springs of Iſrael, to whom the Lord

hath giuen the tongue of the Learned, to ſpeake a word to him that is weary, in due ſeaſon; in peruſing the Workes of the worthy Perkins, D. Sparkes, Eſpmes, good old Linakers Comforts for afflicted Conſciences, Hughes Troubled mans Medicine, The Penſiues Practiſe, the Conſolatory Letters of that zealous Greenham, D. Hil, Wilcox &c. Ferrarius vpon 51. Pſalme; Mr. Knox vpon the 6. Pſalme, Mr. Downams Chriſtian Warfare, Luthers Conſolations, The ſicke mans Salue; chiefely, that beſt ſixe-penny Manuel that I know in Engliſh Mr. Fremans Comforters, Wolcomb his Sinners ſalue; with all thoſe that haue ſtrengthened the ſoule directly againſt deſperation. Beſides, if you deſire further ſatisfaction in any point, eyther poſitiue or controuerſall, concerning death naturally; in which theſe my poore paines doe not content you, the zealous & learned Lucubrations of men of good parts and paines, offer themſelues, as Mr. Perkins and Lupſet, Mr. Sutton, with D. Hill, by their printed Workes, as their titles are, will teach you how to die well; Mr. Draxe lends the ſicke man a Guide, another a Salue; Sr. Thomas Eliot lends a preſeruatiue againſt Death,Alſo ſee Mr. Vauhams and Mr. Tukes Bookes of the ſame ſubiect. 
               Mr. Bradford writes againſt the feare of Death, Mr. Caue out of French ſhewes how to remoue that feare; Wolcombe lends Armour againſt Deaths aſſaults, Eraſmus ſhewes Deaths chances, Mr. Foxe exhorts the ſicke: Deaths generall Proclamation is extant in Print, with his Trophies and Conqueſts. Couerdaile out

of Dutch hath tranſlated a Booke of Death. Ars moriendi, the Art of dying hath bin long extantPrinted Anno 1506. Alſo, the learned know what not onely the Fathers, but Papiſts haue writ of this Argument, as Pontanus, Inclinus, &c. as alſo ſome Germane Proteſtants▪ as Bibembachius, and Brandmillerus in their Funerall Sermons, with others, both in Latine and Engliſh; all which I haue ſeene, moſt of which, before, and vpon this occaſion, read: and in many of them (omitting the principals) found ſmall ſatisfaction, ſo that none by comparing mee with them ſhall finde me ſeruilely tyed to any of them, or taking any thing ſo verbally or by ſentences from them, as it is not mine owne by method, digeſtion, and application. Neyther, I hope, will it be more blame-worthy in me, to write after theſe, then it was in Curtius to write the life of Alexander; in Baptiſta Egnatius to write the liues of Emperours; in Platina to write the liues of the Popes; after that ſeauenteen approued Authors had writ of the ſame ſubiect before the firſt; thirteene, before the ſecond; and fifteene before the third, as a warrantable Writer reckons them 
                  Text
                        •
                     r in Epiſtola ante ſuam Officinam..
            And now hauing acquainted you what I haue done, how, and why, I ſend all vnto you▪ as Abraham ſent his Seruant away with a bleſſing, euen ſuch a one as I deſire and intend. With which thought now the cuſtome of all Epiſtlers cry it is time to conclude, leaſt it be too tedious; yet beare I pray you with mine error of loue, which ſtill extends my lines (being vncertain when or whether euer to

ſee all your faces againe in earth, by reaſon of that mortalitie we ſpeake of, or to ſpeake to you by audible voyce) to commend vnto you (as a departing father would, ſome things to his children, as dying Dauid did to ſuruiuing Salomon) onely theſe two things: firſt, that you would ſpend well the time of your ſhort life▪ ſecondly, that you would prepare your ſelues for death. The firſt makes way to the ſecond, (as the Needle for the Thread) the ſecond for a third: euen a dignitie amongst liuing Angels, as Grace ſits for Glory. Firſt therefore, becauſe the daies of your pilgrimage are as few as euillGen. 47.9., as ſhort as ſinfull, that euen for that cauſe, as the Apoſtle counſelsEph. 5.16, you would redeeme the time: account of it (as not onely Chriſtians, but euen the Heathens, Theophraſtus, Seneca 
               De vitae breuitate, ſic Epiſtola 1. ad Lucil.
               , with others, haue prized it) as the greateſt treaſure yea, aboue your patrimonies and inheritances, from which you will not ſuffer your ſelues to be diſinherited. Beware the loſſe of it (as Lodouicke Bloſius, and that myſticall Thaulerus counſell amongst the reſt of their documents) as of the moſt peſtiferous poyſon that is, knowing that one of the offences whereof thoſe Remembrancers and Checquer Officers, your guiltie conſciences ſhall accuſe you at the day of Iudgement ſhall be abuſe of time. Nay, ſaith Bernard
               Sermone ad Schol., as a haire of our heads ſhall not periſh Luke 21.18., ſo not a moment or minute of time, whereof wee are Stewards, without an account rendered. Doe not therefore ſpend and miſſpend your ſhort dayes that are allotted you for Gods ſeruice, and the working out

your owne ſaluation, eyther in idleneſſe, doing nothing Nihil agendo, aliter agendo, male agendo. Seneca.
               , or doing other things, or euill things: not in the purſuite of profit, the proſecution of pleaſures; not in the ſeruice of the ſinners Trinitie, the fleſh, the world, the diuell; not in chambering & wantonnes, not in ſurfetting & drunkennes 
               Rom. 12.13., &c. not in heatheniſh luſts, cardings, dicings, and the like; not in frequenting ſoule-ſoyling Enterludes, Paganiſh Playes; not in the practiſe of gaming and prohibited playingProu. 21.17.; nay, ſaith Chriſoſtome, not in prittle prattle, not it idle talking Mat. 12.36., ſcurrulous ieaſting, Satyricall gibing, vaine diſcourſing, witty quipping, fooliſh tales-telling, vnchriſtian backbiting, carnall goſſipping, ſenſuall company-keeping, profane taunting, counterfeiting geſtures, Apiſh actings, light and laſciuious dauncings, making mowes, and ſuch antique toyes, to make men merry: but in holy actions, proceeding from ſuch mortified affections as ſhall declare you to be crucified to the world, and the world to you, that firſt happily you may dye to the world, that ſo hopefully you may dye out of the world. I vrge not theſe to take from you the vſe of all recreations: I know (what Iob feltIob 6.12) that your fleſh is not braſſe nor ſteele, but brittle and flexible: I know, that the ſpirit is willing, the fleſh as weakeMat. 26.41.: I know, that as Birds and Beaſts require reſt, ſo man, without which no fleſh is durable Quod caret alterna requies durabile non eſt.: I know, that reſt is not ſufficient without recreation, which cauſed all Nations to vſe thoſe Feriae, which wee turne into Feaſts; which recreations, not onely the beſt of Heathens, as Amaſis,

Socrates, Scaeuola, &c. Nay, the ſtrict Lacedemonians, but euen the ſtricteſt Chriſtians haue approuedly vſed: I know, the Apoſtle approues of that Eutrapelia, or vrbanitie, which Philoſophy makes a 
                  Ariſt. in Eth.vertue; nay, Chriſt himſelfe who oft wept Iohn 11.35 Luk. 19.41, yet euen often lead his diſciples with him into the fields, as though he ſhould ſay, you are men, reſt & refreſh you: neyther was I euer perſwaded in iudgement or practiſe, but that the birds flying, dogs ſmelling, &c. is not onely for mans profitable vſe, but honeſt delight: thoſe limits being obſerued, which iudicous Diuines See Mr. Perkins in Caſes of Conſcience. Dearing in Hebraeos, in initio. Aquinas. 22
                     •
                  . q 168. haue from the word preſcribed. Yet for all this you muſt not abuſe what you may lawfully vſe; you muſt not turne Chriſtian liberty into licentious carnalitie; you muſt not make of Recreations, occupations; you muſt not paſſe away the time in paſtime, as is the fooliſh ſpeech and wicked practiſe of fleſhly minded men. To which men I ſay, with Bernardine, De Sena, that if they once come to lodge in Hell, the place for impenitent profaneneſſe Pſal. 9.17, if the trafficke of time ſhould be carried thither to be ſold, they would giue if they had a thouſand worlds, for one halfe houre to repent in. Preuent you therefore the time, leſt afterwards you fruitleſly repent your neglected opportunities, like Diues in the ParableLuke 16.24.. Whilſt you haue time doe good Gal. 6.10 to others, to your owne ſoules; labour in the Ʋineyard, in that calling wherein you are planted and placedMat. 20.1.2.; thinke that day loſt (with the heatheniſh Cato
               Plutarke., & Titus Veſpaſian) in which you doe not ſome good; imploy your Talents gainefully, at leaſt painefullyLu. 19.13; worke

out your ſaluation in this day of ſaluation; do works acceptable in this acceptable time 2 Cor. 6.2; worke whilst it is day, before the night come Ioh. 9.4.; trafficke in the Mart-time, buy in the Fayre; hoiſt ſaile in the Tide-time; prepare corne in the plentious time; prepare with the Emmet Pro. 6.6, againſt a rainy day, hord vp in lifes ſummer what may beſtead you in deaths winter; if with Bernard, Baſil, and that holy Arſenius 
               Dion. Carthuſ. in opuſculo., you be not ſo ſtrict to redeeme time, from ſleepe and repaſt, and the ordinary workes of Nature, yet at leaſt, like Chriſtians, from words and workes which are vaine and vicious, knowing that onely that time is yours, which is ſpent righteouſly, and religiouſly, all the reſt you are cooſened of by Sathan, that is ſpent in the ſeruice of ſinne, euen as Sauls reygne is onely reckoned two yeeres, becauſe in thoſe he onely reygned well 1 Sam. 13., as Simile, and that noble Dion. Carthuſ. Conuert accounted in his death, that he had liued onely ſeauen yeeres; and Barlaam in Damaſcene 
               Suſtur
                     •
                  a de Barl c. 18.
               , that he had liued onely forty yeeres, though they both dyed old; becauſe all their life before in ſinne, was a death and no life, and ſo they prize it, ſo the Saints haue thought it Hier. in Aggeum. cap. 1.
               .
            Now a word or two to prepare you for death, as Moſes did the Iſraelites for their Paſſeouer: in which, for the firſt part of your preparation, I commend vnto you the frequent and ſerious meditation of Death, after the practiſe of Patriarkes, Prophets, Apoſtles, Chriſtians and Pagans, whom you ſhall finde further exemplified in this Treatiſe, this thought will further your Repentance, ſtrike

at the roote of ſinne, makes you with the Pylot that ſits at the ſtearne, beare off from the ſhelues and rockes of many dangerous occaſions; will cauſe you to vſe your talents well, like that Seruant that feared his Maſters comming Luke 12.38.. The Niniuites faſt, and repentIohn 3.8.; the Publicanes feare and quakeLuke 3 9.10., when Ionas cryes to the one, and Iohn to the other of their imminent end; Ahab is humbled 1 Kin 21 v. 19. v. 27.28., Felix trembles Acts 24.26., the Captaine ouer fiftie fals downe and ſupplicates 2 Kin. 1.13., when from Elias and Paul they heare and ſee the ſentence of death and iudgement; this or nothing will draw your hearts out of the earth, if with Moales and Antes they be there wrooting: this will pull downe the lofty and Giantly lookes of Pride, quench the fire of Luſt, curbe the ranckour of Malice, bridle the fierceneſſe of Wrath, (euen as duſt caſt amongst angry Bees, makes them quiet,) mortifies many moe ſinnes, kindles and keepes deuotion, as aſhes keepes in fire. Therefore I counſell you to number your dayes Pſal. 90.12, to remember your ends Eccl. 1.40., to make your Sepulchers in your Gardens Iohn 19.41, to thinke of death in life, to ſtrew Aſhes with Daniel 
               In Apocryph. Dan. c. 14., to diſcerne the ſteps of death, leaſt it ſteale away your time, and the pleaſure of life inueigle your hearts, as Abſolon did the hearts of his Fathers Subiects, leaſt the euill day take you▪ as the ſnare the Bird, and the net the fiſh; leaſt that be obiected to you which God once to Iſrael, that you remembred not your endsLam. 1.9..
            Other Rules I might preſcribe, but that I may not make the gate too great for the Cittie, for

ſome Cynicke to ſcoffe at: I referre you to the Concluſion of the Tractaite it ſelfe See the laſt Sermon in Simeon his deſired Pacification.
               . I will not giue Coleworts twiſe ſod Cramba bis cocta..
            Now, the laſt thing that I deſire of you is, that you will reade without partialitie and preiudice. If there be any circumſtantiall errours in Printing, as tranſpoſition, addition, or defects of ſome Letters, Syllables, or Words; not right placing of the Comma's, Colons, or full Points, or ſeeming defect, in not alwayes quoting the Chapter and Verſe, to which I haue reference teſtimonially, or exemplarily, (which perhaps would haue ſtuft the Booke too full) or in any ſuch circumſtances, which my farre abſence from the Preſſe might occaſion: I pray you let your loues make the beſt conſtruction: if any thing be amiſſe that is mine owne; if ought here be good, that is the Lords, and his Grace in mee: to which good Grace commending you, and theſe my poore labours for you, I rest, as now, ſo euer,
            
               Yours in the beſt bond STEVEN IEROME.
            
         
      
      
         
            
               
                  
                  MOSES His ſight of Canaan: With SIMEON his Dying-Song. Directing How to liue holily and dye happily. BY Steuen Jerome, late Preacher at St. BRIDES.
                  Seene and allowed.
                  Naſcentes morimur, finiſ
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      ab origine pendet.
                  LONDON: Printed for Roger Iackson, and are to be ſolde at his Shop, neare to the Conduit in Fleetſtreete. 1614.
               
               
                  
                  
                  The chiefe Contents of the two ſubſequent TREATISES.
                  
                     In Moſes his ſight of Sion, theſe things are obſeruable.
                     
                        1 THE Caſe of the Inheritance of Daughters propounded. page 1
                     
                     
                        2 How Caſes are wiſely to be carryed before the Magiſtrate. pag. 3
                     
                     
                        3 The true Rule of iudging Caſes, Conſultation with God. pag. 4
                     
                     
                        4 The Caſe adiudged, and ſpiritually applyed. pag. 6
                     
                     
                        5 Moſes is forewarned to dye, and how God forewarnes vs. pag. 9
                     
                     
                        6 All muſt dye. 13
                     
                     
                        7 God prepares his Children to dye, as hee did Moſes, by ſhewing them Canaan. 14
                     
                     
                        8 Moſes his obedience to Gods ſummons a patterne to vs. 15
                     
                     
                        
                        9 Fifteene Reſemblances of Death to Sleepe. 16
                     
                     
                        10 Fiue Conſiderations to imbrace Death as willingly, as we ſleepe naturally. 23
                     
                     
                        11 Sixteene Comforts againſt the feare of Death, in theſe enſuing particulars. 35
                        
                           
                              1 GOD who infuſed the Soule, cals for it againe. 36
                           
                           
                              2 Sinne the ſting of Death is taken away by Chriſts death. 37
                           
                           
                              3 God as a Father, is preſent at the death of his Children. 39
                           
                           
                              4 Death is no death but a diſſolution to the godly. 41
                           
                           
                              5 The Saints ſhall know, and enioy their friends in glory. 43
                           
                           
                              6 Death frees the ſoule from her ſpirituall enemies. 44
                           
                           
                              7 It deliuers from euils preſent and to come. 47
                           
                           
                              8 It ends Sinnes Conflicts with Heauens Tryumphs. 48
                           
                           
                              9 It frees vs from conuerſing with the wicked. 51
                           
                           
                              10 It ſecures vs from corrupting by the wicked. 55
                           
                           
                              11 It ſecures from the malice of the mighty. 56
                           
                           
                              12 Our good name is cleared in Death, which calumny ecclypſed in life. 57
                           
                           
                              
                              13 Death tryes and declares the ſinceritie and meaſure of grace. 63
                           
                           
                              14 It is the inheritance of the Saints as it is the terrour of the wicked. 64
                           
                           
                              15 The Chriſtian ſhould in death deſire Chriſt who by death deſired him. 71
                           
                           
                              16 Death is the common Inne of all fleſh, where the Saints are refreſhed. 75
                           
                        
                     
                  
                  
                     In Simeons dying Song theſe are the chiefe Notes, both from the Doctrines and the Vſes.
                     THE force of Examples eyther for imitation of Ʋertue, or deteſtation of Ʋice. 77
                     
                     The vaine Songs and Sonnets of our age iuſtly reproued. 79
                     
                     Our ſinging as corrected, ſo directed. 80
                     
                     The ground of all our reioycing muſt be in and for Chriſt. 81
                     
                     The ſenſuall and ſinnefull ioyes of worldlings iuſtly taxed. 83.84. &c.
                     Wee muſt be truely thankefull for Chriſt. 8
                              •
                           
                        
                     
                     Tenne Reaſons to incite vs to the duty of gratulation, with the vſes. 88.89
                     
                     The great miſtery and greater mercy of Chriſt incarnate. 92.93. &c.
                     Wee muſt be borne againe to CHRIST, and

and hee borne in vs, as hee was borne for vs, 95
                     
                     The glorious Name of the Lord muſt not be vſed vpon euery triuiall occaſion. 97
                     
                     How bootleſſe it is for the wicked in death to cry Lord, Lord. 99
                     
                     The godly haue diuers raptures and ſecret ioyes in life and death. 101
                     
                     Theſe Ioyes demonſtrated in ſixe particulars. 103
                     
                     Three Reaſons of theſe extraordinarie Rauiſhments. 105
                     
                     Worldlings farre wide that thinke Chriſtians Melancholicques and comfortleſſe. 106
                     
                     Foure Comforts of the Chriſtian which the world neyther knowes nor feeles. 107
                     
                     All the Patriarkes and Prophets, ſince the promiſe, haue expected the Meſſias. 110
                     
                     Wee ſee Chriſt more clearely then the primitiue Saints. 111
                     
                     How Chriſt came to them, how to vs. 112
                     
                     How wee ſhould entertaine Chriſt, with Redargution and Commination of the Iewes and our ingratitude. 113
                     
                     Our deſire of long life muſt be ſimply to glorifie God. 116
                     
                     Reproofe of the worlds practiſe in Miniſters Magiſtrates, Maſters, and all ſorts, ayming at themſelues, not God. 120
                     
                     The better Chriſtian the more willing to dye. 126
                     
                     
                        Twelue Reaſons which cauſe this willingneſſe. 127
                     
                     The point applyed by examination. 133
                     
                     Chriſt moſt willing to dye of all the Sonnes of men. 135
                     
                     Seauen Reaſons why Death is vnwelcome to the wicked. 136
                     
                     Wicked men may die willingly for ſiniſter reſpects as Heretiques haue done. 143
                     
                     Fiue meanes to be vſed to make vs willing to our diſſolution. 144
                     
                     God manifeſts his preſence at the death of his, three wayes. 148
                     
                     How God workes in ſinne permiſſiuely, diſpoſingly, &c. but neuer workes ſinne. 151
                     
                     Euery death, for Time, Place, Matter, Manner, is determined by God, 153
                     
                     Iuſt inuectiues againſt Heatheniſh Fortune. 157
                     
                     The raſh cenſures of men concerning diuers deaths condemned. 160
                     
                     Comforts in that God ſees the cauſe and effect of euery mans maladie. 161
                     
                     Patience perſwaded, in that it is Gods rod which ſtrikes. 162
                     
                     No meanes can protract or detract from our dayes, beſides their limits. 164
                     
                     Foure maine Obiections anſwered. 165
                     
                     Meanes muſt be vſed both for life temporall and ſpirituall, notwithſtanding Gods decree. 168
                     
                     Vnlawfull for any priuate man to take away life from himſelfe or others. 170
                     
                     
                        Twelue diſſwaſiue arguments againſt Selfe-murther. 171
                     
                     The ſinne reproued, and the frequencie of it deplored. 174
                     
                     Twelue things from experience and Heatheniſh examples occaſioning ſelfe-killing. 179
                     
                     How to preuent this ſinne. 188
                     
                     Euery obſtinate ſinner from cauſes naturall and ſupernaturall accuſed of ſelfe-murther. 189
                     
                     *
                           The chiefe delight and deſire of euery man muſt be to be Gods Seruant, with foure reaſons why. 196
                           
                           Multitudes that liue vnder the meanes, are ignorant how God ſhould be ſerued. 201
                           
                           Multitudes reproued that haue as little will as skill to ſerue God. 202
                           
                           How few ayme at Gods ſeruice in all their wayes, expoſtulated in particulars. 210
                           
                           Ciuill honeſt men moſt enemies to Gods true Seruants and ſincere ſeruice. 216
                           
                           Many in the rancke of Chriſtians ſerue the Diuell and their owne luſts. 218
                           
                           All the members that haue ſerued ſinne directed to ſerue God. 221
                           
                        
                     
                     Sixe Motiues perſwading to ſerue God. 
                           
                              1 From the end of our Creation, 227
                           
                           
                              2 From our Preſeruation. 231
                           
                           
                              3 From our Vocation. 233
                           
                           
                              4 From our Redemption. 235
                           
                           
                              
                              5 From our Profeſſion. 237
                           
                           
                              6 From the Reward. ibid.
                           
                        
                     
                     Firſt Reward of Gods ſeruice Wealth and Riches. 238
                     
                     Second, Honour and Dignitie. 239
                     
                     Sinne brings ſhame and all other iudgements. 240
                     
                     Gods hand vpon his enemies in many iudgements. 243
                     
                     Holineſſe is the way to Honour. 245
                     
                     God is moſt liberall of all Maſters. 246
                     
                     Gods ſeruants beſt rewarded and regarded in eight particulars. 248
                     
                     God grants the ſuites of his ſeruants. 252
                     
                     The godly haue a taſte of Heauen here, enioyed hereafter. 253
                     
                     God bleſſeth the wicked oft for his ſeruants ſakes. 255
                     
                     God deliuers his ſeruants from generall iudgements, ſixe wayes. 257
                     
                     God and Sathan cannot be ſerued together. 258
                     
                     The caſe of Sathans captiues opened. 259
                     
                     Seauen Reaſons why the godly muſt dye as well as the wicked. 263
                     
                     Tenne ſins that haue prouoked the Lord to ſweepe away the wicked. 268
                     
                     That all muſt dye, exemplified, and amplified, by many inſtances. 269
                     
                     The deaths of the worlds Worthies of all ſorts, epitomized. 274
                     
                     Fiue naturall cauſes of death. 282
                     
                     
                        Death is as inexorable as vnreſiſtible, with his Trophies ouer all. 283
                     
                     We muſt not too much loue this life, which we muſt ſhortly leaue. 287
                     
                     Thoſe that loue life, muſt hate Sinne, the cauſe of death. 289
                     
                     Death onely makes the Prince and the poore man equall. 291
                     
                     Deaths effect in equalizing all, illuſtrated by fit ſimilies. 296
                     
                     Sixe Reaſons, further ſhewing the neceſſitie of dying. 299
                     
                     How euen in liuing wee dye, and are dead in part. 301
                     
                     By how many meanes we dye. 304
                     
                     Diuers examples of ſeuerall ſorts of deaths, violent and naturall. 305
                     
                     Some cut off in the midſt of their lawleſſe luſts. 309
                     
                     Our dayes abbreuiated, in reſpect of the long liues of the Patriarkes. 316
                     
                     Foure cauſes of the long continuation of things. 318
                     
                     Becauſe our life is ſhort we muſt ſpend it well. 319
                     
                     Our many ſinnes to be mourned for, and why. 320
                     
                     The practiſe of Epicures and profane men reproued and threatned. 321
                     
                     How wee muſt ſow in teares in this ſhort ſeed-time. 323
                     
                     Further vſe to be made of our ſhort time. 325
                     
                     Our life is laborious and miſerable: euery calling hauing his croſſe. 328
                     
                     
                        No place priuiledged from foure things: 1. Sathan tempting: 2. The hearts wandring: 3. Ill tongues biting: 4. The world croſſing. 330
                     
                     Examples of humane calamities. 331
                     
                     Twelue meanes to get that peace with God which the world wants. 334
                     
                     The vanitie of life, with all the things in life, truely diſcouered. 336
                     
                     The world truly deſcribed by eleauen ſimilies. 340
                     
                     How Chriſt in his practiſe croſſed all the worlds proceedings. 342
                     
                     The benefits of death to a Chriſtian vnder the Croſſe. 343
                     
                     God oft cats away the beſt ſooneſt. 345
                     
                     How death is fearefull and not fearefull. 347
                     
                     Death is onely a departure out of life, not a finall deſtroyer. 348
                     
                     Eight Arguments, prouing the Reſurrection of our bodies. 351
                     
                     Illuſtrations from Nature that our bodies ſhall riſe. 352
                     
                     Foure Reaſons beſides from the Word. 354
                     
                     The Chriſtians comfort in the conſideration of our Reſurrection. 355.356
                     
                     That wee may riſe ioyfully we muſt liue holily, in tenne particulars. 359
                     
                     Tenne Arguments to proue the ſoules immortality. 362
                     
                     Seauen moe, from the Word. 364
                     
                     Death vnmasked, what it is to the godly. 365
                     
                     
                        Reproofe of thoſe that reſpect the body more then the ſoule. 367
                     
                     The ſeruants of God alwayes dye in peace. 369
                     
                     The godly oft haue their deſires at, before, and in their deaths. 372
                     
                     The very laſt words recorded, which the Saints vttered in their death beds. 374
                     
                     How great men haue liued and dyed good men. 377
                     
                     Reaſons why the godly depart in peace. 379
                     
                     Nine Obiections anſwered, that ſeeme to contradict the peaceable departure of the Saints. 380
                     
                     Nine Reaſons that his death may be good that dyes of the Plague. 384
                     
                     How ſelfe-murther doth not alwayes imply a wretched death. 387
                     
                     Hee that would dye well muſt liue well. 389
                     
                     The fearefull ends of wicked perſecutors in euery age. 391
                     
                     An ill life the vſuall Prologue to a Tragicall death. 395
                     
                     None can repent when he will. 397
                     
                     The Word layes downe a way to a bleſſed death. 402
                     
                     Death is certaine, yet vncertaine. 403
                     
                     The paines of Hell without remiſſion or redemption. 405
                     
                     Repentance is not to be deferred till death. 406
                     
                     The danger of deferring diſcouered. 408
                     
                     The Theefes Repentance vpon the Croſſe examined. 412
                     
                     
                        Sixe effects of Deaths meditation. 417
                     
                     The life of Faith brings dying Peace. 429
                     
                     Repentance the meanes of peace with God. 430
                     
                     How to dye daily three wayes. 433
                     
                     How to leaue the damnable cuſtome of Swearing. 434
                     
                     Eighteene things to be prayed for that death may be proſperous. 437
                     
                     A good conſcience in life brings peace in death. 442
                     
                     Sixe cauſes of ſickeneſſe, beſides ſinne. 445
                     
                     With fiue duties to be done in ſickeneſſe. 446
                     
                     The ſicke man muſt ſend for a Miniſter before the Phyſitian and carnall friends. 451
                     
                     The neceſſitie and lawfull vſe of Phyſicke proued and vrged. 455
                     
                     Rules obſeruable in the vſe of Phyſicke. 457
                     
                     Againſt ſeeking to Witches and Charmers in ſickeneſſe. 459
                     
                     Reconciliation and Reſtitution vrged. 461
                     
                     Fiue Reaſons why a ſicke man muſt make his Will. 465
                     
                     Foure Rules in making all Wills. 466
                     
                     A Chriſtian carriage preſcribed in the houre of death. 468
                     
                     Twenty ſeuerall Comforts in the death of friends. 
                           
                              1 Becauſe God takes them away. 470
                           
                           
                              2 The Saints haue beene patient ſpectators of the deaths of their deare friends. 471
                           
                           
                              3 If he dyed in the faith of Chriſt he is tranſlated

from this life to a better. 472
                           
                           
                              4 He is bleſſed being dead in the Lord. ibid.
                           
                           
                              5 Hee is returned home to his Fathers houſe. ibid.
                           
                           
                              6 He is inſeperably vnited vnto God the chiefeſt good. 473
                           
                           
                              7 He is marryed vnto his Bridegroome Chriſt. ibid.
                           
                           
                              8 His warfare is now at an end. ibid.
                           
                           
                              9 Being here a pilgrime, hee is returned into his owne Country. 474
                           
                           
                              10 Thou haſt not loſt, but left him. ibid.
                           
                           
                              11 He ſhall be reſtored vnto thee againe at the Reſurrection. ibid.
                           
                           
                              12 Ere long thou ſhalt goe vnto him. 475
                           
                           
                              13 His better part is yet liuing. ibid.
                           
                           
                              14 His eſtate is bettered by death. ibid.
                           
                           
                              15 Thou ſorrowest for that could not be preuented. 476
                           
                           
                              16 Thou haſt many companions in thy ſorrow. ibid.
                           
                           
                              17 Thy impatient ſorrow hurts thy ſelfe. 477
                           
                           
                              18 Thy extreame ſorrow is as fruitles as faithleſſe. ibid.
                           
                           
                              19 The Lord, thy beſt friend, is ſtill liuing. ibid.
                           
                           
                              20 They are inſenſible of thy ſorrow. 479
                           
                        
                     
                     Twenty Cordials againſt the croſſe of ſicknes. 482
                     
                     And Meditations how to beare the intollerable burthen thereof. 499
                     
                     
                        Eight ſeuerall Conſolations againſt the vnkindnes of mercileſſe Friends. 500
                        
                           
                              1 Thy caſe is not ſingular but ordinary. ibid.
                           
                           
                              2 The Saints haue had the ſame meaſure. 501
                           
                           
                              3 Chriſt himſelfe was maliced of his owne brethren. ibid.
                           
                           
                              4 There hath beene hatred amongst the nearest friends by nature. ibid.
                           
                           
                              5 Though thy friends forſake thee, yet God careth for thee. 502
                           
                           
                              6 As thy friends are vnkinde to thee, ſo thou haſt beene vnthankefull to God. ibid.
                           
                           
                              7 God hath elected thee, though man reiect thee. 503
                           
                           
                              8 Though thou canſt not ſee thy friends here with comfort, yet ere long thou ſhalt ſee God as hee is. ibid.
                           
                        
                     
                     Thirteene Preparatiues againſt Pouertie. 504
                        
                           
                              1 It is the prouidence of God that thou ſhouldeſt be poore. 504
                           
                           
                              2 Thy croſſe is not ſingular. 505
                           
                           
                              3 Pouertie is no token of Gods diſpleaſure. ibid.
                           
                           
                              4 A little with the feare of God is better then great riches of the vngodly. 507
                           
                           
                              5 As well Pouertie as Riches fals out to the beſt to them that feare God. ibid.
                           
                           
                              6 The Lord knoweth what is beſt for thee. ibid.
                           
                           
                              
                              7 Pouertie hinders not the acceptance of thy Prayers. 508
                           
                           
                              8 If thou be poore in ſpirit, thou art rich in Chriſt. 509
                           
                           
                              9 Pouerty is no hinderance to thy ſaluation. 510
                           
                           
                              10 The leſſe thou receiueſt, the leſſe ſhall thine accounts be. 511
                           
                           
                              11 The Lord hath a care of thee euen for the things of this life. 512
                           
                           
                              12 And can bleſſe a ſmall portion vnto thee. 514
                           
                           
                              13 Chriſt himſelfe, and the moſt excellent Saints haue beene poore on earth. 516
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
            
            
               
                  
                  MOSES His ſight of Sion: applyed to encourage and direct euery Chriſtian to his heauenly CANAAN.
                  
                     NVMB. 27.1.2.3.4.
                     And Zelophehad the Sonne of Hepher, had no Sonnes but Daughters.
                  
                  
                     CHAP. I. The caſe of the inheritance of Daughters propounded.
                     
                        
                           Sect. 1.
                        
                           BEcauſe this caſe of the Daughters of Zelophehad is extraordinary, and not obuious in the Scriptures beſides, in any the like example; it will not be amiſſe, lying in the forefront of the Chapter, bordering vpon that of Moſes his warning to dye: ſince it concernes

a ſubiect not vſuall, the title of the Womans Inheritance, to touch it in ſome perticulars, and the rather, becauſe it was the laſt caſe that Moſes adiudged, immediately before that the Lord himſelfe ſentenced and adiudged him to dye. In which, though there be many things worthy our exact dilating and vrging, both pleaſing and profitable, as would appeare in the opening and applying of this Scripture: yet I chooſe rather, from the warrant and writings of an excellent Light in our Church,B. B. according to his Method, to commend vnto you, theſe Notes and Obſeruations.
                        
                           
                              Note. 1 Here then firſt note, how carefull theſe Daughters are of a place among the people of God in the Earthly Canaan, which was a type of the Heauenly:Expoſtulat. Ought not all wee to be as carefull for that Heauenly? yes, and more carefull: ſo no doubt are Gods Children, when their eyes be opened: and by name, Women; for although many are buſied about attyres and vaine ſhewes, to make them pleaſing vnto men, yet others doe ſeeke by all meanes for that eternall reſt, and how to be pleaſing vnto God; which is the onely good and perfect way: Fauour is deceitfull and beautie is vanitie, but a woman that feareth the Lord ſhe ſhall be praiſed. Prou. 3.30.
                     
                     
                        
                        
                           Sect. 2. How caſes are wiſely to be carried before the Magiſtrate.
                        
                           
                              Note. 2 OBſerue how theſe Daughters goe not vp and downe from Tent to Tent, from one to another, tatling and pratling, murmuring and complaining; but directly they goe to the Magiſtrate, and there exhibite their deſire, waiting for reliefe and order from him: ſo ſhould all men doe, not marring a good cauſe with ill handling. Being come to him, ſee how modeſtly, and womanly they propound their matter, without any vnfitting words of choler or anger, or any vnſeemely behauiour any way: ſee againe how vviſely they preuent an obiection, that might haue beene made of their Father, that happily he was one of thoſe Rebels that tooke part with Corah, Dathan, and Abiram, and ſo periſhed. No, (ſay they) our Father dyed in the Wilderneſſe, and he was not among the aſſembly of them that were aſſembled againſt the Lord in the Companie of Corah, but dyed in his ſinne: that is, as all ſinners muſt, for death is the reward of ſinne, &c.
                           
                              Rom. 6.21. Where you may ſee what a comfort, what a credit and glory honeſt Parents be to their Children: they leaue a good name behinde them, which makes their children bold to ſpeak

of them, when others muſt hang their heads and bluſh, eyther to mention them themſelues, or to heare them ſpoken of by others. A great motiue to all Parents, euen for this cauſe, to be carefull of their carriage.
                     
                     
                        
                           Sect. 3. The true rule of iudging caſes, Conſultation with God.
                        FOr the iudgement and reſolution of this requeſt, it is ſaid in the 5. verſ. Then Moſes brought their cauſe before the Lord. And the Lord ſpake vnto Moſes, ſaying: The daughters of Zelophehad ſpeake right, &c. Before, you ſee that the cauſe was brought before Moſes and Eliazer, and all the Princes, ſuch a coniunction there was of the ciuill Magiſtrates and Eccleſiaſticall Miniſters together in hearing of cauſes: which continueth euer ſince, as appeareth in good records of Antiquitie. But neyther Moſes nor Aaron ſpake till they had receiued reſolution from God, and vnderſtood his will.
                              Note. 3 In like manner ſhould it be ſtill with all Iudges, firſt to know and vnderſtand, and then to iudge, wherein the Lord ſtill is ayding and directing, although not by ſpeaking, as to Moſes, yet by his Spirit of wiſedome and vnderſtanding, of counſell and knowledge, men vſing the meanes as they

ought of learning and prayer; Be wiſe ye Kings,
                           
                              Pſal. 2.10 
                           and be learned yee that are Iudges of the earth:
                              Iames 1.5. For Prayer; if any lacke wiſedome, let him aske it of God (as Salomon did) which giueth to all men liberally and reprocheth no man,
                           1 King. 3.6.7. 
                           and it ſhall be giuen him, &c.
                        
                        
                           
                              Note. 4 Another vſe, againe, men may well make here, euen a caueat for Plaintiffes and Defendants, to haue but ſuch cauſes as if they be brought before GOD, may be approued, as this was of the Daughters of Zelophehad: but alacke, ſhould the moſt of our ſuites and controuerſies in theſe dayes, be brought to this touch and tryall, how impious, how hatefull, how vile would they appeare. The all-holy God is offended with our braules: much more with our wicked paines, coſts, and charges, to effect the madneſſe and malice of our Hell-heated harts, in bringing to paſſe our diuelliſh deſignes, and peſtilent plots againſt our Brethren: that I may ſay nothing of them that pleade them to the vttermoſt of their wit and cunning, daubing them ouer with humane Eloquence, and painting them out with filed and flowing words, againſt their owne conſciences, and that knowledge which they haue both in the Lawes of God and man. Is it not a grieuous fault to iuſtifie a wicked man, or to condemne an Innocent man; and is it not ſo in cauſes? Doth God pronounce a woe againſt

the one, and is hee not wroth with the other? Well, for this cauſe (if it were nothing elſe) there muſt needes be a generall Iudgement, that thoſe things may be pleaded and iudged before the Lord, which are wrongfully pleaded and adiudged here. Well, God giue eyes and feeling, I ſay no more.
                     
                     
                        
                           Sect. 4. The caſe adiudged, and ſpiritually applyed.
                        GOds anſwere you ſee now following: firſt, perticular, in regard of theſe women, The Daughters of Zelophe had ſpake right,
                           Verſe 7. 
                           thou ſhalt giue them a poſſeſſion to inherit amongst their Fathers Brethren, and ſhalt turne the inheritance of their Father vnto them. Then generally, for a Law to others;Ver. 8. &c. 
                           If any man dye and haue no Sonne, then yee ſhall turne his inheritance vnto his Daughter; and if bee haue no Daughter, yee ſhall giue his Inheritance vnto his Brethren; and if hee haue no Brethren, yee ſhall giue his Inheritance vnto his Fathers Brethren; And if his Father haue no Brethren, yee ſhall giue his Inheritance vnto his next Kinſman of his Family, and hee ſhall poſſeſſe it: and this ſhall be vnto the Children of Iſrael a Law of Iudgement, (or an Ordinance to iudge by) as the Lord hath commanded MOSES. In which gracious Anſwere theſe things may ſerue for our vſe.
                        
                           
                           
                              Note. 5 Firſt, we may note, that God reiected not theſe women from hauing a place in his earthly Canaan, becauſe ſo earneſtly they ſought and deſired it: and thereby wee may gather comfort aſſured and infallible, that out of his Heauenly Canaan hee neuer reiecteth any that are deſirous to haue a place in it: for Hee that commeth to me (ſaith hee) I caſt not away. God would not the death of a ſinner,
                              Ezech. 18.23.32. Eſa. 55.6.7 but rather that hee would turne from his ſinne, and be ſaued. God would haue all men to be ſaued, and to come to the knowledge of his truth,1 Tit. 2.1.1 And in this, God is no excepter of perſons,
                              Act. 10.34.35. but in euery Nation, hee that feareth him, and worketh righteouſly, is accepted of him. There is neither Iew nor Grecian, bond nor free, male nor female in this, but wee are all one in Chriſt Ieſus. Exclude not then your ſelues out of Canaan, and the Lord of mercy and goodneſſe will not exclude you.
                        
                           
                              Note. 6 Againe, wee may note how harſh this diſinheriting of Daughters is, becauſe wee deſire to continue the name: If God be pleaſed to continue the Land or Inheritance in our name, bleſſed be his will; if hee be againſt it, and to that end giue no Sonne but Daughters, wee fight againſt one that is too ſtrong for vs, in ſeeking by-wayes contrary to his rule, and how can it pleaſe him? God raiſeth vp houſes and putteth downe at his pleaſure; for

                           the Earth is his, and all that is in it: with his owne to doe his will who will controule and checke him? Now if he doe this by a woman, why may hee not? May hee raiſe a name by women inheritors, and may hee not change the name againe when hee ſeeth good, by giuing a daughter and no Sonne? Let vs often thinke of the Pſalme, in a religious feeling, and humbly deſire to receiue inſtruction from the Lord, They thinke their houſes and their habitations ſhall continue for euer, euen from generation to generation, and call their lands by their names: but man ſhall not continue in honour, hee is like the beaſts that dye. This their way vttereth their fooliſhneſſe, yet their poſteritie delight in their talke, &c.
                        
                        Here wee may note how groſſely and grieuouſly they erre, that condemne the gouernment of Women, when Crowne and Kingdomes, by lawfull deſcent, in the all-guiding prouidence of God, fall vnto them: for, be they not within this Law of God, that he ſaith ſhould be a Law of Iudgement that is, a Law to iudge by of this matter for euer; If a man haue no Sonne, his Inheritance ſhall deſcend vnto his Daughter?
                        
                     
                  
                  
                     
                     CHAP. II. Moſes is fore-warned to die, and how God fore-warnes vs.
                     
                        
                           Sect. 1.
                        
                           THE ſecond part of this Chapter now followeth in the 12. Verſe, to wit, the ſhewing of the Land of Promiſe to Moſes and the telling him of his death, in theſe words: Againe, the Lord ſaid vnto Moſes, goe vp into this Mount of Abarim, and behold the Land which I haue giuen to the Children of Iſrael. And when thou haſt ſeene it, thou ſhalt be gathered vnto thy people, as Aaron thy Brother was gathered, &c. Theſe points that are naturall from this place will come againe to be ſpoken of in the laſt Chapter of Deutronomie, to which I referre you. Let vs therefore I pray you, euen ſeriouſly and zealouſly pitch our mindes vpon theſe points: 
                              Note. 1 Firſt, that Moſes is not here taken away ſodainely, but is premoniſhed before that he muſt away, and a time giuen him to prepare himſelfe for it: a great and ſweet mercy of God to his Children. Wherefore Dauid prayeth heartily, Lord,
                           
                              Pſal. 90.12 
                           let mee know my end, and the meaſure of my dayes: Let me know how long I haue to liue. And againe in another Pſalme, Teach mee to number my dayes

that I may apply my heart vnto Wiſedome. The Lord doth not this by expreſſe words, as here to Moſes:
                            but firſt, by increaſing weakneſſe and infirmities vpon vs: ſecondly, by many yeeres: thirdly, by Examples of others daily before our eyes: and fourthly, many times by a ſecret inſtinct in our hearts, with arguments and circumſtances fitting to confirme vnto vs, that wee muſt dye: ſo that if wee be vnprepared it is our fault that wee carry no better an eye to the Lords dealings with vs, no better a watch ouer our ſelues for ſtate of body and minde, nor make better vſe and application of things, as that often repeated counſell in Scriptures willeth vs,
                              Mat. 26.41 1 Pet. 4.7. ſaying, Watch, watch, for you know not at what houre, the Bridegroome will come, &c. Sweet is the Lord, and moſt gracious is his courſe. Let vs not be wanting in ours, and all ſhall be well: the time neuer ſodaine, the thing neuer fearefull, but as welcome as quiet ſleepe to a wearied, and ouer-wearied body. A ſodaine death to any one prepared, is no hurt: for the word of God is firme and immutable:
                              Iohn 3.15.1 18.36. Iohn 10.29. Rom. 8.1. 
                           hee that beleeueth ſhall be ſaued: No man taketh my Sheepe out of my hands: There is no condemnation to them that are in Chriſt Ieſus, which walke not after the fleſh but after the Spirit.
                           Ver. 35. Againe, Who ſhall ſeparate vs from the loue of Chriſt, ſhall tribulation, or anguiſh, or perſecution, or famine, or nakedneſſe, or

perils, or ſword. No, no,Ver. 38. for I am perſwaded that neyther death, nor life, (no not ſodaine death) nor Angels, nor Principalities, nor Powers, nor things preſent, nor things to come, nor height, nor depth, nor any other creature ſhall be able to ſeparate vs from the loue of God which is in Chriſt Ieſus our Lord. Now if none of theſe, certainly not ſodaine death as I ſaid before, and therefore well ſaith the Booke of Wiſedome, concerning the godly, that though he be preuented by death, yet ſhall hee be in reſt: hee was taken away leaſt wickedneſſe ſhould alter his vnderſtanding, or deceit beguile his minde: though he was ſoone dead, yet fulfilled hee much time,
                           
                              Eſa. 57.1.2 2 Chron. 34.28. 
                           for his ſoule pleaſed God, therefore haſted hee to take him away from wickedneſſe, &c.
                        
                        It is ſaid that S. Iohn dyed of an Apoplexie, and Policarpu
                                 •
                              
                            wiſhed hee might doe the like, yet Why we are to pray againſt ſodain death. wee vſually pray againſt ſodaine death, firſt, in regard of the raſh iudgement of the world: ſecondly, many mens negligence in preparing themſelues for all houres; the want of which hath made the godly ſometimes timerous, as wee ſee in Dauid, Pſal. 39.15. thirdly, as their ſoules are not alwayes ſet in order, ſo neyther their houſes, as in Ezekia, 2 Kings 20.1. But I ſay againe, to one that hath laid his ground-worke well, it is no hurt bleſſed be God: and for the iudgement of men in taking Gods office vpon them in iudging

weakly or wickedly of their Brethren, Mat. 7.1.2. it is too raſh vſually both in this and other things. The life before, and the profeſſion and confeſſion of a true Faith, ought to giue all men ſatisfaction; if not, let them remember that ſaying well,
                              Rom. 14.4. 
                           Who art thou that iudgeſt another mans Seruant? hee ſtandeth or falleth to his owne Maſter and Lord. To the The fearfull eſtate of the wicked, by ſodain death. wicked indeede that haue wallowed in ſinne without feeling, ſodaine death is fearefull, eyther in warre when the bullet taketh him, or at Sea when hee is drowned, or any other way whatſoeuer: when Ammon is nailed to the wall by his Brother Abſolon, 2 Sam. 13.28.29. when Pharaoh and his Companie be ſodainly drowned in the Seas, Ezod. 14.27.28. Corah, Dathan, and Abiram ſodainely ſwallowed vp of the earth, Numb. 16.32. When Zimry and Coſbee, the Iſraelitiſh and Moabitiſh wantons be ſodainely deſtroyed by Phineas Speare, or Gods plagues, in their filth or after, Numb. 25.4.8. The old 
                              Gen 7.21. Worldlings, and 
                              Gen. 19.24. Sodomites ſodainely conſumed by fire or water; 
                              Dan 4.30 
                           Baltazar, 
                           2 Mach. 9 5.6.7. 
                           Antiochus, 
                           
                              Act. 12.23. 
                           Herod, the rich 
                              Luke 12. 
                           Churle, with others, ſodainely ſwept away like dung from the face of the earth, with the beſome of Gods wrath, and ſtrucke with Gods reuenging hand in the midſt of their drunkenneſſe, crueltie, pride, couetouſneſſe, and ſuch ſins, their caſe is fearefull.
                     
                     
                        
                        
                           Sect. 2. That all muſt die.
                        BVt though Moſes be not ſodainely taken away, yet away hee goeth: it is very true, and ſo muſt all fleſh, therefore let vs reckon of it, The reward of ſinne is death, Rom. 6.21. And ſince all fleſh is ſinfull, to all is appointed once to die, Heb 9.27 hodie an cras, &c. whether it be to day or to morrow, it muſt be, it will be, a debt it is, and muſt be paid, ſaith S. Auguſtine; Hodie mihi, cras tibi; I to day, you to morrow, till wee be all gone: nothing more vncertaine then the time, nothing more certaine then the thing. They that liued ſo many hundred yeeres, as Adam, Methuſalem, Noah, Sem, and the other Patriarkes, of euery one it is ſaid Et mortuus eſt, and hee dyed, the longeſt time had an end: and at the laſt death knocked for him, hee muſt away. And as no time ſo no vertue can auoid death, but euen Moſes himſelfe, as worthy a man as the earth hath carried, as the Word teſtifies of him, Ioſh. 1.2.13. Heb. 3.2.5. yet this Moſes muſt die.
                        But if a man maruell at this, why ſuch men ſhould dye,
                              Rom. 5.12. ſince ſinne which is the cauſe of death, is pardoned & forgiuen them, through faith in Chriſt: let him know that this is done for two cauſes.
                        
                           
                            Firſt, for thoſe reliques of ſinne and corruption which hang vpon, and by death muſt be purged and taken cleane away, God then perfecting that ſanctification which was begun before.  Secondly, that wee might be made conformable to our Head Chriſt Ieſus, who as hee by death ouer-came death▪ and roſe from death to life, ſo muſt wee by him; both which ends yeeld vs great comfort, becauſe they ſhew that death is not laid vpon the elect as a puniſhment, but as a mercy vouchſafed by a ſweet father for the ends named.
                     
                     
                        
                           Sect. 3. God prepares his children to dye, as hee did Moſes, by ſhewing them Canaan.
                        BVt before hee dye, and paſſe this way of all fleſh, God will haue him goe into the Mountaine, and ſee the Land of Promiſe, this was done in ſweet goodneſſe, that with more ready will hee might make an end. And aſſuredly thus dealeth God with his louing children at their latter ends,Obſer. euen giue them a glympſe, a ſight and taſte of the true Land of Promiſe, that heauenly Canaan: which hee hath prepared for them after death. But as Moſes to ſee this pleaſant ſight, muſt aſcend vp into the Mountaine; ſo muſt wee raiſe vp, and lift vp our hearts, our ſoules, our thoughts,

and the eyes of our mindes, as it were aloft to an high Mountaine, that ſo wee may ſee what will make vs moſt willing to depart, that our ioy may be full and endleſſe, as in Peter.
                           
                              Mat. 17.14
                        
                        That Moſes entered not into Canaan, but onely ſaw it, it had two ends: firſt, the puniſhment of his Incredulitie, when hee ſtrucke the Rocke ſpoken of here in the 14.Numb. 20.12. Verſe of this Chapter: and ſecondly, for myſterie, Vt ſignificet nos per Legem, cuius Miniſter, &c. that it might ſignifie that by the Law, whereof Moſes was Miniſter, wee may ſee as it were afarre off eternall life and ſaluation, but neuer enter into it that way, becauſe through corruption of our natures, wee are not able to performe it, which being not performed,
                              Gal. 3.10. Iames 2.10. Mat. 5.19. ſhutteth vs out, and ſubiecteth vs to a curſe.
                     
                     
                        
                           Sect. 4. Moſes obedience to Gods ſummons, a patterne to vs.
                        THat Moſes went vp into the Mountaine to dye, Deut. 34.1. is an example before our eyes of moſt ſingular obedience, for hee grudged not, hee grieued not, he ſhrunke not backe, but yeelded to Gods bleſſed pleaſure, and was moſt willing and ready to dye. O that wee may finde grace and mercy with God, ſo to doe when time commeth, ſaying with

tongue, and ſaying with heart, behold here am I thy ſeruant, be it vnto mee as thou my bleſſed God wilt: Is my time come▪ and muſt I away? Lord then I come, and deſire to be looſed, and to be with thee▪ Againe, that Moſes endured ſo patiently the deniall of him to enter into the Land, which no doubt hee much deſired, let it euer teach vs and ſtrengthen vs to doe the like when God denieth vs our deſires: for aſſuredly God will doe better for vs, as here he did for Moſes, if vvee reſt on his good pleaſure. It is a true ſaying, it is a good ſaying, let it neuer goe out of our mindes; Semper Deus ſuos exaudit, &c. God alwayes heareth his Children, if not vnto their will, yet vnto their ſaluation and good.
                     
                  
                  
                     CHAP. III. The nature of death ſweetned to the Saints, with fifteene reſemblances of death to ſleepe.
                     
                        OBſerue it againe carefully, that death is not mentioned vnto Moſes in any terrible words, but in ſweet wordes,Ver. 13. 
                        Ibis ad Patres, Thou ſhalt goe to thy Fathers, and ſo ſtill is the death of Beleeuers ſpoken of in the Scriptures, that we might draw ſweet comfort from it, againſt any feare that fraile fleſh may

conceiue of death. For there is a death which moſt men feare, and that is the ſeperation of body and ſoule, our naturall death: and there is a death which too few feare, and that is the ſeperation of the ſoule from God. 
                           Ʋita carporis anima, vita animae Deus, the life of the body is the ſoule, and the life of the ſoule is God: Againſt this naturall feare oppoſe this and the like phraſes in Scriptures,
                           Gen. 15.15 You goe to your father, therefore feare not. Socrates a Heathen was much comforted at his death, that hee ſhould goe and meete with thoſe learned Poets, Orpheus, Homer, Heſiod, and ſuch like, how much more may wee ioy to meete with God the Father, and God the Sonne, and God the holy Ghoſt, with Angels, Arch-angels, Patriarkes, Prophets, Apoſtles, and all the holy company of Heauen; our fathers, our mothers, our ſiſters, and brothers, our friends and deare ones, that are gone before vs? O glorious ſight, O ineſtimable comfort, worthy to make vs cry with the Apoſtle;
                           Phil. 1.21. Iohn 11.1
                              •
                           
                         
                        I deſire to be looſed, and to be there: Come Lord Ieſus, come quickely. Death is an end of all miſery, and the beginning of all bliſſe, an eternall dwelling with God againe, and an aduantage as the Apoſtle nameth it, a ſweet ſleepe, a comfortable reſt, Vitae via, the way of life, ſaith Ambroſe: Nomen tantum fidelibus, death is onely a bare name and no death indeed to the faithfull,

ſaith Chriſoſtome: Nemo timet mortem, niſi qui non ſperat viuere poſt mortem; No man feareth death, but hee that hopeth not to liue after death: the Lord gaue, and the Lord taketh away life as well as goods, and ſhall not wee ſay with Iob?
                        
                           Iob 1.21. 
                        Bleſſed be the Name of the Lord. If wee hold for tearmes of yeeres, or at the will of the Lord, muſt not we be content to relinquiſh it when our tearme is expired. Wee our ſelues doe looke for it at the hands of our Tenants, and would be much offended if they ſhould be diſobedient: ſhall wee not performe to God what wee looke for at men? Grudge not at the loſſe, but be thankfull for the Ioane: wee are Gods Tenants, and we ought to giue him his owne when it is due to him. Would you keepe a pledge from the true owner, that committed it to you for a time. Our life is Gods pledge, hee hath left it with vs now ſo long, he euer entended to call for it againe, and will you not reſtore it gladly and willingly without murmuring and repining? thinke how you would like that at mans hands to keepe your pledge? Heathens haue beene ſtrong, and ſhall Chriſtians be weake?
                     The Swan is ſaid to ſing moſt ſweetly when ſhee muſt die, and ſhall Gods Children weepe? Bleſſed, bleſſed are the dead that die in the Lord, ſaith the holy Ghoſt, Reu. 14.13. and will we

not beleeue him? O ignaros malorum ſuorū, &c. O ignorant men of the miſeries of this life, that doe not eſteeme and prayſe death, as the beſt inuention of nature: yea, let vs ſay rather it is the great mercy and goodneſſe of God towards man: for firſt, it expelleth calamitie; ſecondly, it includeth felic
                           •
                        tie; thirdly, it preuenteth the perils of youth; fourthly, it finiſheth the toyles of age: Omnibus finis, multis remedium, nonnullis votum; to all an end, to many a remedie, to ſome a wiſh; deſeruing better of none then of them to whom hee commeth before hee be called for. As children feare their friends when they are diſguiſed, but when their vizards are plucked off, are glad of them: ſo of death, Ignorance makes feare, and Knowledge ioy.
                     
                        Cleambrotus, ſaith Cicero, after hee had read Platoes Booke of the happy eſtate of the dead, caſt himſelfe head-long off from a wall, into the Sea, that hee might come to that happineſſe: the ſame Author ſpeaketh of another Philoſopher that ſo diſputed of the contempt of death, that many willingly killed themſelues, whereupon Ptolomy the King forbad him any more to ſpeake of that matter in his Schoole: Now alacke, what compariſons be betwixt Philoſophicall Comforts and Diuine, out of the Treaſure of Gods owne Wiſdome, taken from his written Word? Shall wee then with

our light feare that, which they in their darkneſſe ſo little regarded? God forbid. The day of our birth wee neuer feare; and The day of death (ſaith God, that is euer true) is better then the day that one is borne, Eccleſ. 7.3. That reſemblance of death to ſleepe in Scriptures, 1 Cor. 15.51. is moſt fit if you marke it, and full of pleaſure: for,
                     1 As no man can euer wake, but of neceſſitie muſt ſometimes ſleepe: ſo no man can euer liue, but muſt needes haue a time to die.
                     2 Be a man neuer ſo ſtrong, ſleepe will tame him, and ſo will death, as it did Goliah, Sampſon, Milo, and others.
                     3 As ſleepe maketh vs put off our cloaths and Iewels, and that willingly, that we may take our reſt: ſo dealeth death with vs, it taketh away all our pompe and port, and layeth vs downe in our beds, till the waking time to ariſe.
                     4 As ſleepe commeth of eating: ſo came death alſo to our firſt Parents by intemperancie in eating the forbidden fruit, Gen. 2.17.
                     5 As our dayes doings be our nights troubles, by the working of the phantaſie: ſo are our lifes ſinnes our deaths griefes, by the gnawing of the Conſcience, as appeareth in Iudas, Antiochus, and Francis Spira.
                     
                     6 Sleepers haue no ſtormes, nor dead men know the worlds woes, for Abraham is ignorant

of, and Iſrael knowes not the Iewes woes, the firſt things being paſt &c. Reu. 21.4.
                     7 Some fall ſodainely or quickely into ſleepe, and ſome are long, according to the moiſtneſſe or dryneſſe of their braines: euen ſo, ſome dye ſooner as young Ioſias, and ſome later, as olde Methuſalem, according to the temper of their radicall moyſture, as it pleaſeth God.
                     8 Some ſleepe in their owne houſes, and ſome in other mens, as did Siſera in Iaels, ſome in the fields, ſome at Sea, ſome here, ſome there, in ſundry places: ſo doe wee dye, ſome at home, and ſome abroad; ſome by land, and ſome by Sea as God appointeth.
                     9 No man can tell the very time that hee falleth aſleepe, but onely feeleth it comming, and his body diſpoſed to it: ſo no man can tell the very moment of his death, but onely feeleth his body faint, and his ſpirits drawing to an end.
                     10 Suanius dormiunt qui relinquunt, &c. They ſleepe much better (ſaith one) that leaue all their cares in their ſhooes which they put off, and goe to reſt with a quiet minde: euen ſo doe they dye better, that haue diſpoſed of all their worldly matters, by Will or otherwiſe; whereby they are not troubled or diſtracted by them.
                     11 They ſleepe well againe, that haue laboured,

and taken paines all the day time: and ſo they die well, that in their vocation haue not beene idle, but imployed both body and minde to doe good.
                     
                        
                           Eſter 6.1.12 As Aſſuerus when he could not ſleepe, called for the Chronicles of his kingdom, to be read vnto him: ſo aſſuredly, whilſt wee wake in this world, and the ſleepe of death commeth not vpon vs, it ſhall be a moſt profitable thing to reade, or cauſe to be read vnto vs, the chronicle of GOD, the ſacred and holy Scriptures, the treaſures of all Comfort and good inſtructions.
                     13 When the body ſleepeth the ſoule ſleepeth not: no more dyeth the ſoule when the body dyeth.
                     14 No man goeth to bed to ſleepe but with a certaine hope and purpoſe to wake and riſe againe: ſo muſt wee dye in aſſurance of that great and generall Reſurrection.
                     15 And as our voyce and calling vpon men awake them: ſo ſhall that ſounding Trumpet doe in that day. Our Bed (ſaith another) is the Image of our Graue; the cloaths that couer vs, of the duſt and earth caſt vpon vs; the little Flea that biteth, of the Wormes that ſhall conſume vs; the Cocke that croweth, of the laſt Trumpet: and as (ſaith hee) I riſe vp luſtily, when ſluggiſh ſleepe is paſt, ſo hope I to riſe vp ioyfully to Iudgement at the laſt:

How fitly then Death and Sleepe be reſembled together, you ſee.
                  
                  
                     CHAP. IIII. Conſiderations to moue vs to embrace death as willingly as we goe to ſleepe in our beds naturally.
                     
                        BVT you may happily wiſh to know what may make you dye willingly and gladly when Gods time commeth, fleſh being fraile, and an enemy ſtill to the Spirit, till God ſubdue it▪ your deſire herein is good, and hearken a little to theſe things: if death be a ſleepe as you heare the Scriptures ſtill call it for our Comfort, then looke what maketh men goe to ſleepe gladly without any feare, and the ſame ſhall helpe vs greatly to dye contentedly and chearefully:
                           Note. 1 the firſt thing is wearineſſe or paine of body, for in this caſe you know how willingly wee goe to reſt, and how heartily wee wiſh wee were aſleepe; for the ſleepe of him that trauelleth is ſweet, Eccleſs. 5.11. Apply it to death, if you eyther be weary of the toyles and troubles of this wretched life, of the diſhoneſt courſes that are in it, and of the infinite trickes, ſinfull and vile, before God and good men: or if you be in any paine of

the whole, or any part of the body, not to be caſed and helped by the Art of man: how in ſuch a caſe is death welcome, and of right ſo ſhould be, much more then ſleepe? For firſt, ſleepe eaſeth but for a time, but death for euer, both theſe cauſes: ſecondly, ſleepe taketh not away the Maladie, but the feeling; Death taketh both away, and as I ſay, for euer. The diſeaſes of the body? how many? how ſtrange? how fearefull? who can number them; when daily happen new, that the Phyſitian knoweth not? ſweet Death is a Superſedeas for all, curing what we haue, and preuenting what we might haue, ſhould God ſo be pleaſed to lay them vpon vs. Thinke therefore ſeriouſly of this one meanes, to make death welcome, and aſſuredly you ſhall be the better.
                     
                        
                           Sect. 3. The ſecond Conſideration.
                        
                           
                              Note. 2 A Second thing that maketh vs willing to to goe to our naturall ſleepe, is griefe and anguiſh of minde, ſorrow and woe of hart, and will not this alſo make vs dye willingly? Surely ſo much more then the former, by how much griefe of minde exceedeth any griefe of body. The croſſes by Foes, the croſſes by Friends, the diſobedience of Children, the vnfaithfulneſſe of Seruants; publike woes; and

priuate wrongs, in goods, in name, and many other wayes, they are more bitter then Gall and Wormewood, more burning and biting then tongue can expreſſe: now ſcalding, now cooling, the oppreſſed heart groaning and ſighing, panting and pincing away in the view and ſight of all beholders; the number is ſo great that no man can comprehend them: euery day begetting new griefes of minde, as well as new paines and diſeaſes of body. Thinke with your ſelues, whether euer you eſcaped day in your life without ſome diſcontent, greater or leſſer, that according to his meaſure hath not bit you, and grieued you. It is Vallis Lachrimarum, the Vale of miſery that we liue in: and from one miſery or other we ſhall neuer be free while wee liue in it.
                        S. Auguſtine ſaid vpon ſome feeling, Diù viuere eſt diù torqueri, Long to liue, is long to be vexed and tormented. The holy Prophet Elias went a dayes iourney in the Wilderneſſe, and ſate downe vnder a Iuniper tree, deſiring that hee might dye, and ſaying, It is enough,
                           1 King. 19.4 
                           O Lord, take my Soule, for I am no better then my Fathers. See how griefe of minde made this holy man willing to dye, and moſt welcome ſhould that good will of God haue beene to him, if ſo it had pleaſed the giuer and taker away of life to doe with him: adde vnto theſe words the like words of Tobiah, Deale with me

O Lord, as ſeemeth beſt vnto thee, and command my ſpirit to be taken from mee, that I may be diſſolued and become earth: for it is better for mee to die then to liue, becauſe I haue heard falſe reproches, and am ſorrowfull; command therefore that I may be diſſolued out of this diſtreſſe, and goe into the euerlaſting place, turne not away thy face from mee. See the effect of ſorrow and griefe of minde in this good man: againe, it maketh him moſt willing and deſirous to dye.
                        It is written of Babylis, Biſhop of Antioch, ſlaine by Decius that perſecuting Emperour, that going to his death, he ſaid the words in the Pſalme; Returne vnto thy reſt, O my Soule, for the Lord hath beene beneficiall vnto thee: (an excellent place for ſuch a time:) as if he ſhould haue ſaid, Now my griefes farewell, and all my woes and wrongs in this wicked world; and now my Soule be chearefull and glad, for now commeth thy reſt, thy ſure reſt, thy ſweet reſt, thy neuer failing reſt, but eternall, for euer: therefore returne vnto it, O weary ſoule, and giue thankes and praiſe to God, for hee hath beene beneficiall vnto thee in this moſt gracious change and happy releaſe. Conclude with the words of wiſe Sirach, and remember them often: O Death, how bitter is the remembrance of thee to a man that liueth at reſt, in his poſſeſſions, vnto the man that hath nothing to vexe him, and that hath proſperitie in all things? &c.
                           
But againe, O Death, how acceptable is thy iudgement vnto the needfull! and vnto him whoſe ſtrength faileth, and that is now in the laſt age, and is vexed with all things, &c. Feare not the Iudgement of death: remember them that haue beene before thee, and that come after thee: it is the ordinance of the Lord ouer all fleſh, and why wouldeſt thou be againſt the pleaſure of the moſt Higheſt? whether it be tenne, or an hundred, or a thouſand yeeres, there is no defence for life againſt the graue.
                     
                     
                        
                           Sect. 3. The third conſideration.
                        
                           
                              Note. 3 A Third reaſon that maketh a man willing to ſleepe naturally, is the good that commeth both to body and minde by ſuch ſleepe: it cheareth and refreſheth, gladdeth and comforteth both, let the ſame reaſon alſo make thee willing to dye; for Death will miniſter much more comfort, chearing and refreſhing, and that for euer, as ſhall be ſaid. The Brazen Serpent cured the beholders, and had no ſting: ſo doth death, and hath no ſting neyther. That it cureth and helpeth all euils, you know, becauſe it is Finis omnium malorum, the end of all euils: and it hath no ſting, as you are taught when you reade thoſe words; O Death, where is thy ſting? O Graue, where is

thy victories?
                           1 Cor. 15.55.56.57. 
                           the ſting of death is ſinne, and the ſtrength of ſinne is the Law: But thankes be vnto God, which hath giuen vs victory through our Lord Ieſus Chriſt. Mors Chriſts, mors mortis meae, The death of Chriſt is the death of my death,
                              Oſee 13.14. ſaith Bernard. O Death! I will be thy Death, ſaith hee by the Prophet. And Hierome vpon it; Illius morte t
                                 •
                               mortua es, &c. By his death thou art dead, by his death wee liue, thou haſt deuoured, and art deuoured thy ſelfe, oh Death. Death maketh duſt returne to the earth as it was, and the Spirit to returne to God that gaue it, ſaith the word of God, and ſhall not wee be glad of this? Shall it grieue vs to returne to God? to haue the Spirit goe from whence it came? to walke with God? to enter into life? to goe to the Marriage of the Lambe? Is the brute Oxe grieued to be vnyoaked? Were Abraham, Iſacc, and Iacob; holy men, or holy women, euer vnwilling? Wherefore if men deſire naturall ſleepe, in regard of the good that commeth by it, ſo doe you death: and cherefully from your heart ſay with olde Simeon; Lord, now letteſt thou thy Seruant depart in peace, according to thy Word, &c. Luke 2.29.
                     
                     
                        
                        
                           Sect. 4. The fourth Conſideration.
                        
                           
                              Note. 4 A Fourth cauſe making men willing, without feare, to ſleepe naturally, is that aſſured hope which they haue to awake and ariſe againe: and ſhall not you ariſe from the ſleepe of death? why then ſhould we ſhrinke more at the one then at the other? wee ſhall riſe againe, for Chriſt our Head is riſen, and the Members muſt follow: If the dead be not raiſed, then is Chriſt not riſen, &c. as you read in that ſingular Chapter, 1 Cor. 15.20. The Sunne riſeth and ſetteth againe, the Moone waineth & groweth againe. Of the aſhes of the olde Phoenix commeth another: the leafe falleth, and the ſappe deſcendeth, yet both ſappe and leafe returne againe. Sarahs wombe, though dead, yet beareth a Sonne, when the Lord will: ſo ſhall the reſurrection be of dead bodies. The hand of the Lord was vpon mee,
                           
                              Ezech. 37.1 (ſaith the Prophet) and carried mee out in the Spirit of the Lord, and ſet mee downe in the midſt of the field, which was full of bones.
                           2 
                           And hee led me round about by them, and behold, there were very many in the open field, and loe, they were very dry. And hee ſaid vnto mee,
                           3 
                           Sonne of man, can theſe bones liue? And I anſwered, O Lord God, thou knoweſt. Againe,
                           4 
                           hee ſaid

vnto mee, Propheſie vpon theſe bones, and ſay vnto them, O yee dry bones, heare the word of the Lord. Thus ſaith the Lord God vnto theſe bones,
                           5 
                           behold, I will cauſe breath to enter into you,
                           6 
                           and yee ſhall liue. And I will lay ſinewes vpon you, and make fleſh grow vpon you, and couer you with skinne, and put breath into you, that yee may liue,
                           7 
                           and ye ſhall know that I am the Lord. So I propheſied, as I was commanded, and as I propheſied there was a noyſe, and behold there was a ſhaking, and the bones came together, bone to his bone.
                           8 
                           And when I beheld, loe, the ſinewes, and the fleſh grew vpon them, and aboue the skinne couered them, but there was no breath in them. Then ſaid hee vnto mee, Propheſie vnto the wind: propheſie ſonne of man,
                           9 
                           and ſay to the winde, Thus ſaith the Lord God, Come from the foure windes, O breath, and breathe vpon theſe ſlaine, that they may liue.
                           10 
                           So I propheſied as hee had commanded mee: and the breath came into them, and they liued, and ſtood vp vpon their feet, an exceeding great armie.
                        
                        Such another excellent place is that in the Apocalypſe,
                           
                              Reue. 20.11 
                           And I ſaw a great white throne, and one that ſate on it, from whoſe face fled away both the earth, and the heauen, and their place was no more found.
                           12 
                           And I ſaw the dead, both great and ſmall ſtand before God: and the Bookes were opened, and another booke was opened, which is the Booke of life, and the dead were iudged of

thoſe things, which were written in the Bookes, according to their workes.
                           13 
                           And the Sea gaue vp her dead, which were in her, and Death and Hell deliuered vp the dead which were in them: and they were iudged euery man according to their workes.
                        
                        Thus you ſee, that as from our naturall ſleepe, ſo from death, wee ſhall awake againe, and therefore no cauſe to feare the one more then the other, Reſurrectio mortuorum, ſpes Chriſtianorum, The Reſurrection of the dead, is the hope of the Chriſtians Faith. So Tertullian, meaning their ioyfull hope, that wipeth away all teares and vnwillingneſſe to dye. Credo Reſurrectionem carnis, I beleeue the reſurrection of the body, and life euerlaſting: Therefore care away; Though I dye yet I dye not, but onely ſleepe in my Graue, as in my Chamber, till my GOD ſend his Angels to awake me with his Trumpet, that I may enter into ioy that n
                              •
                           uer ſhall haue an end; till which time I reſt free from all ſorrow and paine, not troubled with any of the worlds woes, but as a man in his bed faſt aſleepe, moſt free from all offences and vexations. Yea, euen the ſelfe ſame body ſhall ariſe, to our vnſpeakable comforts, teach the Scriptures, Iob 19.25. Iohn 5.29. 1 Cor. 15.42.43. and many other places, euen as Chriſts body aroſe the ſame that it was before, the ſame eyes, mouth, feet, hands, &c.
                              Luk. 34.32
                           
                           Dixe
                                 ••
                              nt, tactis corproibus, &c. They ſaid, (ſaith Tertullian of auncient Chriſtians,) touching, or laying their hands vpon the bodies, wee beleeue the reſurrection of this body, this body that I touch and lay my hands vpon, for the goodneſſe of God will giue glory to that body that hath giuen glory to him, the ſelfe-ſame eye, the ſelfe-ſame mouth, the ſelfe-ſame eare, feet, hands▪ &c. What an encouragement is this to doe well, if you marke it? and what an argument to make vs willing to dye, being aſſured of this as weare?
                     
                     
                        
                           Sect. 5. The laſt Conſideration. The bodyes freedome, and the ſoules Glorification.
                        
                           
                              Note. 5 THE fift and laſt cauſe that maketh vs willing to goe to our naturall reſt, without feare, muttering, or any diſcontent, is the chearefulneſſe and liuelineſſe of body and minde, that vſeth to follow after ſleepe, both to body and minde, being refreſhed thereby ſo greatly, let the ſame cauſe make vs willing to dye, for there is no compariſon betweene the comfort and refreſhing that naturall ſleepe worketh, and that which followeth after death, when Chriſt ſhall change our vile bodie, that it may be faſhioned like vnto his glorious body, according to the working whereby hee is

able to ſubdue all things vnto himſelfe, when this corruptible hath put on incorruption, and this mortall hath put on immortalitie. If that ſmall glimpſe which the Diſciples ſaw made them wiſh for three Tabernacles, and an eternall being there, Mat. 17.4. O how ſhall the whole glory of heauen and heauens bliſſe rauiſh vs, and make vs glad, that wee haue attained to it! O no ſuch refreſhing can come from our earthly beds and naturall ſleepe here. Wherefore with ioy let vs welcome the houre of death, and bleſſe God for it tenne thouſand times, following the foot-ſteps of worthy Fathers and Saints in the Church, whoſe feeling of this point God hath directed them to leaue behinde them in their writings, O tu vita, quam praeparauit Dexs ijs, qui diligunt eum: vita vitalis, vita beata, vita ſecura, vita tranquilla, &c. O thou life (ſaith Auguſtine) prepared of God, for them that loue him, thou liuing life, thou bleſſed life, thou ſecure life, thou quiet life, thou beautifull life, thou life that knoweſt no death, thou life that knoweſt no ſadneſſe, thou life without blot, without ſorrow, without care, without corruption, without perturbation, without any varietie or change. Would God that laying aſide this burthen of my fleſh, I might enter into thy ioyes, O quam fortunatus ero ſi audiuero, &c. O how happy ſhall I be, if I might heare thoſe

ſweet Songs of thy Citizens, and thoſe honey ſweet verſes; but O more happy if I my ſelfe may finde grace and fauour to ſing a ſong vnto the Lord Ieſus Chriſt, of the ſweet Songs of Sion! O verè foelices, qui de Pilago, &c. O truely happy they that come out of the Sea of the World, to the Hauen of Heauen, out of Baniſhment to their owne Country, and out of a foule Priſon to a glorious Palace! O Coeleſtis domus luminoſa, ad te ſuſpirat, &c. O Heauenly Houſe, full of glorious light, to thee tendeth my pilgrimage, that he may poſſeſſe mee in thee, that made both mee and thee! Inter Brachia Seruatoris mei & viuere volo, & mori cupio; In the Armes of my Sauiour I wiſh to liue, and deſire to dye. Many ſuch feeling ſpeeches I could repeate from the auncient militant warriours in this mortalitie, whom we call Fathers, when they went to the Father of Spirits; ſhewing how farre they were from any vnwillingneſſe to die, which if wee make vſe of as wee ought, aſſuredly they will vvorke in vs through the bleſſing of God, the ſame effect. To ſhut vp this, the godly cry, come Lord Ieſus, come quickely: Now they are in the world, then they ſhall come to their owne: now they are in the skirmiſh, then ſhall they be in their victory: now in the tempeſtuous Sea, then in the quiet Hauen: now in the heate of the day, then in reſt and coole euening: now in

place abſent from Chriſt, then with him following whereſoeuer hee goeth. Now their life is hid with Chriſt, but then ſhall they appeare with him in glory, and that glory for euer and euer, without change or end. 1 Iohn 4.2.
                     
                  
                  
                     Comforts againſt the feare of Death: by which the Chriſtian Soule may be made willing to her Diſſ
                           •
                        lution. CHAP. V.
                     
                        THE feare of death is not one of the leaſt temptations to a weake Chriſtian: for, Death is not onely fearefull to a naturall man, whoſe hope is in this world, being in it owne nature the moſt terrible of all terribles; as Heathen men haue tearmed it: for which cauſe wicked men are agaſt at the apprehenſion of it, as appeares in the example of B
                              •
                           ltazar, of Hamon, and others being as vnwilling to dye as the Beare vnto the Stake, and the Swine vnto the Shambles: but euen the godly themſelues haue ſome combats and conflicts in this

kinde, as had our Sauiour Chriſt himſelfe, Ezekias, and Dauid, &c. by reaſon that Nature abhorres her owne aboliſhion, and feares the diſſolution of the ſoule and body, which are naturally as vnwilling to be ſeuered and ſundered as two friends, that haue beene borne, and bred, and brought vp together, are loath to depart, and to take their long leaue eyther of other: therefore to make that eaſie and facile vnto thee, which of it ſelfe is harſh and difficult, that thou maiſt ſubmit thy ſelfe willingly to that which all fleſh haue vndergone and muſt vndergoe of neceſſitie. Arme Grace againſt Nature, and the Spirit againſt the Fleſh, with theſe comfortable conſiderations.
                     
                        1 God cals for thy ſoule.1 Conſider that by corporall death, God onely cals againe for that ſoule which at the firſt hee created and infuſed into the body, to informe and animate it, and that this Soule of thine flits not out of her terreſtriall tabernacle by chance or hap-hazard, or caſualtie, or fortune, or by the Climactericall yeere, the reuolution of ſeauens and nines, or by the poſition of the Heauens, or courſe of the Starres, or by thy diſeaſe, or ſickneſſe, occaſioned by bad dyet, ſuperfluities of meates or drinkes, ouer-great heates or taking of cold, or the like accidents, which are but meere inſtruments of thy mortalitie; but looke at the ſuperiour Agent, GOD himſelfe, who hath now determined

and diſpoſed thy death: Hab. 9.27. who hath numbred thy dayes and appointed thy limits: who turnes thy duſt into his duſt, Gen. 3.19. thou being a Sonne of Adam, and cals for thy Spirit to returne to him that gaue it, Pſal. 90.3. Eccleſ. 12.7. And therefore ſeeing it is the Lord that cals, be thou as willing to ſleepe with thy Fathers, as Samuel was to awake out of his naturall ſleepe at Gods call, 1 Sam. 3.10. Thinke that thy Soule is giuen vnto thee as a precious pledge to be ſafely kept, and therefore grudge not to returne thy holy pawne to God the chiefe owner, when hee requires it, but commit it to him, as into the hands of a faithfull Creator and louing Redeemer. Why ſhould the Tenant at will, ſtand out with his Land-lord for an old rotten Cottage, when he would remoue him to a better Manſion? why ſhould the Souldier be refractorie to leaue his ſtation and place, to be otherwaies diſpoſed of by his Generall and Commander? Now thou art here but a Tenant at will, thou haſt no fee-ſimple of thy life: thou art a war-faring Souldier, profeſſed in Baptiſme, therefore like the Centurions Souldiers, be willing to goe when thy Captaine bids thee goe, Mat. 8.9.
                     2 Let this comfort thee, that thy ſinnes,2 The ſting of death is taken away. the cauſe of thy death, is taken away by the Meſſias, Chriſt; in whom thou beleeueſt, by whom thy ſinnes being pardoned, thou

art bleſſed, Pſal. 32.1. his death being the death of Sin, and the conqueſt of Hell. Hoſ. 13. 1 Cor. 15. And therefore comfort thy ſelfe with Dauids holy Meditations, encouraging thy ſoule to returne vnto her reſt, becauſe the Lord hath beene bountifull vnto thee, ſince he hath deliuered thy Soule from death (euen the ſecond death) thine eyes from teares, and thy feete from falling: and ſince thou ſhalt walke before the Lord, euen with the foure and twentie Elders, in long white roabes, in the Land of the liuing, Pſal. 116.7.8.9. For all thy bitter griefe in corporall death, (which yet is ſweetened to the Elect) the Lord will deliuer thy ſoule from the pit of corruption: for hee hath caſt all thy ſinnes behinde his backe, as hee did Ezekiahs, Eſay 38.17. And therefore as there is no danger in handling an Adder or Viper, or any other Serpent, when her ſting is taken away, ſo there is no perill in Death, ſince Sinne, which is the ſting of Death, is to thee, not imputed, but in the mercies of God, pardoned, and in the merits of Chriſt couered. 1 Cor. 15. Rom. 8.1.
                     
                        3 Ionas 4.2. Exod. 34. God is preſent at thy death.Remember, that God is the ſame God vnto thee in thy death, that hee was in life; good, gracious, propitious, mercifull, and mindefull of thee in thy laſt and greateſt exigent. Enoch found it ſo, who walking vvith God in his life, vvas taken away by the ſame

God, in his death, that he was no more ſeene. Gen. 5.24. Therefore it was Iobs dying comfort, that his Redeemer liued, whom as hee deſired, ſo hee hoped to ſee with the eyes of his body, as he had beheld him, with the reſt of the Patriarkes, with the eyes of Faith, Iob 19.25. This conſideration made him confident in the midſt of his combats, that though the Lord ſhould kill him, yet hee would truſt in him. Iob 13. This made prophecying Iacob, ioyfull in his laſt farewell out of the few and euill expired dayes of his Pilgrimage, in the inioying that Shilo, the bleſſed Meſſias, and his ſaluation, which ſo long hee had waited for, Gen. 49.18.33. This made old Simeon ſo comfortably caroll out his Swan-like ſong a little before his death: euery particular of vvhich dittie expreſſeth his delight to dye, and his deſire to depart, when hee had the worlds Sauiour in his armes, and his Spirit in his heart, Luke 2.25.26.27 28.29. And ſure if thou haue the ſame grace, and feele God in ſo many particulars now gracious vnto thee in thy life, as did Enoch, Iob, Iacob, and Simeon; thou oughteſt vpon the ſame grounds, to ſe
                           •
                        tle thy heart in the ſweet aſſurance of Gods ſpeciall preſence in thy laſt diſſolution, that hee will make thy bed in thy ſickeneſſe, and ſend thee that very Comforter, his owne Spirit, which according to his promiſe he ſent

his Diſciples, euen when all externall comforts faile; if thou now worſhip him in ſpirit and in truth. Iohn 4.24. For Salomon the wiſeſt of men, from the wiſdome of God, taught, what Dauid his Father bleſſedly felt, 1 Kings ch. 1. v. 48. ch. 2. v. 1.2.3. v. 10.11. that the righteous hath hope in death:
                           Pro. 14.32 euen then when the wicked is caſt off by reaſon of his malice, as was Antiochus Epiphanes, Herod, and others. And therefore you of the Iſrael of God, you the Seede of Abraham, the friends of God, feare not, for the Lord is vvith his Seruants, with thoſe whom hee hath choſen, and he will be with you, and not caſt you away; but vvill ſtrengthen, help, and ſuſtaine you: yea againe I ſay, Feare not thou worme Iacob, and yee men of Iſrael, I will helpe thee ſaith the Lord, and thy Redeemer, the holy One of Iſrael, Eſay 41. v. 8.9.10. & v. 14. If the Lord be thy friend (as hee vvas a friend to Abraham, to Lazarus,
                        
                           Iames 2.23 and to his Diſciples, and is ſtill to all that ſeeke him and his grace,) then ſure hee will play a ſure friends part, hee will ſticke faſt to thee in thy laſt conflict, in this thy vvarrefare, remembring thee euen in death, as hee did his friend Lazarus, Iohn 11.11. Therefore apply Dauids meditation, as balme to thine owne ſore, in thy feares: and ſay to thy ſoule, Why art thou ſad oh my Soule? and why art thou ſo diſquieted within mee? ſtill truſt in

God, and giue him thankes for the comfortable helpe of his preſence. Though I walke through the ſhadow of death, yet will I feare none euill, for thou art with mee, thy Rod and thy Staffe ſhall comfort mee, Pſal. 23.4. God is my God, euen the God of whom commeth my ſaluation. God is the Lord, by whom I eſcape death: by whom indeede death is no death. Pſal. 68.20.
                     4 Remember what death is properly to the godly: not a dying, but a departing:4 Death is no death to the godly. 
                        Luke 2.29. not an aboliſhion, but a diſſolution: Phil. 1. a looſing out of Priſon, a Goale-deliuery to the ſoule; not a curſe, but a bleſſing; a freedome and a libertie out of captiuitie; not pernitious, but precious in the ſight of God is the death of his Saints, Pſal. 116. A walking with God. Gen. 5. A going to our Fathers in peace. A gathering to our people, and A yeeldding of the ſpirit, Gen. 25.8. Gen. 49.33. A ſweet ſleepe, Deut. 31. A reſt of our fleſh in hope, Pſal. 16. & 116. A reſting from our labours, Reu. 14. with diuers ſuch Epithites that the Scripture giues, ſpeaking of the death of Abraham, Iacob, Moſes, Dauid, Ioſias, &c. and the reſt of the Saints of God. Oh then, why ſhouldeſt thou feare thy freedome? Doth any Iewiſh, Turkiſh, Romiſh, or Athenian Bond-man, take it ill to be infranchized? Doth any Apprentiſe diſtaſte to be made a Free-man? Is any Priſoner daunted vvith

the newes of his deliuery out of colde Irons? Is any Captiue diſcomforted when hee perceiues the meanes of his ranſome? oh then why ſhouldeſt thou be daunted with that meſſenger that is ſent from the King of heauen, to deliuer thee from all the maladies and miſeries of this life? from all the diſtreſſes, croſſes, and cares that are incident to this mortalitie, in bonds, ſickeneſſe, diſeaſes, paines of body, burthen of minde, incurable ſores, with an hundred ſuch like afflictions, which make life to be loathedly vnpleaſant and vnprofitable beſides?Vita vix vitalis. Is any man afraid of his bed? is not reſt comfortable to a iournying foot-man; to a trauelling pilgrime, or a drudging labourer? Oh how glad is hee to repoſe his wearyed limbes in his wiſhed couch! Oh how acceptable is ſleepe to refocillaite and recouer the ouer-ſpent ſpirits, and to reuiue the decayed powers! Now thy death is but a ſleepe, as the Word teſtifies: there being ſuch a proportion betwixt death and ſleepe, that the Heathen could tearme ſleepe the Image of Death,
                        Somnus Imago mortis. Frater mortis. Homer.
                         and the elder Brother of Death: and our graues are our beds, in which our bodies reſting and ſleeping, the holy Ghoſt, vvhoſe liuing Temples they were, vvatching ouer them vvhen they are dead, ſhall rouze them vp at the laſt day in beautie, glory, and ſplendor, like the Sunne; refreſhed,

like a Gyant ready to runne his Race.
                     5 Further,5 Wee ſhall know and inioy our friends in glory. (to inlarge and diffuſe this meditation a little further) doth any man diſlike to accept of theſe opportunities, where hee ſhall not onely ſee and viſite, but inioy the company and conference of his friends; his longed for, his louing and beloued abſent friends? their ſight is gracious, the communion and conuerſation with them is more gracious: now by death we come to enioy 
                           Gen. 1.15 Numb. 27. Deut. 32., and to ioy in the preſence of our friends, vvho haue broke the Ice before vs, and haue led the way to this common Inne of death: we ſhall ſee the face of CHRIST, wee ſhall looke vpon him, whom our ſinnes haue pierced, behold his wounds in his glorified body, as the Angels now behold them; wee ſhall inſeperably be vnited vnto him, and ſo ioy in him, that our ioy ſhall be full, in thoſe bleſſed manſions which hee hath gone before to prepare; wee ſhall liue and conuerſe with Abraham, Iſaack, and Iacob, and the ancient Patriarkes; with Dauid, Ioſias, Ezekias, &c. and all religious Kings; with Samuel, Eſay, Ieremie, Iohn Baptiſt, and all the holy Prophets; with Peter, Andrew, Phillip, and all the bleſſed Apoſtles; with Matthew, Marke, Luke and Iohn, the ſincere Euangeliſts; with Paul, Steuen, Peter and Iames, and all the conſtant Martyres, zealous

Confeſſors, and Profeſſers of the Truth; yea, and all the reſt of the faithfull, whom we ſhall know to the increaſe of our ioy, eſpecially thoſe whom wee haue here knowne and ſeene, euen as Adam knew Eue in the Creation,
                           Gen. 2.23. Mat. 17.4. and Peter knew Moſes and Elias in Chriſts Tranſfiguration (a type of our Glorification) whom before they had neuer ſeene. To conclude therefore, now is the time, when in the Church triumphant, all that haue beene within the Couenant of Grace, and vnder the Goſpell in the Church militant, ſhall come to the Mount Sion, and to the Citie of the liuing God, the celeſtiall Ieruſalem, and to the company of innumerable Angels, and to the Aſſembly and congregation of the firſt borne, which are written in heauen, and to God the Iudge of all, and to the Spirits of iuſt and perfect men, and to Ieſus the Mediator of the new Teſtament, Heb. 12.22.23.24. Now, what great harme is there in going to our friends? eſpecially, ſuch friends as theſe be, who in knowledge and wiſedome, in glory and excellencie, in loue and amitie, doe farre ſurpaſſe all friends vpon earth.6 Death frees from ſinne, and from thy ſoules enemies.
                     
                     6 Conſider the fruit and happy effect of Death, in freeing thee from ſinne, and all miſeries the puniſhments of ſinne: that ſtroke that kils thee will kill alſo a monſtrous Mother and a wretched Daughter, Sinne and

Sorrow: for, as Death is the death of the body, ſo it is the diſſeuering of ſinne from the body; Sinne that brought forth Death is deſtroyed by Death, euen as the Viper kils the damme that bred him, and as Nero murthered Agrippina that bore him: that which puls downe the houſe of the body, deſtroyes Sinne the troubleſome and vnruly Tenant that dwelt in this houſe. Now, is it not a ioy to thee, to be rid by any meanes of ſuch an vnworthy and vnwelcome gueſt, as Sinne, which is alwayes quarrelling with thy beſt friends, as the Spirit and the Grace of GOD within thee? Art thou not glad to be freed from ſuch a Make-baite, as this body of ſinne, this old Adam, which is alwayes ſtirring vp ciuill broyles and combats within this little world of thy ſelfe? alwayes plotting and contriuing the ruine and deſtruction of thy better part, thy Soule? Art thou not glad to haue ſuch a fire quenched, as thy burning luſts, and rebelling concupiſcences, the worſt burning Feuer that euer came to man? Art thou not glad to be rid of a ſloathfull, luxurious, riotous, vaine, wanton, vicious, rebellious Seruant, which is alwayes grieuing and offending thee, prouoking thee to euill, hindering thee from good, ſluggiſh to doe well, forward to all euill? ſuch a gueſt, ſuch a quarreller, ſuch a fire, ſuch a rebell, ſuch a ſeruant is thy Fleſh; dull and dead,

and lumpiſh, ſlow and ſluggiſh to euery good dutie, priuate and publique; prone and propenſe to euery ſinne; alwayes ſolliciting, importuning, trying, and tempting thee, with as great importunitie as Potiphars Wife did Ioſeph, to abaſe and abuſe thy ſoule and body, in euery filthy pollution, to commit ſpirituall whoredome with the world, and the fleſh; ſtill grieuing thy God, and offending his maieſtie, abuſing his mercy, crucifying Chriſt, turning his grace into wantonneſſe, vexing his Spirit, quenching the motions, and hindering the operations of his Grace; taking part with Sathan thy forraine enemie, like an inmate traytor, and domeſticall conſpirator. Now, Death diſlodgeth this gueſt; quels this quarreller, hangs vp this Achitophel, quencheth this luſtfull fire, executes this rebell, caſhiers this ſeruant: for euen as the Iuie dyes that twines about the Oake, when the Oake is cut downe; ſo the cutting downe of the body is the curbing and curing the ſinne in the body, which ſinne liues and dyes, hath his birth and death, with the ſubiect wherein it is reſident: for he that is dead is freed from ſinne, Rom. 6.7. Therefore, Mors metuenda non eſt, quia eſt finis peccatorum. Ambroſe.
                     
                     Now, as it frees thee from ſinne, ſo the cauſe ceaſing, the effect ceaſeth alſo: it frees thee from all the miſeries that grow, as fruits,

from this curſed Tree: euen all the paynes and labours of body, and vexations of ſpirit that are incident to this mortall condition. This made the Wiſe-man praiſe thoſe that were dead, before thoſe that are liuing. Eccle. 4. and to preferre the day of death before the day of life, Eccleſ. 7. And made ſome of the Philoſophers in their Heatheniſh Paradoxes affirme, that it was beſt for a man neuer to be borne, the next beſt, to dye ſoone; becauſe in reſpect of the many miſeries of this life, which they ſaw into with their naturall eyes, they thought Nature was a Mother vnto all other Creatures, and a Step-dame vnto man;Theophraſtus. therefore Iob that drunke as deepe in this cup of common afflictions incident to humane nature, as euer any meere man, in this reſpect deſired death; Euen as the Servant deſired the ſhadow, and as the Hireling looked for the end of his worke, Iob 7.2.
                     7 Conſider that God doth not onely deliuer thee from the euill of ſinne and the euill of puniſhment preſent,7 It deliuers from the euils preſent and to come. but by taking thee now away hee hath a purpoſe to free thee from future temporall euils, which perhaps hee purpoſeth to bring vpon that place and people amongſt whom thou art: for indeede this is the Lords ordinary proceeding, to deliuer his Seruants from the euils to come, whileſt the wicked are chained in earth, and

reſerued for further plagues. Thus hee tooke away good Auguſtine ere the Gothes and Vandals ouer-ranne Hippo, where hee vvas Biſhop: this the Lord promiſed, as a ſpeciall mercy to good Ioſias, that before hee vvould accompliſh his threat againſt Iudah, he ſhould be put into his graue in peace, and that his eyes ſhould not behold the euill, 2 Kin. 22.20. And thus hee ſaith of the mercifull men and righteous, that they are taken away from the euils to come, that Peace ſhall be vpon them, and they ſhall reſt in their beds, when the Witches Children, the ſeede of Adulterers and Whores, a rebellious people, ſhall periſh and conſume, Eſay 57.1.2.3. Apply this fauour of God to thine owne particulars, for the ſtrengthening of thy faith, as alſo inlarge it, by the meditation of theſe euils, which are fore-told in theſe laſt times, Mat. 24.4. v. 24. &c. Luke 21.25. 1 Tim. 4.1.2. 2 Pet. 2.1.2.3.
                     
                        8 It ſecures thee from the fight with Sin, to triumph with God.8. Remember, this corporall death thou art to vndergoe, puts a period to a moſt perillous and dangerous fight, with which in this life thou waſt continually exerciſed, in which fight thou diddeſt often faint, was often ſoyled, often wounded, more often put to fight, (euen to flye to Heauen for help, ſuccour, and refuge) then euer the Iſraelites were occaſioned to flye and cry vnto GOD, againſt the 
                           Deu. 44.45 
                        Amorites,
                        
                           Iudg. 10.10 Iudg. 3.8. 
                        Amonites, Amalekites, 
                        
                           Exod. 14. 
                        Aegiptians,

Philiſtines, or any of their mortall enemies. Thou canſt tell well what theſe enemies were, the deceitfull World, deluding Fleſh, and deceiuing Diuell, 1 Tim. 6.4.18. Ephe. 6.12. 1 Pet. 5.8. 1 Iohn 2.13. The luſt of the fleſh, the luſts of the eyes, and the pride of life, 1 Iohn 1.16. How oft haue they ſoiled, how oft haue they foyled thee? What burnings haſt thou had from thine owne boyling concupiſcence within, and from Sathans fiery darts without? What bloody bickerings haſt thou had with thine owne rebellious heart? What ciuill broyles betwixt Grace and Nature, two armed Champions, ſtrugling within thee, like Iacob and Eſau in Rebeccahs wombe? What combats haſt thou had with thine owne corruptions, thine owne fleſh riſing againſt thee, as Abſolon againſt Dauid; incouraged and counſelled by that Serpentinely politique Achi
                              •
                           phel, the Diuell, how to diſpoſſeſſe thee of a better kingdome then any earthly Monarch euer gaue, euen the Kingdome of Heauen; driuing thee from the Caſtle of Grace, and preuenting thee from the Throne of Glory? What troupes of luſts out of thine owne boſome, and breeding, like the blacke guard of Ruffians, and Swaſh-bucklers, haue ioyned iſſue with the Fleſh againſt thee, the Diuell being the grand Generall of thoſe ſlauiſh and ſinfull Legions? What vvounds

and wrackes haſt thou receiued from Pride, Luxurie, Worldlineſſe, Carnalitie, Ambition, Anger, Aemulation, Malice, Couetouſneſſe, ſenſuall Delights, carnall Deſires, &c. the skars whereof are yet remaining, though their rancour be cured by repentance? how haue theſe ſucceſſiuely, and oft ſucceſſefully, ſet vpon thee, one after another, like the Lion after the Beare, and Goliah after the Lion, againſt Dauid; oft-times all together? What oppoſitions haſt thou had with Luxurie, when Couetouſneſſe hath beene conquered? how hath Ambition lift vp his head, when Luſt hath beene bet downe with the Hammer of Mortification? If Ambition hath beene quenched, how hath Anger boyled? how hath Pride puft vp, Wrath inflamed, Enuy gnawed thy diſtracted and diſtempered heart? how haue peſtilent Paſſions (like Hydra's heads cut off) riſen vp one after another: nay (like the heads of the Serpent Amphisbena) one againſt another, all againſt thy peace? Now, when Death comes it is the death of all theſe thy deadly enemies; thy reſt in the graue is a reſt from all theſe perturbations: the bearers of thy Hearſe carry thee (like the Romane Worthies) in a triumphant Chariot; then thou haſt the Conqueſt after theſe tumultuous and various conflicts: therefore lift vp thy head, and reioyce in thy death-bed, for now thy warre-fare is at

an end, and thy reward which thou ſhalt now poſſeſſe amongſt the bleſſed conquering Spirits in glory, ſhall neuer haue end. Now thy ſoule like the Aeagle, ſhall mount aloft, ſinging vpward with the little Larke, taking the wings of a Doue, it ſhall flye out of this incloſing houſe of the body, and be at reſt, ſafe and ſecure from the ſnares of the helliſh Fowler: free from the ſnares of the world, neuer to be beſmeared nor intangled againe with the lime-twigs of the catching and intrapping fleſh. Sugar and ſweeten the bitter cup of thy death with this Meditation; and if thou truely hate ſinne, loue the Lord, deteſt thy corruptions, and fight againſt thy ſpirituall temptations: this triple peace which thou ſhalt enioy; firſt, from thine enemies; ſecondly, in thy Soule; thirdly, with thy GOD, the God of peace, amongſt, the Angels of peace, in the Kingdome of peace, will be thy dying peace.
                     9 Thou maiſt inlarge this Meditation,9 It frees thee from conuerſing with the wicked. by pondering the griefes and vexations that thy ſoule hath beene pinched with here, not onely for thine owne perſonall ſinnes, Originall and Actuall, of Omiſſion and Commiſſion, but for the ſinnes of others, of this wicked world in which thou liueſt, and of wicked and vngodly men amongſt whom thou liueſt, which now thou ſhalt be freed from: for, alas, what man, hath any feare of God, any ſparke of

Grace, liuing, trading, trafficking amongſt vngodly, vngracious, and prophane men, as Noah liued amongſt the Worldlings, Lot amongſt the Sodomites, Ioſeph and Daniel amongſt Idolaters, as Eſay, Ieremie, and Ezekiel amongſt a ſinfull, beaſtly, hard-hearted, and rebellious people: ſeeing their abhominations, hearing their fearefull and horrid blaſphemies, when like Dogs they ſet their mouthes to barke againſt heauen that hurts them not; like Toades and Serpents ſpitting daily and deadly poyſon, in their deuilliſh oathes, euen in the very face of God, vpon no occaſion, without any temptation, but onely of cuſtome, graceleſneſſe, madneſſe and malice againſt the Lord himſelfe; beſides other harſh ſounds comming from their worldly, luxurious, and carnall hearts, with a thouſand ſuch like impieties, and horrid villanies, amongſt profeſſed Chriſtians, more enormious then haue beene, or now are, amongſt the very Turkes, Iewes, and Pagans, nay, amongſt the Beaſts themſelues: who, I ſay, hearing and ſeeing theſe things, can haue any ioy or comfort in this life, in the few and euill dayes of his Pilgrimage? Who could be contented to liue in a Pallace in pompe, where hee ſhould euery day heare his deare Parents, his Father and Mother, railed vpon and reuiled; his Brethren traduced; his owne Country and country-men

vilified? this were a racke and torture: Oh what ioy haue we then to liue in this worlds Priſon, where daily and hourely wee heare God our Father, the Father of Spirits, Ieſus Chriſt, our elder Brother, blaſphemed; his Name abuſed, his glory eclipſed, and his children calumniated; our Brethren, Saints by calling, Cittizens of the Celeſtiall Hieruſalem, vſed as the off-ſcourings of the world; mocked at by the mocking Michols, and rayled vpon by the Satanicall Shemeis of our age: being meere ſubiects of ſport, (as CHRIST vvas to the Iewes, and Sampſon to the Philiſtines,) to the Diuels Apes, prophane men in their Peſt-houſe-Play-houſes, and in their deuilliſh and drunken merriments, in Tauernes, Ale-houſes, Tobacco-ſhops, and Brothell-houſes: who, vnleſſe hee haue an heart of flint, hardned like the nether-Milſtone, can be freed from remorſe, diuiſion, diuulſion? who vnleſſe a Myrmidon, or hewen out of Caucaſus (as was once fained) can temper from teares? who can be otherwayes (if hee be Gods) then a mourning Doue, an howling Oſtrich, and a ſolitary Pellican, in this worlds wilderneſſe and Deſart of ſinne, for all the ſinnes of the ſonnes of men? who can but mourne with the holy Saints in former times, for all the abhominations of the Citie? Ezek. 9 4. Whoſe heart is not vexed with Lots, for the vncleane conuerſation

of millions amongſt vs, vvhoſe workes of darkeneſſe, in theſe dayes of light, ſhall iuſtifie the Sodomites in iudgement, 2 Pet. 2.7.8. who cryes not, Woe is me (with Dauid) that is conſtrained to liue here in Meſeck, and to dwell in the tents of Kedar? Who prayes not with Samuel, for a ſinfull people? 1 Sam. 12.23. Whoſe ſoule is not wounded with the ſinnes of the times, that breake out in ſuch abundance? Who could not be content to be free from the ſmell, ſtinckes, and infection of them? What comfort is there to haue any conuerſe or commerſe with ſuch, more then with bruit Beaſts and wicked Spirits, that commit ſuch ſinnes, (as Intemperance, and Luxurie and Drunkenneſſe) which beaſts and Diuels commit not? Now ponder well Deaths lenitie in this coraſiue:
                           Pſal. 31.15 Death ſtops thine eares from hearing the Blaſphemies of the multitude wherewith they blaſpheme. Death hoodwinckes thine eyes from beholding ſuch vaine and filthy obiects, as made the Heathen Democritus plucke out his eyes that hee might not behold; Death chaines thy tongue from talking, with, or talking of ſuch obſceane ſubiects; Death, Gods Meſſenger, pluckes thee away,
                           Gen. 19.16 22.23. as the Angell did Lot, out of the Sodome of this world, and carries thee to Zoar, a Citie of refuge, the new and true Ieruſalem; from whence thou ſhalt come againe with thy

Sauiour in the clouds, to ſee theſe wicked ones caſt into burnings, Mat. 25.41. but neuer to heare them more blaſpheming: from vvhich Iudgement thy ſoule ſhall returne to heauen againe, with her old companion the body, now awakened out of the duſt, and glorified, where thou ſhalt alwayes after to eternitie heare the Quires and Melodies of Angels and heauenly Spirits, carrolling out their new Songs, and Haleluiahs, to the glory of the Lambe, Apoc. 5.9.
                     10 As Death frees thee from the conuerſation, ſo from the corruptions of wicked men,10 It frees thee from corrupting by the wicked. which as it is not the leaſt ſafetie, ſo it ſhould not be the leaſt ioy and tranquillitie to a Chriſtian; and the rather, becauſe the danger of infection by them is here ſo imminent as fearefull. If any thinke himſelfe ſafe and ſound, and on a ſure ground in this kinde, as too many are too bold; let him know that it is as ſafe for ſound Apples to lye amongſt the rotten, for ſound Sheepe to feede amongſt the ſcabbed, for cleare eyes to looke earneſtly on thoſe that haue ſore eyes, for a healthfull body to conuerſe with the infected in the Peſt-houſe; as for thee to liue and conuerſe with the wicked, and not to learne wickedneſſe, with the froward without frowardneſſe: nay, it is as eaſie to touch pitch and not be defiled: the experience of Gods Saints leaue it recorded:

that when the Saints are amongſt ſinners; firſt, eyther by Imitation of them; ſecondly, or compulſion by them; thirdly, being brought into ſtraites by their wiles; fourthly, by their temptations and ſeductions; fiftly, in extremities amongſt them; ſixtly, by the ouer-ſwaying of their owne humane paſſions; or by ſome ſuch meanes they are infected with them: theſe things occaſioned Ioſeph to ſweare by the life of Pharaoh,
                        
                           Gen. 42.15 amongſt the Aegyptians; Abraham twiſe to vſe ſimulation,
                           Gen. 12. Gen. 20. diſſimulation, or aequiuocation, in two prophane Courts; Dauid to faine madneſſe, in the Court of Achiſh, 1 Sam. 21.13. Peter to deny his Maſter amongſt the high Prieſts Seruants, Mat. 26.74. the true Prophet to eate bread with the falſe Prophet, 1 Kings 13.15.16. the Children of Iſrael to commit Adultery and Idolatry with the Daughters of Moab. Numb. 25. All theſe haue failed, or fallen for company (as one breach brings downe another) amongſt wicked men, which is thy caſe now, and hath beene. Now Death deliuers thee from euer conuerſing, much more from corrupting by wicked men.
                     
                        11 It ſecures thee from the malice of the mightie.11 Let another of Deaths commodities comfort thee, in that it very much doth priuiledge thee from the madneſſe and malice of the maleuolent Monſters of the vvorld: thou art now ſecure from the puſhing hornes

of the Buls of Baſhan, from the ſword of iniuſtice, from the arme of tyranny. Though mad Saul ſend for deuout Dauid, to kill him in his ſickeneſſe, 1 Sam. 14.15. yet none can harme the body of a dead man: firſt, it may by kept vnburied, for a time, as great Alexanders was; ſecondly, arreſted for debt, into which a good Chriſtian may fall in life, 2 Kin. 4.1. thirdly, be wounded and mangled, as Hectors was by the Grecians (liuing Hares may leape ouer a dead Lyon;) fourthly, digged vp againe, as Pope Formoſus body was by Stephanus his ſucceſſor, and as Bucers was by the Papiſts (an act more befitting Swine then men:) yet it cannot be hurt or harmed, becauſe it is inſenſible of paine; and therefore neede not feare Phalaris his Bull, nor the Perſecutors wilde beaſts; nor the Papiſts fire and Fagot, and burning chamber, nor the moſt exquiſite tortures of the greateſt Tyrants: for thy ſpirit, it returnes to the Father of ſpirits, thy ſoule to God that gaue it, euen as the beames of the Sunne reflect vpward againe, towards the Sunne, from whence they came.
                     12 Beſides, thy good name,13 It cleares thy good name. that eſpecially is cleared by death: for, wee oftentimes ſee that by the aemulation of aequals, the enuy of inferiours, the hatred of ſuperiours, and the wickedneſſe that is in the hearts of all, good

men in their life time, by Gods permiſſion, for cauſes beſt knowne, ſome ſecret, ſome reuealed,
                           Iames 3.6. haue beene vvondrouſly abaſed and abuſed, cenſured, calumniated and ſcorched by the malicious and maleuolent tongues of ſuch as haue beene ſet on fire by Hell, oftentimes to the very eclipſing of their good name for a time:
                           Pſal. 31.20 being poyſoned and beſmeared with their Aſpiſh venome; vvhoſe good names it pleaſeth God to reſtore againe vnto them,
                           Eſay 58.8. at, or after, the houre of death, making the luſtre and ſplendor of their graces then to breake out like the light at the noone-day, diſperſing all the clouds of ſcandall, which haue in their vapours aſcended from the foggie and filthy Quagmires and Marriſh of ignorance and Malice. Who eyther denies or doubts of this, may ſee it in the Glaſſe of the Word▪ and obſerue it in the experience of other ages and our owne. What oppoſitions had Moſes the meekeſt man on earth,
                           Ioſh. 1.2. Heb. 3.2. Deut. 34.10 11 the faithfull Seruant of GOD, in his life time, in the place of his Magiſtracy, amongſt a rebellious people, though hee diſcharged the greateſt function that euer was committed to any meere man, the beſt that euer any did, that was but fleſh and bloud?
                           Num. 11.1. Pſal. 78. Num. 16.3 yet how was hee vpbrayded, ſcandalized and ſlandered, his Commiſſion from God contradicted? hee vvas thought to take too much vpon him, accuſed

as a deſtroyer,and 41.42 or at leaſt a deluder of the Lords people, concerning the promiſed Canaan: yet the ſame Moſes had beene worſhipped as a God of theſe ancient Idolaters after his death, if the Diuell could haue had his purpoſe, in expoſing his dead body vnto them, being reſiſted by the Angell, Iude 1. v. 9. So was Dauid not a little diſgraced by the mockings of his wife Michol, 2 Sam. 6.20. the raylings of Shemei, 2 Sam. 16.5. the calumnies of his tyrannous enemies, by whom hee was eſteemed as a foole, reuiled as a murtherer, verſe 6. accounted as an Hypocrite and vile man, ver. 7. yea, euen the drunkards made ſongs of him in his life time: now Dauid is eſteemed as the ſweet Singer of Iſrael, as the man after Gods owne heart, after his death. So, in our times, what broyles and turmoyles had that worthy Caluin, zealous Luther, reuerent Beza, iudicious Zanchy, moderate Melancthon, learned Peter Martyr, Oecolampadius, and others in forraine Countries; Cranmer, Latimer, Ridley, &c. amongſt our ſelues at home: what filthy blots and aſperſions were caſt vpon their good names? how were their doctrine and doings miſconceiued? their liues and learnings queſtioned and cenſured? their workes and writings wreſted and miſſeinterpreted? all that they ſaid or did, preuerted or corrupted, by the malicious enemies of

the truth, both within, and amongſt themſelues, and abroad amongſt the Papiſts: inſomuch that it was one of Melancthons dying Comforts, that by death hee ſhould be freed (as his words are) from the barkings and bitings of ſome dogs, in the forme of Diuines: which was the meaſure that the reſt found, (as indeede in the whole courſe of Scriptures, the greateſt enemies that euer the Church and zealous Teachers in the Church had, were of their owne rancke and profeſſion, falſe Prieſts, falſe Prophets, Scribes and Phariſies, and falſe Apoſtles,) in which reſpect as the ſame Melancthon once hoped and in a manner propheſied, that the after-Ages would iudge more candidly and ſincerely of him and his Workes after his death: euen ſo hee, and others, now finde it: for, (notwithſtanding the Blaſphemies which Romiſh Rabſhakeh's, Feuerdentius, Coc
                              •
                           leus, Bolſerus, and others, belch out againſt theſe Germaine and Belgicke Lights, and the reſt of the Hoſt of God, whoſe tongues are no ſlanders) how hath the Lord honoured & famouſed thoſe worthy labourers in his Vine-yard, euen in their good names, ſince their diſſolution? all of them being accounted pillers (notwithſtanding the detraction of theſe Romiſh Caterpillers) in the houſe God: all of them in their zealous and learned Labours, (like Oecolampadius, as his name

imports) ſhining as precious Lights in the Church, which neuer ſhall be wholy obſcured til he that is the light of the world come againe to Iudgement. This wee daily ſee verified, that (to the comfort of the ſuruiuing) though zealous Paſtors, men of exquiſite parts and paines, haue beene in the day of their Miniſtrie torne and reuiled amongſt theſe Swine and Dogs, to whom they haue giuen holy things: counted as fooles and deceiuers (as the Iewes, and Chriſts Country-men, accounted Chriſt) mad men▪
                        
                           Acts 26.28 (as Feſtus thought Paul) and rauers and ragers in the Pulpit (as the Iewes held Ieremie) yet after the ſetting of their Sunne, they haue beene longed for,
                           Ier. 18.18. Ier. 20.7.8.10. their loſſe lamented▪ (chiefely of the houſhold of Faith) and their names honoured, in the harts, and mindes, and mouthes of multitudes, when the wicked in all their power and pompe being magnified of their fawning Paraſites for a time, in the ſodaine dampe of death, haue had the glimmering of their glory put out, their honour laid in the duſt, and their names (like their rotten carkaſſes) rotting and ſmelling and ſtincking in the noſtrils of God and good men: as may beſeene in the life and death of Herod, Antiochus, Nero, and others. For, I pray you,
                           Acts 12.23 who is now more famous after death, Nero or the perſecuted Chriſtians? Iulian, or the poore Saints which he butchered?

                        Herod, or Iohn whom he beheaded: Paſhur, or Ieremie whom hee impriſoned: Gardiner, Bonner, and ſuch bloody Butchers, or our Engliſh Martyrs whom they burned? Surely the candle of the wickeds glory is put out, and there remaines the impure filthy ſtincking ſnuffe of an euill name, their glory is their ſhame,
                        
                           Prou. 10. 
                        Phil. 2.19. but the memoriall of the righteous is precious, ſmelling like Balme and Spikenard diffuſed;
                           Pſal. 112.9 yea, their name ſhines like the Starres in the ſhady night of death, or rather like the Sunne, the cloud being remoued, flouriſhing in the ſtorme of death, like the Laurell, which is greene when the Winter is foule. Though CHRIST himſelfe be counted a Samaritan, an impoſter, one that vvas Belzebubs friend, a poore Carpenters poore Sonne in his life, yet in and at his death, hee is iuſtified, approued and famouſed as a righteous man as an innocent, as a iuſt man, as the Sonne of GOD, by the teſtimonie that was giuen of him, firſt, by 
                           Mat. 27.24 
                        Pilate; ſecondly, 
                           ver. 19. 
                        Pilates Wife; thirdly, the 
                           Luke 23.48 Paſſengers that ſmote their breaſts; fourthly, the 
                           Mat. 27.54teares of the Daughters of Ieruſalem; fiftly, the 
                           Mat. 25 4Centurion; ſixtly, and 
                           ver. 51.53
                        Iudas himſelfe; ſeauenthly, yea, 1. the vaile of the Temple; 2. the ſtones; 3. the Sunne; 4. the Elements; 5. the raiſed bodies of the dead Saints, giue a reall and an honourable teſtimonie of him; 6. thus ſhall it be with thee if

thou beeſt a member of Chriſt, though thou beeſt miſſe-reported, and ſiniſterly cenſured, as 
                           Iob. 15. ch. 22.33.34. 
                        Iob was of his friends; 7. yet in thy diſſolution principally, thy name ſhall be raiſed, like the fire from vnder the aſhes of ignominie. It was the Heathens Comfort that hee ſhould leaue a good name behinde him: ſo let it be thine; it being one of the greateſt earthly bleſſings, aboue Gold and Siluer, Prou. 22.1. yea, as a precious Oyntment, Eccl. 7.3. this Oyntment ſmels the ſweeteſt when the boxe of thy body is broken: thou carryeſt this Oyntment (as dead bodies are annoynted) euen to the graue with thee▪ and it liues, when all other earthly things dye to thee and thou to them. Therefore be thou cheared vvith the thought which comforted the Pagan, Nemo me, &c.
                     
                     
                        Let none be-moiſt my Hearſe with helpleſſe teares.
                        From Learnings mouth Fame flyes to vulgar eares.
                     
                     14 In death thou ſhalt haue an excellent and notable both tryall and demonſtration,14 It tries and declares thy graces. as alſo exerciſe of thy graces, as firſt, of thy Faith; ſecondly, thy Patience; thirdly, thy Conſtancie; fourthly, thy Chriſtian Courage; fiftly, Fortitude; ſixtly, and the Spirit of Prayer, by which, firſt, others ſhall be ſtrengthened;

ſecondly, the weake ſhall be confirmed; thirdly, and all that are preſent with thee, and amongſt whom thou liueſt, incouraged in their Chriſtian courſes; fourthly, thy ſinceritie in thy profeſſion approued; fiftly, Gods graces in thee magnified; ſixtly, and aboue all, his name glorified.
                     
                        15 It is the good inheritance of the godly, and the horrour of the wicked.15 In thy death thou ſhalt be diſtinguiſhed from a carnall and a prophane man: for commonly the ſicke bed ſhewes the ſickneſſe or the health of the ſoule: the death ſhewes the life, diuiding and iudging the eſtate of the viſited, as Gid
                              •
                           on diuided his company by lapping of water▪ 
                        Iudg. 7.1. and as the Ephramites were diſtinguiſhed from the Iſraelites by pronouncing Shib
                              •
                           l
                              •
                           th. For looke at the godly from time to time, and the laſt acts they did, and the laſt words they ſpake, were the moſt ſacred, ſeaſoned, and ſanctified of their whole life, (but it hath beene contrary in the wicked) and God is the ſame God to thee that hee was to them, if thou beeſt a beleeuer. Looke into particulars: the laſt ſpeeches of dying Saints, as they haue beene full of grace, ſo they are worthy relating, and remembring, and applying.
                           Acts 7.60. The laſt period of S. Steuens life was prayer for his enimies, and for his owne ſoule:1 Kings 2. v. 1. to. 11. the laſt words of Dauid, holy exhortations to his Sonne Salomon, to obſerue the Statutes and Ordinances of the Lord, and the

diſpoſing of ſome particulars, of which hee gaue him cautions: the laſt acts of old Iacob,
                        
                           Gen. 48. Gen. 49. Prayer, and prophecying, concerning his ſonnes and poſteritie: the like comfortable end made Abraham, Iob, old Simeon, Moſes,
                        
                           Gen 25.8. Iob 42.17. Luke 2. and other of the Saints in the old and new Teſtament. The like wee read of Ambroſe, whoſe concluſion in his death-bed was, that hee was neyther aſhamed to liue, nor fearefull to dye, becauſe he had a good Lord.Vide cent. Magd. ſic Grin. in Apotheg. morientiu
                              •
                           . 
                        Bernards death was grounded vpon the ſure hope and Anchor of Gods mercy, though hee liued in corrupt times. Oecolampadius told his viſitors newes, in the laſt ſpeech hee vttered, namely, that hee ſhould ſhortly be with the LORD IESVS. Mr. Caluin with Dauids heart repeating Dauids Pſalmes, mourning in the Spirit, for his ſinnes, his ſoule was ſent out of his body, like Noahs Doue, out of the Arke. Melancthon, in his laſt farewell to life, profeſſed he was exceeding willing to dye becauſe it was the Lords will, praying for a happy and ioyfull departure, hee had his deſire preſently ſealed. Peter Martyr, gaue a comfortable farewell to his brethren and deare friends, acknowledging ſaluation onely in Chriſt the Redeemer, in which faith as he liued ſo he dyed. That halfe miraculous man Luther, in his death abounded as with prayer ſo with praiſes and thankeſgiuings that the Lord had reuealed

Chriſt vnto him, and made him an inſtrument to diſcouer Antichriſt, and to oppoſe him. Annas Burgius cryed in her laſt cryes, Lord forſake not mee, leaſt I forſake thee. Mauritius the Emperour, in his laſt fainting, gaue glory vnto GOD, that was righteous in all his wayes, and holy in all his workes. Saint Auguſtine wept vpon his ſicke couch for many dayes together, and ſo was his ſoule ferryed to Chriſt in a floud of teares, as Peter walked to Chriſt on the Sea of waters. I might giue your meditations matter enough to worke vpon, in reflexing vpon infinite examples, related by Authors, to which euery faithfull Miniſter that vſeth to performe this dutie of viſiting the ſicke, like a ſpirituall Phyſitian, diſcerning the eſtate of the ſoule, addes his Probatum eſt, in ioyfull experience of many, whoſe dying hath beene ſuted and ſorted to their liuing, both gracious, both glorious.
                     Why then ſhouldeſt thou feare? for to the righteous there ſhall be peace at the laſt, Eſay 57.2. therefore liue by Faith, beleeue the Promiſes, and apply them, and be comforted in Gods mercy to others: but as for the wicked, it is not ſo with them, they ſhall bee like the chaffe ſcattered in the winde; for, there is no peace to the wicked ſaith my God, Eſa. 57.21. the prolong of their wicked life ends in a fearefull Tragedie in death: for, though in

reſpect of the body, and the outward man,
                           Eccleſ. 2.16 there is the ſame condition to the vviſe and the fooliſh, to Nabal and Salomon, godly Ionathan periſhing in the field as well as wicked Saul, 1 Sam. 31.2.3. Ezekias ſtrucke with the plagues boyle, Eſay 38.21. Aſa goutie in his feete; nay,2 Chron. 35 23 euen good Ioſias wounded in the Battell, and the reſt of the godly being afflicted in ſickeneſſe as pittiouſly, and dying oft times as painefully, whether in a naturall or a violent death, euen as the wicked, (as appeares in the exquiſite torments of the Martyres in the Primitiue Church, in the crucifying of Peter and Paul with their heads downewards,Ar. in probl. de cruce. &c. yea, euen in the very Paſſion of Chriſt himſelfe:) yet in reſpect of the inward man, and diſpoſitions of their ſoules in death, there is as great difference betwixt them, as there was in their carriage and conuerſation in life. And therefore as you haue heard the godly praying, or prayſing and bleſſing GOD, ſpeaking graciouſly, ſending out their ſpirits ioyfully, and dying comfortably: ſo prophane men dye eyther careleſly and blockiſhly, for the moſt part, their hearts being frozen, and their conſciences benummed and ſcared, without any touch in ſoule or remorſe for ſinne; which kinde of dying though our ſottiſh ſilly common people commend as the moſt happy and bleſſed death, when they goe

away quietly like Lambes, as their ſtupiditie and blindneſſe thinke: yet indeede they dye like Beaſts and Dogs, without any life of grace, or feeling of the Spirit, in the power or comfort of it; nay, ſenſleſly like ſtockes and ſtones, as is ſaid of Nabal, whoſe heart was like a ſtone within him, 1 Sam. 25.37.38. or elſe deſperately and ragingly, impatiently as impenitently, belching out blaſphemies againſt both the Maieſtie and the Mercy of God. Thus Iudas cryes hee hath ſinned in betraying the innocent bloud,
                           Mat. 27.3. but hath no Faith to apply that bloud to the waſhing away of his bloody treaſon.2 Mach. 9.13. Thus Antiochus Epiphanes dying, is tormented inwardly with the gripes and conuulſions of conſcience, as with the rage of his ſickeneſſe: ſo Iulian the Apoſtate, in his laſt act of life, from his infected lungs ſent out venome againſt Chriſt, calling him in diriſion, victorious Galilean. Thus Eccius dyes execrating his Popiſh on-ſetters in fruſtrating his golden hopes, when they had clapt their hands to animate him to barke at Luther and the Proteſtanrs. The like end made Latomus, Hoff-maiſter, Spira, and other Antichriſtian Champions, being not vnlike in their ſinne. Thus Gardiner dyes, confeſſing that hee had ſinned with Peter, but could not repent vvith Peter. Cornelius Agrippa, curſing his attending Spirit, that ſtood by him in the forme of

a blacke dog. Others paralel in the like ſinnes, making like proportioned ends: vnleſſe it be in ſome particulers, as once in the Scripture,
                           Luk. 23.43 in the Theefe vpon the croſſe, that a theeuiſh and licentious life ſhould haue the promiſe of Paradiſe in Death: which as it was, firſt, the concluſion of Chriſts life; ſecondly, the preſent magnifying of the power of his Paſſion: ſo it is not to be vrged, nor peremptorily pleaded; 1. in defence of ill liuers; 2. nor imitated in deferring repentance; 3. nor preſumed vpon, no more then a man ought to preſume to be a Traytor, a Witch, a murtherer, in hope for a pardon when he is to be turned off the Ladder: becauſe ſome one man in an age, hath by Gods prouidence this priuiledge, to be repriued and releaſed from theſe facts committed. For, in place of one example that hath had his inueterate old ſores cured, his crying treaſons pardoned at the laſt houre, (like Gregories good theefe that begd heauen) wee haue millions that haue periſhed, rot, and conſumed, in body and ſoule, in the laſt exigent of life: as they haue not ſpared GOD, liuing; God hath not giuen them any tokens of his fauour, but rather of his wrath and indignation, dying: forgetting them dying, as in their life they forgat him; turning away his eare from hearing of their prayers,
                           Pſal. 66.2
                              •
                           
                         though they houle vpon their ſicke-beds like Wolues,

                        Oſe 7.14. becauſe in their health and proſperitie, they haue like deafe Adders, ſtopped their eares, in not hearing his Law and Word, and in not conſidering the cryes of the poore, Prou. 28.9. Prou. 21.13. Prou. 15.8. Therefore for thy preſent inſtruction and future conſolation, worke thou out betimes thy ſaluation with feare and trembling.
                           Phil. 2.12. Giue all diligence to make thy Election ſure. Breake off all thy ſinnes by repentance. Dan. 4.24. Turne to the Lord with all thine heart, in faſting, weeping and mourning, Ioel 2.12. Turne from the wickedneſſe thou haſt committed, with the Niniuites, Ionah 3.7.8. Waſh thee and make thee cleane, Eſay 1.16. Cleanſe thy heart from euill thoughts, Ier. 4.14. Leaue thy formalitie in Religion▪ and worſhip the Lord in truth and ſpirit, Iohn 4.24. Get faith, and learne to liue by faith, Hab. 2.4. and to dye by faith.
                           Iohn 1.47. Be a Nathaniel in thy dealings with men; let thy heart be vpright as thy hand, Ioh. 1.47.
                           Pſal. 41 1. Remember the poore and needy, then the Lord will remember thee in the day of thy ſickneſſe:
                           Luk. 16.22. Chriſt will viſite thee as hee did Iairus Daughter, and Peters wiues Mother; he ſhall be thy Phyſitian, when the ſimples of Nature, and the arme of Fleſh faile; his Angels ſhall pitch their tents about thee, and carry thy flitting ſoule, as they did Lazarus his, into the ſeates of the bleſſed. Make vſe of this,

and the LORD giue thee vnderſtanding in all things.
                     16 As the examples of the Saints of God,16 In death deſire Chriſt, as hee by death deſired thee. that hauing liued conſcionably, and dyed comfortably, muſt comfort thee in this houre, ſo their willingneſſe to dye muſt encourage thee willingly to drinke of that cup which the Lord offers thee, without reſiſting or relucting. Looke vpon old Simeon, ſinging that Swan-like ſong, prophecying his death; Lord, now le
                              •
                           t
                              •
                           ſt thou thy Seruant depart in peace, Luke 2.29 But eſpecially of Saint Paul, vveary of this mortalitie, deſirou
                           •
                         to be disburdened of the burthen of his corruptions, to be deliuered from the body of ſinne, Rom. 7. to be preſent with the Lord; to be diſſolued and to be with CHRIST, 2 Cor. 5. Phil. 1. But the beſt preſident that wee haue in life and death, as the beſt comfort, is the practiſe of Chriſt; who although hee feared death as man, deſiring conditionally the paſſing of that bitter cup, yet neuertheleſſe wee ſhall ſee in him a great alacritie, chearefulneſſe, propenſitie, and willingneſſe to dye: for,
                           Mat. 10.38 and 16.21.17▪ 22.23. Luk. 18.31. beſides his often conference with his Diſciples about his death, the frequent nomination of it vpon all occaſions, which ſhewes how vehemently hee was affected towards it, the tongue ſpeaking from the hearts abundance, all his words and acts declare it: for to ſhew his deſire to

dye,
                           Iohn 4.32. hee counts it but a Baptiſme, or as it were, a ſprinkling of cooling water, Mat. 20.22. nay, it is meate and drinke to him to doe his Fathers will, which was that hee ſhould dye▪ hee counts it a Iourney to goe, which hee was willing to vnder-goe: nay, hee was euen payned vntill it was paſt: when it came to the puſh that his houre was come, hee ſeekes death as it ſeekes him;
                           Ioh. 18.4.7 hee goes forth to meete and welcome it as his friend,
                           Gen. 18.2. Ioh. 19.30. Gen. 8.8. as Abraham and Lot to meete and entertaine the Angels; hee offers himſelfe to the inſtruments of his death, his backe to the ſmiters; and finally, his ſoule is not taken from him compulſorie, but as hee commended it, ſo hee reſigned and gaue it vp, to his Father willingly; hee gaue vp the ghoſt hauing power to lay downe his life, ſending out his ſpirit, as Noah did the Doue out of the Arke, which after three dayes returned againe to quicken the body, from heauen, from whence alſo Lazarus his ſoule returned after foure dayes. Now apply this to thine owne particular: art not thou a Chriſtian, ſo denominated of CHRIST? then euery one of Chriſts actions ought to be thy inſtruction, chiefely in his death, all whoſe dying geſtures are worthy to be writ in thy heart, in letters of Gold. Did hee then vnder-goe ſuch an extraordinary, vnnaturall, painefull, ſhamefull, curſed death, the worſt that euer was; for

therefore Chriſt dyed the worſt death that euer was, both for the ignominie of it, and the exquiſite tortures in it, that a Chriſtian ſhould not feare any death, ſince euery death is ſanctified vnto him in the death of Chriſt. Did Chriſt not onely indure his pangs and paines in death ſo patiently,
                           Eſay 53. as a Lambe before the ſhearer, but was euen deſirous of this bitter pill, for the ioy that was ſet before him, and the loue hee bore to redeeme thy enthralled ſoule? and art thou ſcrupulous and timerous of a naturall and an ordinary paſſage from life to life through this dead Sea? Wilt thou mutter and murmure, and ſhew thy ſelfe refractory to come to the Kings Court, when thou art ſo gently ſummoned, by ſuch a ſweet meſſenger as a lingring ſickeneſſe? Haſt thou ſo little longing to goe to him by the rupture of a weake thread of life, who was ſo deſirous to come to thee from heauen to earth, from the earth to the Croſſe, from the Croſſe to the Graue, euen through a red Sea of blood? thorow Pikes and Speares, and nayles and thornes, being dieted in this his bloody march with the bread of affliction, and the water of teares; with gall & vinegar? oh haſt thou ſo little delight in him, ſo little deſire towards him? ſo ſmall liking of him, ſo little loue to him? that thou liſt not ſtep ouer the narrow bridge of this life, to meete him, to greete him, and

to inioy him? Expoſtulate with thy ſoule how it comes to be ſo dull, ſo dead, ſo lumpiſh, ſo leaden: how it is that thou profeſſeſt thy ſelfe to be a Spouſe of Chriſt 
                           Eph 5.21 Oſe 2.19., a member of Chriſt 
                           Ephe. 5.30, a branch of Chriſt 
                           Ioh. 15.5., (which thou muſt beleeue and profeſſe if thou haſt any part in him 
                           Ioh. 15.6.,) and yet haſt no deſire to put off the outward mantle of this bodies couering, to be inſeparably imbraced in the armes of this Bridegroome; not to leane with Iohn, but for euer to reſt in his boſome; to be ioyned to thy Head? to be fixed in this vnion? But if Chriſts loue and deſire to dye, and to dye for thee, be too high a pitch for thee to ſoare to, which yet ought to be aymed at, yet imitate the deſires and the patience of the Saints in this kinde, ſo farre (as the Apoſtle ſpeakes of himſelfe) as they imitate Chriſt: for as the examples of the wicked are recorded for our deteſtation, 1 Cor. 6.10. ſo the examples of the godly are written for our comfort and conſolation, Rom. 15.4. You haue heard (ſaith Iames) of the patience of Iob,
                        
                           Iam. 5.11. 
                        and what end God made with him. You haue heard of the deſires of Paul and Simeon, of the graces that appeared in Dauid, Iacob, Steuen. &c. Ambroſe, Auguſtine, &c. Caluin, Luther, &c. and vvhat ends they made, vvith God. Then, thou vſing the ſame meanes that they did, euen Faith and Repentance;

why ſhouldeſt thou demurre, or be vnwilling to goe that Iourney vvhich they haue gone?
                     17 Yet if examples and preſidents of others,17 Death is the common Inne of all fleſh, where thou ſhalt be refreſhed. Eſay 38.2. Numb. 27.13 as of Chriſt and Chriſtians ſet not an edge on thy deſires to dye; yet let the mutabilitie, breuitie and vncertaintie of life, with the certaintie of death, cauſe thee to make a vertue of neceſſitie: as Eſay ſaid from God, to Ez
                              •
                           kias, thou muſt dye; and as God to Moſes, thou ſhalt dye; ſo hee ſaith to thee, Set thine houſe, ſet thine heart in order, for thou canſt not liue, thou muſt dye; nay, thou canſt not long liue, and thou muſt ſoone dye, certainely dye; therefore it is wiſedome for thee, (as in outward things) ſo in this, to doe that voluntarily, which thou muſt doe neceſſarily, and compulſorie: thy life thou knoweſt is but a ſhort life, frayle, and brittle as glaſſe. As it is a flower for the mortalitie of it, Eſay 40.7. A ſmoake, for the vanitie of it, Pſal. 102.3. ſo it is a houſe of clay, ſoone cruſht downe, Iob. 4.17. A tent or tabernacle, ſoone pluckt vp, 2 Cor. 5.1. A Shepheards Tent, ſoone pulled downe, Eſay 38.12. A Shippe in the Sea, Wiſd. 5.10. ſoone ſliding, ſoone ouer-throwne by the Rockes, ouer-blowne by the windes: nay, as a Weauers Shittle, Iob 7.6. for the volubilitie of it: as a dreame Iob 20.8. as a ſhadow, Iob 8.9.

for the vanitie of it; nay, vanitie it ſelfe, which is nothing, it being in very deede nothing in reſpect of eternitie.
                     Learne therefore by this mirrour of dying Moſes, ſo to ſpend theſe thy dayes of vanitie, that for ſhortneſſe of dayes in this world, thou maiſt with Moſes, and all the glorious Saints of God, inioy eternitie of dayes in the world to come.
                  
               
               
                  
                  SIMEON'S dying-Song. HANDLED IN ſixe Sermons.
                  
                     LVKE 2.29.
                     Lord, now letteſt thou thy Seruant depart in peace, according to thy Word.
                  
                  
                     IT is the Poſition of ſome,Plus exempla quam praecepta. that Examples moue more then Rules; that Practiſe perſwades or diſſwades aboue Precepts, eyther in Imitation or Aemulation of Vertue, or Deteſtation of Vice: and aboue others wee are proneſt to write after the Copies of great men, and to tread in the ſteps of old

men. Therefore the Scripture propound vnto vs the patternes of the greateſt of men, euen Kings who were as good as great,Regis ad exemplar totus componitur orbis. 
                     2 Sam. 15.31. Ch. 23. 1 Kin. 2.10 
                     Dauid, 
                     2 Chro. 31.1.2. 
                     Ezekias, 
                     
                        Chro. 34.3.4. 
                     Ioſias, 
                     
                        Chr. 15.8 
                     Aſa, 
                     1 King. 22.41. 
                     Iehoſaphat, &c. that wee ſhould follow their footings ſo farre as they followed Chriſt, and walked with God. Of the moſt aged amongſt men, as of 
                        Gen. 25.8 
                     Abraham, 
                     
                        Gen. 9.28.29. 
                     Noah, 
                     
                        Gen. 5.27 
                     Methuſhalem, 
                     
                        Iob 42.17 
                     Iob, &c. and here of old Simeon, whoſe liues and deaths are ſo many pleading Orators, and preaching Sermons, to excite vs to Chriſtian courſes, that like them wee may liue holily and dye happily, and arriue at the common Hauen of all fleſh peaceably and ſafely. Now amongſt the reſt, I haue called out and ſelected Simeon, as a Candle ſet on a hill, as a Beacon on fire, to giue light to the world (if ſhee will open her blinded and beetle eyes) how to walke to Sion, through this vaile of life, euen in the darke and 
                        Pſal. 22.4. ſhadowie night of death. Simeon a fit obiect for vs to reflect the eyes of our intellectuall powers vpon, in the proſecution of this ſad and ſable ſubiect of death: in which conſider, firſt, the Title of the Text; ſecondly, the Text it ſelfe.
                  For the Title, Antiquitie, and our Church denominates it, The Song of Simeon, meerely Swan-like and Cygnean,Canti
                           •
                         Cygnea. pious and propheticall. I might eaſily runne Deſcant and Diuiſion vpon it, ſorting it out into his ſeuerall parts;

ſhewing. 1. the Ditty; 2. the Matter; 3. the Manner; 4 the Harmony; 5. the Time; 6 the Tune: with all ſuch obſeruances in vocall Muſicke, ſubſtantiall and circumſtantiall; euen from the ground of this Scripture. But my part now is, rather to ſigh then to ſing, vnleſſe Dirges and Madrigals, fitter for Heraclitus his part then Democritus, yet I cannot but ſo farre condeſcend to this Cantion, as to commend this diuine Canticle for the excellencie, and to conſider in it, the ground of it, nature▪ and proprietie. For the excellencie, it is of that puritie and perfection, that I wiſh it might be a rule and a ſquare to our irrigular and vnlimited licentiouſneſſe in ſinging, that our hearts were rightly tuned by the Spirit of God as was Simeons, verſe 25.Redargution. that our tongues were the Pennes of this ready Writer in our Ditties,
                        Pſal. 45.1.2 that ſo wee might ſing the prayſes of the King: but alas, our Songs are commonly rather from Sod
                           •
                        me then from Sion; rather ſenſuall then ſpirituall, carnall then Chriſtian, Satanicall then ſacred, rather to the honour of Bacchus, Priapus, and Venus, pleaſing the Fleſh▪ the World, and the Diuell, the vvorlds worſhipped Trinitie; th
                        •
                     n to the glory of the immortall and indiuiſible Trinitie: witneſſe the vaine, vile, wanton, vicious, looſe, licentious, venerious Songs and Sonnets of Poets and Poetaſters of our times: 1. Which may

not onely be ſeene extant: 2. but euen are chaunted and carolled out, by Fooles and Fidlers, vnprofitable Moathes of the earth; which liue eyther in no calling, or in a ſinfull calling: 3. heard, receiued, applauded, approued, laughed at by all the licentious Prodigals, looſe gull-Gallants, Epicures, and Carnaliſts, ordinarily in euery Ordinary, Inne, Tauerne, Ale-houſes, and the like: Oh therefore whoſe heart ſmites him in this kinde, let him reforme this ſinne, whether actiue or paſſiue, in delighting or deſiring to ſay, ſing, or heare theſe Organs of Sathan, and thoſe Bellowes of ſinne and vncleanneſſe. Turne now the ſtreame another way, let Iordan runne backe-ward. If thou beeſt afflicted, pray: take out this rule, ſo did Moſes, Manaſſes, Dauid, the Iſraelites, and all Gods Saints. Art thou merrily affected?
                        Iames 5.13. ſing: but what? Pſalmes, Pſal. 119. Hymnes, and Songs, and ſpirituall Pſalmes, making melody to the Lord in your hearts: therefore as I would propound Dauid and Ezekias, as true patternes for all mourners; ſo Simeon and Zachary, as ſpectacles to all ſingers. As in Inſtrumentall Muſicke, the ſtrings that are out of tune, muſt be ſet vp to thoſe that are in tune: ſo when thou ſingeſt vanitie thy heart and tongue, which are diſtracted, diſtempered, and out of tune, muſt be ſet in the right Key, as was Simeons; then thou ſhalt

ſing at thy departure out of this worlds Priſon, as 
                        Acts. 16.21
                     Paul and Silas did in Priſon. Thou ſhalt ſing Hoſanna's in Heauen, when thy Friends ſing thy Funerall Neniae on earth.
                  The ground of this Song is Chriſt, the Meſſias, Sauiour, and ſaluation of Iſrael, the Redeemer of his people, as the Word cals him 
                        Luke 2.69; as the Angell chriſtens him from 
                        Mat. 
                        
                           •
                        .21 God; which Sauiour, as he was promiſed to 
                        Gen 3 15 
                     A
                           •
                        am, the promiſe renued to 
                        Gen. 15.5.17.6. Gen. 12.3. Gal. 3.8. 
                     Abraham; prefigured in the Leuiticall Law, and thoſe Moſaicall Types and Ceremonies, Aarons Rod, the Pot of Manna, the watry Rocke, the ſcape-Goat, the brazen Serpent, the blood of ſacrificed Beaſts and Bullockes, and the like; propheſied of by all Prophets 
                        Act. 3.24., great and leſſer, from Moſes 
                     
                        Deut. 1.15 and 7.37. to Malachie: ſo being now reuealed and exhibited, is the ground of Simeons Song, and the matter of his inward mirth, breaking forth like a fire long kept in, into theſe outward Modulations.
                  His practiſe is our precept;Vſe. all our ioy muſt be in Chriſt, and for Chriſt. In Chriſt reioyced the Patriarkes, when they did but ſee Chriſts day a farre off, thorow the cloud and the vayle, as did 
                        Iohn. 6.56 Heb 11.13 
                     Abraham. In Chriſt reioyced the Prophets, 
                        Eſay 53. ch. 5
                           •
                        . ch 55. 
                     Eſay, 
                     
                        Ier 
                        
                           •
                        4.5. 
                     Ierem
                           •
                        , Ezekiel, &c. in the heate of their perſecutions being refreſhed with the viſion of that incarnate Babe, 
                        Eſay 9.6. Prince of peace, branch of Ieſſe, eternall

Counſellor, which they did preach, and of whom they did propheſie. In Chriſt reioyced the Apoſtles, Peter, Iames and Iohn; yea, Paul 
                     1 Cor. 15. himſelfe in the midſt of ſtripes, whips, and impriſonment 
                        Ch. 5.41.. In Chriſt reioyced the ancient Martyres, Policarpus, Ignatius, Cyprian, euen like the three Children in the middeſt of the fire 
                        Dan. 3.23.. In Chriſt reioyced the ancient Fathers, Auguſtine, Ierome, Bernard, &c. witneſſe their words, works, and writings, amongſt the reſt, of him that could ſay, Deus meus & omnia, my Chriſt and all things; Wife, Childe, Friend, Father, ioy ſufficient, efficient, in life and death. Nay, laſtly, as with Chriſt, ſo in Chriſt, and for Chriſt, reioyced the 
                        Luke 2.14 Angels in earth and in heauen 
                        Reu. 5.11.12: be glad then oh yee righteous, and reioyce ye that feare the Lord, as the Angels 
                        Luke 2.10. to the Shepheards, as Eſay to the Church,
                        Eſay 9.6. 
                     For, vnto vs a childe is borne, and a Sonne is giuen: For, to vs is borne a Sauiour, in the Citie of Dauid, which ſhall deliuer all his Iſrael from their ſinnes, Matth. 1.21. Luke 19.10.
                  
                     Redargution.Many and manifold are the ioyes of the ſonnes of men, as dangerous, as diuers; few with thoſe ſonnes of God by Creation and Adoption, Angels and Saints, reioyce in, or for Chriſt; but ſinners according to the diuerſities of their darling ſinnes, ſolace their ſoules in ſuch contents, as I may call meerely Antichriſtian,

and againſt Chriſt, and the Lords annoynted, in which they pleaſe themſelues and diſpleaſe him; content their fleſh, but crucifie CHRIST, and grieue his Spirit. Nabal 
                     1 Sam. 15, and Baltazar 
                     
                        Daniel. 5., the Epicure and Drunkard, hath ioy enough in his feaſts and feſtiuals: the colour of the wine delights his ſight, the reliſh his deuouring ſenſe, like a baſe Bagge-pipe, hee makes ſuch Muſicke as the Diuell daunceth at, when hee is full. The Vſurer, the worldling,Sibila
                           •
                         m
                           •
                         ropulus, &c Horace.
                      and the miſerable able miſer hath his heart rauiſhed when his eye reflexeth vpon his glittering Idoll, and golden God, the Calfe that this beaſt bowes too. The impure Onan
                     
                        Gen. 38., filthy Fornicator, and inexcuſable Adulterer, which like to Salomons foole 
                        Pro. 7.7., goes into the harlots houſe, and like Ieremies neighing horſe 
                        Ier 5 8., without vnderſtanding 
                        Pro. 6.32., runnes after his neighbours wife, like the Oxe to the ſlaughter 
                        Pro 7.22., to his owne deſtruction 
                        Pro. 6.32.; delights himſelfe (as the Swine in the mi
                        •
                     e, as the Toade in the puddle, as the Panther with excrements Geſner. Plinie, as the Scarabean Flye with ordure and filth, as the Diuell his Father 
                        Io
                              •
                           . 8.44., amongſt filthy Hogs 
                        Lu. 15.16.,) with his vncleane courſes and diſcourſes; feeding his appetite with ſtrange fleſh 
                        Pro. 23.27, as the luſting Iſraelites with loued and loathed Quayles v, as the Italian Pſelli and Merſi feede on poyſon: his chiefe ioy is to touch and taſte Sodomes Apples, and the forbidden

fruit; his onely Paradiſe, the ioying in, and inioying here (which hee dreames of hereafter,) a Turkiſh Heauen, a Mahumetaine portion of Wine and Women: as for Chriſt hee hauing no heart at all, Hoſea 4.11. can haue no heart to him, neyther in delighting in him, or deſiring him, no more then the very Diuels themſelues, who quaked and trembled, and made out cryes and exclamations, at the very ſight of him, Luke 8.28.29. ſo all other Libertines amongſt vs, haue ſome 
                        Mar. 6.17 
                     Herodias or other, ſome one beloued ſinne which they more loue and like, and ioy in then in the worlds Sauiour. As ſome in their carnall companions and vvicked aſſociates, vvith whoſe diſpoſitions and conuerſations, as they receiue as much infection in their ſoule, as their bodyes from a Peſt-houſe; ſo they haue their refections, as 
                        Dan. 5.1.2 
                     Baltazzar and Sardanapalus had with their Queenes and Concubines, and ſo in the reſt. Well, theſe carnall and common Chriſtians, which haue as much zeale to Chriſt, and loue for Chriſt, as common women, plainely demonſtrate that they haue the ſpirit of Sathan, and not the Spirit of GOD, as had Simeon. And therefore as they ioy not in Chriſt, neyther doth he ioy in them, no more then a chaſte Bridegrome in a whoriſh Spouſe, as they deſire not him, he deſires not them, nor their company in his Chamber,

no more then hee did the fooliſh Virgins 
                        Mat. 25.11.12.; as they delight not in him, he delights not in them, no more then a man delights in his crucifier and tormenter; as they loue not him, ſo hee loues not them, no more then he doth Cain 
                     Iude v. 11
                      and Eſau 
                     
                        Mal. 1.2. Rom. 9.13., whom the LORD hated. As Peter ſaid to Simon Magus, ſo I ſay to them, They and their money periſh together 
                     
                        Act. 8.20, they and their luſtfull pleaſures periſh together, as did Z
                           •
                        mri and Coſbee
                     
                        Numb. 25.14.15.; they and their Gold periſh together, as did Achan and his wedge 
                        Ioſh. 7.24.; they and their Idols periſh together, as did the Iſraelites and their Calfe
                        Exod. 32.20.35.
                     ▪ they and their ſinnes periſh together, as did the murmuring Rebels in the Wilderneſſe; they and their companions periſh together, as did Corah and his complices 
                        Numb. 16.31.32.: curſed be their ſinnes, and their Societies, like Sim
                           •
                        on and Leui, brethren in iniquitie 
                        Gen. 46.5.7.: So let them periſh, Lord, that are thine enemies, like the vntimely fruit of a woman. If any loue not the Lord Ieſus, let them be accurſed, Anathema, Maranatha. If any reioyce not at the birth of a Sauiour here with Simeon, let the Sunne of all their carnall ioyes ſ
                        •
                     t, and be eclipſed in the cloud of death.
                  Secondly, as wee muſt ioy in Chriſt, ſo wee muſt ioy and reioyce, and be thankefull for Chriſt; yea, for all the bleſſings and the benefits that wee receiue in and from Chriſt, temporall

and ſpirituall, externall, internall, or eternall: ſo was Simeon here, his ſong is Euchariſticall and gratulatory, for the reuelation of Chriſt; hee bleſſeth God that hee liues to ſee the conduit and the fountaine of all bleſſings to his Church, Chriſt the Meſſias. And ſince his Deuotion is our Inſtruction, Chriſtians muſt be thankefull for Chriſt. Thus all the faithfull and beleeuers when Chriſt was borne offered vp their tributarie prayſes, the ſacrifices of their ſoules, breaking out into holy Hymnes and Songs. The Angel did caroll out, Glory be to God on high 
                     
                        Luk. 2.13 14., ſo the Eaſterne Magi 
                     
                        Mat. 2.10 11., the zealous Shepheards 
                        Luke 2.20., glorifie God: the bleſſed Virgin magnifies the 
                        Luke 1.46 47. Lord: Elizabeth, and the prophecying Babe within her wombe 
                        Ver. 41., leape and reioyce: Anna 
                     
                        Luke 2.38., Zachary 
                     
                        Luk. 1.68, and Simeon, are not behinde with their parts, in continuing their prayſes; and ſo muſt wee with our beſt hearts and affections, make vp the Quire, ſince wee haue no leſſe intereſt in, nor no fewer priuiledges by Chriſt, then they.
                  The Reaſons to inforce this duety, are theſe:
                  Firſt, if the Saints of God in the old Teſtament were ſo thankefull for their temporall protection, preſeruation, and redemption from their outward enemies, the Egyptians, Amalekites, Canaanites, Ammonites, Moabites,

Philiſtines, &c. by temporall Sauiours, Moſes, Ioſhua, Gideon, Iaphte, Sampſon, Dauid, &c. as may be ſeene in the ſpirituall Songs of Moſes, and Aaron, and Miriam 
                     
                        Exod. 15. v. 1.2.3. v. 20., and Deborah, and Baruch 
                     
                        Iud. 5.1.2, and Dauid 
                     2 Sam. 22 and Iudith 
                     
                        Iudith 26.1.2.3.: how much more ought wee to burſt forth into prayſes, for our ſpirituall deliuerance from the Fleſh, the World, the Diuell, that Pharaoh, and from his Aegyptian yoake, from Hell, Death, and Damnation, by that Meſſias, of whom theſe earthly and terreſtriall Sauiours were Types and figures.
                  Secondly, gratulation and thankefulneſſe is a duety commanded Pſal. 50.15. 1 Theſ. 5.18. therefore wee muſt not be immorigerous and diſobedient to Gods commaund, no more then Paul was to the heauenly viſion 
                        Act. 26.19, vnleſſe vve be found fighters, and rebels, and traytors againſt God.
                  Thirdly, it is a ſpecies, and part of Prayer, and ſo of Gods ſpirituall worſhip, Phil. 4 6. Epheſ. 6.
                  Fourthly, by this duety wee glorifie God which is the end of our Creation, Pſal. 50.23.
                  Fiftly, 1. It is a ſeemely thing, and becommeth the Saints to be thankefull, Pſal. 33.1. 2. It is a very good thing to praiſe the Lord, Pſal. 92.1. 3. It is a pleaſant thing, and praiſe is comely, Pſal. 147.1.
                  Sixtly, the very Heathens haue commended

it, and the beaſts haue performed it in their bruitiſh manner, to their benefactors, as appeareth in Androdius his Liuie. Lion.
                  Seauenthly, an vnthankefull man is hated of men, accounted as a Viper, and an vnprofitable burthen to the earth Terrae inutile pondus.: the very light of Nature, and common humanitie cryes out vpon it.
                  Eightly, God vpbraydes and brands his deareſt Children for the omiſſion of this duetie, 2 Chron. 32.25.
                  Ninthly, the omiſſion of this is a ſigne of a proud heart, and brings downe Gods wrath. Ibidem.
                  
                  Tenthly, this is the conuerſation vvhich wee ſhall haue in heauen, euen to praiſe God, eſpecially for the redemption of the world by Chriſt, Phil. 3.20. Reu. 5.9. Reu. 19.1.3. This is the life that the Angels leade, therefore vvee ought ſpeedily to inure our ſelues to it.
                  
                     Vſe.This muſt excite vs to be more carefull in performance of this duety: It is a blame and a blemiſh to be vnthankefull to man, as Iudas was to Chriſt, as the Iewes and Abimelech to Gideons Children 
                        Iudg 9.16 17.18., as Pharaohs Butler to Ioſeph 
                     
                        Gen 40.23.; much more to God. It is a ſinne, and an abhomination to be vnthankefull to God for temporall and outward bleſſings, as health, wealth, life, libertie, children, &c. ſo for the

vſe of the Creatures. Chriſt vpbraydes the nine Lepers for this ſinne Luke 17.17 18. And ſure thoſe that vſe the Creatures prophanely, as Dogs, and Swine, and beaſts, neuer looking to the holy and religious vſe of them, as ſanctified by the Word and Prayer 1 Tim. 4.5, they are worſe then the Doues and Elephants, that at leaſt looke vp to heauen when they eate their meate: but if we be vnthankfull for the Incarnation, Death, and Paſſion of the Creator, that in his humanitie was made a creature 
                        Gal. 4.4., and ſubiected to death 
                        Phil. 2.8., to redeeme vs the ſlaues and vaſſals of ſinne and Sathan, from the firſt and ſecond death 
                        Rom. 4.25. & 5.18.19.; our ſinne is in a higher die and graine of ingratitude: wee are more not onely vnchriſtian, but viperous, and inhumane then the ſauage Getes and Sauromiataines. Alas then, how many are vnlike to thankefull Simeon? hour many are ſeemingly and hypocritically thankefull for outward things? they are ready in euery company to thanke God oft times in the Phariſaicall pride of their hearts 
                        Luke 18.11.12., for full baſquets and rich ſtore-houſes, abundance of Talents, fruitfull wife, for their Oliue branches, their children, but the ſame men are neyther vocally nor really, in words or workes, thankefull vnto God for Chriſt Ieſus, for the benefits vvee haue by him, 1. of Election, 2. Vocation, 3. Iuſtification, 4. Redemption, 5. Sanctification,

and title to 6. Glorification; for his 7. Word, 8. Goſpell, 9. Sacraments, 10. Miniſters, 11. Miniſterie: for theſe, ne verbum quidem, not a word, there is altum ſilentium, as mute as fiſhes. All naturall and morall men in this are Mutes, and not Conſonants, as it is moſt conſonant they ſhould be. Or if they ſpeake a gratulatory word, their hearts are as farre from it as heauen from earth; at leaſt their workes proclaime open warre and hoſtililie againſt the Lords Chriſt, kiſſing him with Iudas in outward profeſſion, crying Aue, and all haile with the Iewes, when (their liues being all hell) they cry Crucifie him in their conuerſation, Pſal. 3.17.
                  And thus much for the Title, now to the Text, Lord now letteſt, &c.
                  
                  Euery word hath his waight without torturing the Text; theſe things are obſeruable: 1. Simeons Compellation; Lord: 2. his deſires Limitation; Now: 3. the acknowledgement of the Diuine Permiſſion; Letteſt thou: 4. his proper Appellation, Thy Seruant: 5. his deſired Diſmiſſion; Depart: 6. his hoped Pacification; In peace: 7. his grounded Reſolution; According to thy Word: of which in order.
                  
                     
                     
                        Simeons Compellation. In this word, Lord.
                     
                        SOme take Lord, eſſentially for the whole Trinitie, Iehouah Elohim; ſome perſonally, for one of the Perſons, for indeede the vvhole Trinitie, and euery Perſon in the Trinitie, is oft in the Scripture tearmed by this vvord Lord. Some appropriate it here to God the Father, ſome to Chriſt the Sonne, ſo In locum.
                        Theophilact and Euthumius: ſome to God the holy Ghoſt, ſo 
                           In Lucam. 1 Tim. 3.16 
                        Athanaſius.
                     
                     Apply it vnto Chriſt, and then you haue to conſider a great Myſterie, a great Mercy, God manifeſted in the fleſh, iuſtified in the ſpirit, ſeene of Angels, preached vnto the Gentiles, beleeued on in the world, and receiued into glory; for that incarnate Babe, vvhich Simeon hath in his armes, in reſpect of his humanitie hee cals him Lord, in reſpect of his Diuinitie, From whence wee ſee demonſtratiuely, what all Orthodoxe Antiquitie affirmes, the teſtimonie of Scriptures 1 Ioh. 1.14 Epheſ. 4.10 Phil. 2.6.7.8., harmony of all reformed Churches Of Bohemia, Baſill, France, Sweuia, ſee harmonie of confeſſions., Generall and Prouinciall Concels, ſeuerall Creedes, both Apoſtolicall

and Nicene, confirme, that Chriſt the Meſſias, the Sonne of God
                           Mat. 3.17 Pſal. 2.7., is both 
                           Ioh. 17.3. Iohn 1 1.God and Man 
                           Eſay 7.14; Chriſtus Deus de Patre, Homo de Matre, &c. God of his Father, Man of his Mother 
                           Mat. 10.18.23. Luke 1.27.31.34.: of his Fathers immortalitie, of his Mothers virginitie: of his Mother without Father, of his Father without a Mother; a Prieſt for euer after the order of Melchiſedech 
                        
                           Heb. 5.10.: without Father as hee was Man, without Mother as hee was GOD: of his Father without time, of his Mother without ſeede: not borne without eyther man or woman, as was Adam 
                        
                           Gen. 1.27; nor of man without a woman, as was Eue 
                        
                           Gen. 2.22.: nor of both man and woman, as are wee the poſteritie of Adam and Eue; but of a woman without a man, Patrem habuit in Coelis, Matrem queſiuit in Terris 
                        
                           Auguſt. de temp. hom. 9 vide hom. 13
                        , hauing a Father in Heauen hee ſought for a Mother in earth; yea, ſuch a Mother as made the Myſtery ſo miraculous, as all things in heauen and earth cannot paralell or patterne it: for theſe three things in this one are accompliſhed of GOD, admirably ſingular, and ſingularly to be admired; Deus & Homo, Mater & Ʋirgo, Ʋerbum & Caro; to wit, God and Man, a Mother and a Maide, the Word and Fleſh, vnited in one. A Myſtery neuer ſufficiently to be admired; 
                           Ʋt propter nos veniret in mundum, per quem factus eſt mundus; a Mercy neuer enough to be magnified, of men

and Angels; that for our ſakes hee ſhould come into the world, which made the world; that the Creator of Mary ſhould be borne of Mary, that Dauids Lord ſhould be Dauids Sonne; hee which was long before Abraham, the ſeede of Abraham; the Maker of the earth made of the earth; that as in the nonage of of the world man was made after the Image of God, ſo in the dotage of the world, God ſhould come in the ſimilitude of ſinfull man; that God ſhould be made man, that man ſhould be as a God; that God ſhould deſcend downe to the earth, that man ſhould aſcend vp to the heauen. Oh wonder at this you that wonder at nothing: for my part (ſaith Cyprian 
                        Cyprian) I doe not admire the beautie of the Sunne, the colours of the Raine-bow, the glory of the Moone, the motion of the Heauens, the fixed ſtabilitie of the earth, the ebbing and flowing of the Sea, the varietie of the Creatures, the alteration and ſucceſſion of times and ſeaſons, nor any thing elſe amongſt all the Creatures, Celeſtiall and Sublunarie; but this I admire, and for euer will, Deum in vtero, Creatorem in creatura, &c. God made man, the Creator borne of the Creature, and for the Creature; yea, the mighty God before whom the heauens ſhake and the Mountaines tremble. a little Infant in the armes of a Virgin Mother, in the armes of old Simeon an aged Father: this

is ſuch a worke, ſuch a wonder, that I ſay with S. Ierome 
                        Hierome., Quod natura non habuit, &c. that which Naure had not, which Vſe knew not, which Reaſon was ignorant of, mans Minde vncapable of, which the Cherubins conceiued not; the Angels, till reuealed, vnderſtood not, which all the Powers of created nature vvere amazed at, came to paſſe, when CHRIST by his Incarnation, did vnite the Humanitie to the Diuinitie, in a true, naturall, reall, and Hypoſtaticall Vide Zanchium de incar. verbi.vnion.
                     
                        Vſe.Oh therefore let vs reape the fruit of this Vine, ſince he is come from heauen to earth, to marry vs in our owne nature 
                           Bern. ſer. 2 in Cant., Nam vt Sponſus & Sponſa in Thalamo, &c. for as man and wife are one in the Bride-chamber, ſo God and man one Chriſt in the wombe of the Virgin. Oh let vs labour by faith to be vnited and marryed vnto him, to be made members of this Head, Branches of this Vine, Buildings vpon this Corner-ſtone, parts of his Body, Spouſes of this Bridegrome, that with the vviſe Virgins being contracted by faith vnto him here in grace, the Marriage may be ſolemnized in Glory. Then ſhall wee truely be kiſſed with the kiſſes of his loue
                           Can· 1.1.: Oh foelix oſculum 
                        Oh foelix oſculum, in quo non os ori, ſed Deus homini vnitur., &c. Oh happy kiſſe, which is not a ioyning of lips, but a ioyning of loues betwixt God and man.
                     Secondly, was this Lord borne man, for vs,

let vs labour to be borne againe to him in that ſpirituall new-birth and Regeneration, which the Scriptures call a new Creation 
                           Pſal. 51.12, a holy turning 
                           Ioel 2.12., change 
                           Rom. 12.2., and conuerſion 
                           Ier. 31.18 of the whole man, in the renouation of all the Powers and faculties of body and ſoule, ſuperiour and inferiour, both in the intellectuall parts, as in memory, will, vnderſtanding, &c. as alſo in the lower faculties, iraſcible and concupiſcible: this new birth which the Prophets haue continually vrged 
                           Eſa. 31.6. Ier. 3.12.14 Ezek. 18.30 Oſe. 14.2., which Iohn 
                        
                           Mat. 3.2. 
                        Baptiſt and the Diſciples haue preached 
                           Lu. 24.47, which Paul 
                        
                           Acts 26.17.18. and the Apoſtles haue continually preſſed in their Sermons 
                           Act. 2.38. and writings, which our Sauiour Chriſt himſelfe, both in his publique preaching 
                           Mar. 1.15, and priuate conference with Nichodemus 
                        
                           Ioh. 3.3.4., hath ſo doctrinally explained, and by application inforced to be performed of all, vnder paine of damnation 
                           Luke 13.3.5., it is ſo needfull, nay, of ſuch abſolute neceſſitie to be practiſed of all Chriſtians chiefely, that till a man bring forth the fruits of it, worthy repentance and amendement of life 
                           Mat. 3.8, he is but like the barren Figge-tree 
                           Luke 23.7, corrupt and twiſe dead Iude v. 12.
                        , without either ſap of Grace, or bloſſome of goodneſſe, fit to be hewen downe, and caſt into the fire 
                           Mat. 3.10; nay, a beaſt and no man; a foxe, a Viper, a Dogge, 
                           Phil. 3.2. filthy and vncleane, as were Herod 
                        
                           Lu. 13.32., the Iewes
                           Luke 3.7, and the 
                           Tit. 1.12.Cretians: nay, a horſe 
                           Ier. 5.8., and Oxe 
                           Pro. 7.22.; nay, worſe then the

Oxe and Aſſe
                           Eſay 1.4., then the Horſe and Mule, without vnderſtanding, vnwiſe, 
                           Rom. 1.29 30. Pſal. 14. Rom. 3.12. diſobedient, rebellious, fooles
                           Pſal. 53. Rom. 1.22., blinde men
                           Iohn 9 31., naturall men, without God in Chriſt, aliants from God, and ſtrangers from the Common-wealth of 
                           Eph 2.12.Iſrael, miſerable, naked, and wretched men 
                           Reu. 3.17: for whom is reſerued Hell
                           Pſal. 9.17, and the ſecond death, wrath 
                           Rom. 2.8 9 and vengeance,1 Cor 9 14 fire and Brimſtone 
                           Reu. 21 8., ſtorme and tempeſt: excluſion out of 
                           Reu. 22 15 heauen, and intruſion, and eternall incluſion in the bottomleſſe pit, with the Diuell and his Angels 
                           Mat. 25.41., inſomuch that as Auguſtine well, Naſci, & non renaſci, generari & non regenerari, for a man to be borne and not to be borne againe, to haue the nobilitie of the firſt birth without the new birth; be hee what hee will be, Prince or Potentate, King or Keſar: or the worlds Monarch, a ſecond Alexander, if hee haue onely generation from Adam without regeneration from the Spirit of Chriſt, the ſecond Adam; if hee be not borne to him by water and the Spirit, that was borne and dyed for him, comming by water and by bloud 1 Ioh. 5.6, hee had better as the Scripture ſaith of Iudas, that hee had neuer beene borne 
                           Marke 14 21, nay, that a Milſtone had beene hung about his necke▪ and hee throwne into the Sea the firſt houre hee was borne, for then he ſhould haue bene damned for his originall ſinnes: but his damnation ſhall now be aggrauated for his actuall

ſinnes; chiefely, for this ſinne of Omiſſion, in liuing ſo long within the Church, without the life of grace, (like a rotten Bough, or woodden Legge▪) No part of the root of Ieſſe 
                        
                           Eſay 53.2, or body of Chriſt, without regeneration, in not beleeuing in, or liuing like that light which for that end came into the world 
                           Iohn 3.19 20: thoſe which before ſate in darkneſſe, and in the ſhadow of death, being illuminated 
                           Luk. 2.29, ſhould caſt off the workes of darkeneſſe, and walke like the children of the light 1 Theſ. 5.6., like Diſciples of this Lord, who was made man, to redeeme Sathans ſlaues into the libertie of his owne Sonnes.
                     Secondly, in Simeons Compellation, Lord, let it rectifie our practiſe: wee vſe or rather abuſe this great and glorious Name in our mouthes at our pleaſures, not onely in raſh, vaine, and falſe ſwearing and forſwearing, to which ſinnes there belongs a ſwift curſe 
                           Mal. 3.5., but without reuerence, reſpect, or regard in our ordinary and cuſtomary talke, which at euery word, and vpon euery triuiall and friuilous occaſion, is ſtuffed out with fooliſh and vaine admiration, as oh God, oh Lord, oh Ieſus, oh Chriſt See Mr. Perkins his Gouernement of the tongue, toſſing like a Tennis ball this great and fearefull Name, the Lord our God, the mighty Iehouah, which the very Iewes feare and tremble to nominate at this day.
                     Others againe, in their Phariſaicall Oriſons, Paganiſh Prayers, Heatheniſh Bablings,

vſe this word Lord, in their Tantologies and repetitions, as the Papiſts the word Ieſus, euen like a Superſtitious Popiſh charme, thinking to be heard for their much babling 
                           Mat. 6.7.; nay, imagining (which is the groſſe and foggy ignorance of our both vulgar and vicious common and carnall people) that if euen in the houre of death, like the Theefe on the 
                           Luk. 23.41 croſſe, or in their old age with Simeon, they cry, Lord, Lord; if they can haue time but to ſay Lord haue mercy vpon them, they are cockeſure of heauen, it is no matter how they liue.
                     
                        Anſ. It is true indeede, if they had the Faith of Simeon and the penitent Theefe; if they had the Spirit of God, and zealous hearts, like them, they ſhould be heard and helped: yea, inter Pontem & Fontem, crying betwixt the Bridge and the Riuer, betwixt the Axe and the necke; for, 
                           Ʋelox Spiritus ſancti gratia, the Spirit is nimble and ſpeedy like the winde, in breathing grace: and, Penitentia vera non ſera, True Repentance is neuer too late, and hee that cals vpon the Lord ſhall be 
                           Ioel 2. Act. 2.21.ſaued: But alas, then thou muſt call vpon the LORD with ſuch an heart as did Simeon: for, the Lord reiects and abhors all prayers that come not from the 
                           Eſaey 59.13 Eſay 64.7. heart, as hee did Caines Sacrifice 
                           Gen 4., as execrable and abhominable h. But now, thou that haſt liued in ſinne, in health and in youth, in thy

old age, and in ſickeneſſe, by theſe ſinnes, art likely to be depriued of Gods Spirit, and of thine owne heart. For, as Sinne quencheth the Spirit, as vvater quencheth fire: ſo, it takes away the heart, Oſe 4. verſe 11. therefore Nabal vvhen hee dyed, hee vvanted his heart: it was dead like a ſtone 1 Sam. 25 37. Now thou Nabal, thou foole, thou ſtony heart, what profit wilt thou haue in crying Lord, Lord? thou maiſt cry ſo till thy tongue cleaue to the roofe of thy mouth: thou maiſt howle vpon thy bed like a Wolfe 
                           Oſe 7.14., and yet the Lord ſtoppe his eares from hearing, and folde vp his hands from helping. The fooliſh Virgins knocked and cryed, Lord open vnto vs, yet were ſhut out, ſo ſhalt thou. Mat. 25. For, not euery one that ſaith Lord, Lord, ſhall enter into the Kingdome of Heauen, Math. 7.21. But hee that doth the will of God, as Simeon did: now, the will of the Lord is, that thou ſhouldeſt repent betimes, call vpon him, pray vnto him, and prayſe him, but all from a touched heart.
                  
                  
                     
                     His deſires Limitation. In this word, Now.
                     
                        THE ſecond thing obſeruable here is his Deſires Limitation, in this word Now: which denotates the Time preſent. Which word, like all the reſt in the Scripture, hath his weight; for, as S. Ierome once obſerued, Nulla Littera, nulla Syllaba, &c, No Letter, no Syllable, nay, no Tittle, no Pricke wants his energie and force; or is vnſignificant in the originall. Here Simeons minde may be thus expreſſed; Lord it hath pleaſed thee of thy mercy, not my merit, to giue mee a reuelation, that I ſhall not ſee death, vntill I ſee the Annoynted of the Lord, verſe 26. now by the motion of thy Spirit, comming into the Temple, verſe 27. I perceiue that this Babe that is brought in hither to be done vnto according to the cuſtome of the Law, by his Parents, is annoynted and appoynted to be the Prince, and Prieſt, and Prophet of his Church; therefore Lord, now I am willing, nay, deſirous to depart in peace, ſince I haue in mine armes the Prince of peace, in my heart

the ſpirit of peace, in my conſcience inward peace: thou haſt kept touch, and performed what thou haſt promiſed: I haue my expectation ſatisfied, my deſires accompliſhed, therefore I deſire not to liue any longer. I am an aged man, and ready to be gathered to my Fathers; A ripe apple, fit to fall from the tree, I cannot liue long by the courſe of nature, I deſire not to liue long by the inſtinct of grace: it is better for mee to remoue out of this Tabernacle, then to runne further in the Pilgrimage of my few and euill dayes: better to depart in peace, then continue in this worlds Priſon. I know I muſt dye: neuer ſo well, neuer ſo willingly as now, euen now, when I haue in mine armes the conquerour of death, the Lord of life.
                     Wee ſee in Simeon,
                        Obſerue. that the godly haue oftentimes diuers raptures and ſweet ioyes, as in life, ſo chiefely in their diſſolutions. So had Steuen, when about to be ſtoned, hee ſaw the Heauens open, and the Sonne of man ſtanding at the right hand of God, Acts 7.56. Such feelings diuers of the Martyres haue had at the Stake, nay, euen in the heate of flames and fires, ſo experimentally, that Mr. Glouer knew as well when Gods Spirit came to him, as a cold body feeles externall heate or warmth: ſo comfortably,Mr. Fo
                                 •
                              e his Martirologie. that good Cra
                              •
                           
                           mer indured the burning of his (once guilty)

hand with leſſe motion, then ſome abide the Goute or Tooth-ach. Many ſuch rauiſhments and inward comforts diuers of the Saints haue felt, (how euer at other times with perplexed Iob, and penitent Dauid, ſo deiected, as though they were reiected of God,) that they haue deſired the Lord a while to with-draw his preſence, the weake veſſels of their fraile nature not being able to containe that fulneſſe of the Spirit which they haue felt. Such an extaſie was Paul in, when rapt vp into the third heauens, hee heard 
                           Ʋerba ineffabilia, words not to be vttered, himſelfe tranſpoſed from himſelfe; whether in the body, or without the body hee wiſt not: hee was more then in an ordinary rauiſhment, in his ſure Sanctuary that he had againſt Principalities and Powers, life and death, &c. built vpon the ſure anchor and Corner-ſtone of Gods loue to him in Chriſt: ſo in his annihilating and vilifying all things, as Phariſaicall learning, birth, knowledge, riches, and the like, as droſſe and dongue in reſpect of the excellent knowledge of Chriſt IESVS, and him crucified: ſo when hee was ready not onely to goe to Ieruſalem to bee bound, but to dye for Chriſt: ſo in his expectation and aſſurance of that Crowne vvhich Chriſt, that righteous Iudge, would beſtow vpon him, hauing fought a good fight, and finiſhed the Faith, his affections were inflamed,

his Spirit wondrouſly reioyced, his heart ouer-ioyed, and his deſires tranſcendent. The like Iubilies haue many of Gods Children kept with their God, in ſuch extaſies of ioy, as haue ſhewed themſelues (like the Sunne-beames through a cloud) through the vaile of the fleſh, euen in outward alterations, and Symptomies.
                     
                         Some in their Meditations, hauing their thoughts ſo ſequeſtrated, and their ſpirit ſo abſtracted from all earthly things, that their corporall ſenſes haue not perceiued outward obiects: no, not ſo much as the ſound of Bels neare ringing.
                     
                         Others haue forgot their repaſt and feeding, the loue of Chriſt being better then wine, and the taſte of the Spirit ſweeter then honey, and the honey-combe: ſuch things the Papiſts write of their Aquinas, Bonauenture, Katheran of Sienna, &c. and other their Monkes, Friars, Virgins, veſtall Votaries; but Surius is vnſure in his reports, Lippomanus his lips are not freed from lies, and Marrulus makes and marres many Fables. It is more likely vvhat is writ of Auguſtine and Bernard in their Soliloquies in this kinde.
                     
                         Others haue expreſſed their inward raptures, in their very countenances, as Moſes and Steuen, whoſe faces ſo ſhined, when the one had beene on the Mount with God, the

other diſputing for God, that they ſeemed like the faces of Angels, Acts 6.15.
                     
                         Others haue beene ſo carryed away in ſuch glimpſes of glory as the Lord hath ſhewed them; they haue beene ſo inebriated and ſpiritually drunke with the wine of the Spirit, that they haue not knowne what they haue ſaid, as Peter in Chriſts Transfiguration, Mat. 12.
                     
                         Others haue neuer beene ſatisfied vvith commerſe with God, in ſpeaking with God, and ſpeaking to God, by reading the Word and Prayer: ſome reading ouer the Bible foureteene times in a yeere, as Alphonſus; others as conſtantly as Cyprian read Tertullian, or Alexander, Homer: others trauelling in their iourneyes, as Phillips Eunuch, Acts 8. Others at their Tables, as duely as their meate: others praying three times a day, with Daniel; thrice with Paul; frequently, yea at midnight, with Dauid and Silas; ſo long, ſo oft, till their knees were growne as hard as the earth they kneeled on, as Ierome in the Deſart: others ſeauen houres together, (yet obſeruing none canonically) as Father Latimer: ſo haue they chawed their chud on that hidden Manna which God gaue them, hauing ſtill a godly dropſie, (like the Worldlings golden dropſie) vnſtanched.
                     
                         Others haue fallen into bodily dead ſownes by their heauenly viſions, and rauiſhments of

the inward man, as Iohn ſurnamed the Diuine, Reuel. 1.10.17. ſuch, Daniel, Dan. 8.16.17. when groueling on the ground, hee lay as dead; ſo Ezekiel by the Riuer Kebar, with many moe.
                     Now,Reaſons why the godly haue oft extraordinary rauiſhments. the Reaſons why God doth thus delight, and oft, as it were, ouer-ioy his Children are:
                     
                         Firſt, to giue them ſome taſte and feeling of his loue and fauour to them, euen as a Maſter will oft ſhew to his Seruant ſome argument of his loue, and a Father declare to his childe ſome teſtimonie of his fatherly affection: ſo deales God with his.
                     
                         Secondly, to incourage them againſt croſſes: the Marriners heart would breake, if he ſhould alwayes be toſſed in ſuch ſtormes, as Ionas and Paul tryed, without euer any merry gales. The Traueller would be too much perplexed with continuall ſh
                           •
                        wrings and tempeſts, without any intermiſſion or interpoſition of refreſhing Sunnie beames: ſo were the world and worldly woes inſufferable and intollerable to a weake and wearied Chriſtian, if the holy Ghoſt the Comforter, ſhould not wonderfully blow and breathe, and reflexe vpon vs.
                     
                         Thirdly, that they may haue ſome good reliſh and feeling of thoſe better and more laſting and euerlaſting ioyes, of which they

ſhall haue ere long the fruition, of which theſe are certaine Images and Ideaes, ſparkes and reflexions: for, euen as the wicked and the reprobate, in the rage and hell of their conſcience, feele oft-times certaine flaſhings of hell-fire, which are as it were ſummoners to iudgement. Heraulds of their damnation, and Prologues of their Tragicall execution: ſo God diſtils into the hearts of the righteous hidden and holy heates, as it were drops of that fountaine of life with which they ſhall be refreſhed; and glimpſes from the Sunne of Righteouſneſſe, with whoſe beames they ſhall be rauiſhed.
                     
                        
                           Vſe. 1
                        Of Redargution.This then, firſt, reformes their mindes, or refutes their madneſſe, that thinke the eſtate of Grace to be moſt comfortleſſe. Many millions in the world thinke the Profeſſors of the Word to be depriued of all inward and outward ioyes; men as retchleſſe as richleſſe, as forlorne in their ſoules as forworne in their bodies; they appeare to them as budleſſe and beautileſſe Trees, and withered branches: and why? becauſe they cannot diſcerne any thing in them but ſighing and ſobbing, and wayling and weeping, and Melancholy, and ſolitarineſſe: they will not be ſociable with their neighbours in goſſipping and company-keeping, in walking abroad and talking, in pratling and prating at home, in meetings and

merriments in Tauernes and Tipling-houſes, in feaſts and frolickes, in ſports and paſtimes, in dallyances and drinkings, in gurmundizing and gluttony; they neyther care for worldly play, as Carding or Dicing, &c. nor to ſee Playes, the Baudes of looſe luſt: therefore they maruell how they liue ſince they are neuer merry. Hence the Lords owne Simions, gracious and godly men, ſuch as haue ſet their faces to Sion, framed aright their life, and fitted for death, are cenſured and derided, as daſtards and dotards, as ſilly and ſimple, as Monkiſh, Monaſticall, Stoicall, and vnciuill men; nay, as fantaſtiques and fooles: hence comes the helliſh Prouerb, Gods follower, Gods fooles; that, Gods Sheepe, Gods Geeſe, Gods Gauders, and ſuch like Blaſphemies: but alas poore deluded Soules, they muſt know that as our Sauiour Chriſt had meate to eate vvhich the Iewes knew not of, and as he was to goe whither his Diſciples wiſt not of; ſo the true Chriſtian and beleeuer hath comforts here, that the world knowes not of, and is to goe to endleſſe and prizeleſſe comforts hereafter, ſuch as worldlings wot not of: here they haue the teſtimony of a good conſcience, as had 
                           Acts 24. The deſcription of a good conſcience. 
                        Paul, which is a continuall feaſt, a continuated Chriſtmas; alwayes Iubile yeere, the golden bed of Salomon, the beautifull Porch of the Temple, Fidus acbates, a holy and a happy

companion. Secondly, they haue the loue of God ſhed abroad in their hearts by the Spirit of God. Thirdly, they haue thoſe extraordinary ioyes, and ſodaine extaſies, chiefely in their Soliloquies and deuotions with God, the Sunne of his goodneſſe ſhining vpon them, in the heate and light, in the comfort, and power of the Spirit, euen after they haue rayned, powred, and ſhowred downe their teares into the Lords boſome, which they would not exchange for Crownes and Empires. Fourthly, like Steuen and Paul, and Simeon here they are euen filled with the holy Ghoſt, taſting of ſuch ioyes (which are but the firſt fruits of the Spirit, and the earneſt of their inheritance in heauen) as none know, but thoſe vvhich experimentally feele. For as none knowes the loue of a Parent to his Childe, but thoſe that are Parents; nor of a good Shepheard to his Sheepe, a good Paſtour to his people, but hee that is a good Shepheard indeed: ſo none knowes the comfortable condition of a good Chriſtian, liuing and dying, but hee that is a Chriſtian indeede; a common Chriſtian, a naturall man, a wicked man, a ciuill honeſt man knowes it no more then a young childe doth Greeke and Hebrew; diſcernes it no more, then a blinde man doth colours; feeles it no more, then a ſtocke, or a ſtone, or a dead man; eſteemes it no more

then Eſau doth his Birth-right, or the Prodigo his patrimonie; then Aeſops Cocke, a Pearle:1 Cor. 1.23▪
                         accounts of it (as the Iewes and Gentiles, and all profane men account of the Goſpell) euen meere fooliſhneſſe; and therefore they ſo blatter and blaſpheme, and like bruite beaſts ſpeake euill of thoſe things,Iude v. 10.
                         and thoſe perſons which they know not; but I will aſſure thee, how ere thou thinke the poore and penitent Chriſtian, the ſincere and zealous, to raue, as the Iewes thought of Ieremy, to be diſtract, or mad, or beſides himſelfe, as Feſtus thought Paul,
                        
                           Act. 26.24. as Chriſts Country-men thought of our Sauiour, to bee ſimple men, and fooles, &c. yet neuertheleſſe they know, with Dauid, that it is better to be a doore-keeper in Gods houſe, nay, to ſuffer affliction, with Moſes and Gods people, then to inioy the pleaſures of ſinne, then to inioy all the priuiledges in Pharaohs Court, then to reioyce here for a while, with Diues,
                        
                           Luke 16. Eccleſ. 12. and Salomons young man, and then to quake in Iudgement and be damned in hell: yea, they euen in this vaile of teares haue more ioy in their faſting then thou in feaſting; more in praying, then thou in playing; more in ſighing, then thou in ſinging; for euen in the midſt of mirth the heart of the vvicked is heauy, vvhen GOD ſtrikes, and Conſcience gnawes; but the godly are merry in priſon,
                           Act. 16.25. are comforted in perſecution,

reioyce after ſtripes,
                           Acts 5.41. prayſe God, in the deepe,
                           Ionas 2.1.2 and in the Whales belly, bleſſe GOD after hee hath ſmit them, and exult in Spirit in their old yeeres, as did Simeon. Beſides, thy ioyes are vaine, vile, carnall, ſenſuall, like thy ſelfe (like the Horſe and Oxe, that delights onely in a good fat paſture,Exhortat. though the Pinfold, and the ſlaughter-houſe be the next diſh: but theirs are pure, chaſte, ſincere, heauenly, eternall, like that God that ſends them, like that Spirit that workes them: therefore get thine eyes opened to ſee thy miſerie, and ioyne thy ſelfe to them whom now thou deſpiſeſt, (as Rahab and Ruth did to the true Church) that thou maiſt finde mercy.
                     Secondly, whereas Simeon is now willing to depart, hauing ſeene Chriſt, and ſo reioyceth in this expected obiect: it is obſeruable, that the Patriarkes all of them in their times and ages expected CHRIST, euer ſince the promiſe of this Meſſias was made vnto our Protoplaſts,
                           Gen. 3.15. our firſt Parents, Adam and Eue: Simeon lookes for him here in his generation, ſo did the Church of Ieruſalem, ſo did the reſt in their generations. Eue thought he was then come when ſhee bore Caine, confeſſing that ſhee had receiued a man from the Lord, Gen. 4.1. Abraham deſired to ſee his day. Iacob wayted for his ſaluation, Gen. 48.18.
                           Gen. 48.18. 
                        Moſes deſired GOD to ſend him to deliuer

Iſrael out of Aegypt, Exod. 4.13. Iob vvas comforted in this expected Redeemer, Iob 19.25. Yea,
                           Mat. 13.17 many Prophets and righteous men deſired to ſee the things which wee ſee, euen the Maieſtie of God clothed with fleſh, as a man is ſhod with Sandals on his feete. And ſure the Ancients for this cauſe much extenuate the Polygamie and multiplicitie of wiues of the Patriarkes, as of Iacob, &c. as alſo in taking their Maides as Concubines; which they ſay was done, non propter libidinem, ſed propter prolem, not for luſt, but for multiplying a holy ſeede: euery one in their dayes deſiring to propagate the promiſed Seede of the woman.
                     In which wee ſee Gods great mercy to vs now vnder the Goſpell,Vſe. Of Conſolation. more then to thoſe vnder the Law: for, then came into the world the great Phyſitian of the world, to cure the great Patient, which was the world; which ſo long did languiſh; when we ſtood in moſt need of him. The former ages had but a glimpſe of this light of the world; they ſaw him but darkely and obſcurely, tanquam in ſpeculo, tanquā in anigmate, as it were in a cloud, in a glaſſe, in Leuiticall ſhadowes; but wee ſee him clearely, euen fully, as the Sunne at noone day: perſpicuouſly in the Goſpell,
                           Mat. 2. euen as the Wiſe-men ſaw him in the Stable,Viſi
                              •
                            beatifica. as Simeon and Anna in the Temple: wee haue an happier

viſion of him then they, euen as the Angels more then wee, hee came indeede to the beleeuers comfortably, powerfully, Typically; but wee receiue him, as Simeon did, perſonally: hee came to Adam, with the promiſe, in the time of deſpayre: to Abraham, with ſupply, in time of Sacrifice: to Iſaac, with reliefe, in time of famine: in time of exile, with honour, to Ioſeph: in time of perſecution, vvith comfort, to Elias: in time of battell, with an hand on Gideons hilt: with an eye, to the ſtone from Dauids fling: in time of inuaſion, with triumph, to Ezekias: alwayes hopefully, helpfully to his Church. For which cauſe, hee is called, The Starre of Iacob, The Lyon of Iudah, The Rod of Iſaack, &c. Typically hee came in Circumciſion, Rom. 3. in the Paſchall Lambe, Iohn 1. in Manna, Iohn 6. in the brazen Serpent, Iohn 3. in the Arke, and on the Altar, &c. Hee came figuratiuely, as our reſt, in Noah; our increaſe, in Ioſeph; our loue, in Dauid; our peace, in Salomon, our ſaluation, in Ioſhuah, &c. But now hee is come to vs perſonally,Vbi venit plenitudo temporis venit ille qui liberauit nos à tempore. in the aſſuming our nature, in the fulneſſe of time, ſaith Paul, Gal. 4.4. to free vs from all time, ſaith Bernard. Note his mercy, hee came to vs voluntarily, non compulſu Patris, ſed conſenſu ſui, not by compulſion from his Father, but by his owne conſent: Non ex neceſſitate mandantis,
                        Chryſoſt. 
                        ſed ex voluntate venientis,
                        
ſaith Chriſoſtome. Yea, 
                           Ʋltro venit & ſponte, ſe videndum att
                              •
                           lit, occidendum obtulit, Greg.
                        Gregory. Of his owne accord, yeelding himſelfe to be ſeene of men, to be ſlaine for men. Yea,Baſil. 
                        Prepria benignitas inuitauit, miſericordia traxit, veritas compulit; His benignitie to vs inuited him, his mercy drew him, his truth compelled him, Baſil. Here is his Mercy for our Conſolation.
                     
                        
                           Vſe. 2 Oh let vs walke worthy of this grace and Mercy, for an vſe of Inſtruction:Of Inſtruction. let vs runne after the ſweetneſſe of his odours; let vs follow his footings, ſince hee came to leade vs; let vs worke out our ſaluation with feare and trembling, ſince hee came to ſaue vs, 1 Tim. 4.9. Luke 19.10.
                           Luk. 19.10. Let vs returne to the Biſhop of our ſoules, ſince hee came to finde vs, as loſt ſheepe; let vs be no more the ſlaues of the Diuell, ſince hee came to diſſolue the workes of the Diuell, 1 Iohn 3. let vs entertaine him, as did Zacheus, and retayne him,
                           Luke 11. Gen. 28. as did Iacob, when hee would not let him goe till hee bleſt him; let vs feaſt him, as did Mathew; waſh his feete with our teares,
                           Luke 7. as did Mary; ſeeke him ſorrowing, as did his Mother; prepare for him an vpper lodging to eate his Paſſeouer in, as did his Diſciples,1 Cor. 6.16. euen our bodies and ſoules, the Temples of his Spirit; let vs walke nearer to Sion in this our light, ſince the Sun is come ſo neere vs, nay, euen to vs, then the Patriarkes did in their darkeneſſe

vnder the vayle and cloud of the Law.
                     
                        
                           Vſe. 3 Let vs now come to the tryall, and bring our practiſe to the Touch-ſtone;Redargution. and wee ſhall be found as vnworthy of Chriſts reuelation to vs, as vnthankefull for his manifeſtation amongſt vs,
                           Luke 10. as the very Iewes themſelues; nay, let vs compare our ſelues with them, and wee ſhall iuſtifie them, as they did Sodome. Euer ſince CHRIST dwelt amongſt the ſonnes of men, the kinde of his vſage hath beene too vnkinde; the courſe of his entertainment hath beene too courſe; the forme and manner of his welcome, deformed and vnmannerly: the world hath beene ſtill ſo weake through ignorance, as not to know; or ſo wicked through ingratitude, as not to acknowledge; or ſo corrupt by nature, as not to welcome the Word incarnate, the Lord of Nature. For, euen in his birth at Bethlem, howſoeuer hee had the hearts and admirations of ſome few, ſome handfuls; as of Anna, Simeon, Zachary, Elizabeth, &c. As alſo after, of his Diſciples, of Nathaniel, Nicodemus, Ioſeph, Mary, Martha, Lazarus, ſome healed Patients, conuert ſinners, penitent Publicanes, and ſuch like; yet the groſſeſt and the greateſt part, deſpiſed and diſpited him. Looke vpon him from the wombe to the earth, from the Cradle to the Croſſe, from the Croſſe to the Graue, and you ſhall ſee him ſtill croſſed by curſed inſtruments:

ſo looke on him from Bethlem to Aegypt, from Aegypt to Nazareth, from Nazareth to Capernaum, from Capernaum to Ieruſalem, from Ieruſalem to Golgotha; y
                           ••
                         ſhall ſee him toſt from place to place, from poſt to pillar: Herod, the Diuell, the Iewes, the People, the Scribes, the Phariſes, the Lawyers▪ the Herodians, the Gentiles, the Romanes, the Souldiers; Dogs, and Foxes, and Diuels; Iudas, and Pilate, and Herod; Earth, and Hell, all oppoſed madly and maliciouſly euen againſt the Lords Annoynted; whoſe rage from the firſt houre of his birth, till the laſt of his death, could not be quenched without his bloud; Hee came vnto his owne, but his owne receiued him not, Iohn 1.11.20.
                     We ſurely are in the ſame predicament,Application. if not worſe. Compare vs with the Patriarkes and we come as ſhort of their faith in Chriſt, obedience and ſanctification, as they of our knowledge and illumination; we come nearer vnto the infidelitie of prophane Eſau, flowting Iſmael, wicked Cham, curſed Canaan, and their ſeede, then wee doe to the Faith of Abraham, Iſaack and Iacob, &c. to Noahs Obedience, and the holy liues of the reſt. For the Iewes: wherein are wee inferiour in the higheſt meaſure of ingratitude againſt Simeons Lord? wee lodge him not at all, but caſt him out of the Inne of our hearts, with the Bethlems: wee ſhut our

gates againſt him with the Samaritanes, when wee reiect his Word and Miniſters: wee bid him depart from vs, with the Gadarens▪ when wee preferre our Swiniſh luſts before him: we crucifie him worſe and oftner in his immortall body, then the Iewes in his mortall, when like mad dogs wee flye in his face, and by ſwearing and blaſpheming wound his wounds, tearing and renting euery part of his humanitie; and yet wee will be Chriſtians: But I know not how; vnleſſe on the contrary, as the Cynick named his Man: as ſome ſay, Mons à mouendo, when it moues not; for wee moue not after the motion of Chriſt. We are like the Hare, running one way when wee looke another way.
                           Appion. Chriſtus venit ad homines, in homines, & contra homines. Well, let vs looke to it, Chriſt is come to vs, Iohn 1.14. but if wee come not vnto him by Prayer, and into him by Faith, and hee into vs by his Spirit, Iohn 14.18. he will come to vs, and againſt vs in Iudgement, to our ruine and deſtruction, Acts 7.31. Oh therefore Kiſſe the Sonne leaſt hee be angry, Pſal. 2.
                     Thirdly, in that Simeons deſire of life was not ſimply for any loue of life, but onely to ſee, and proclaime, and prayſe Chriſt the Meſſias, to bleſſe God for this fountaine of bleſſings to his Church. It is worth our animaduerſion, more worthy our Imitation, that wee ought not ſimply to deſire life for it ſelfe,

but that wee might liue to glorifie God, and to the good of his Church and Children. This point is plaine by the Apoſtles precept, Rom. 14.7.8. and by his practise, Phil. 2.23.24. For, as here preſcribes to others that none ſhould liue or dye vnto himſelfe, but vnto the Lord; that whether Chriſtians liue or dye they ſhould be the Lords: yea, that whether they liue in the body, or remoue out of the body they might be the Lords, 2 Cor. 5.8.9. So, hee himſelfe being in a ſtrait what to doe, whether to liue in the fleſh, or to be looſed and be with CHRIST, is ouer-ſwayed with the loue of his brethren, to dwell vvith them ſtill, onely for the furtherance and ioy of their Faith. So it muſt be with thee in that rancke wherein thou art.
                     
                        
                           Vſe 1 Art thou a Miniſter? thy deſire to liue muſt be onely to preach the Word,Of Inſtruction. for the gathering of the Saints, for bringing home the wandering Sheepe, for planting and watering Gods Vineyard, for feeding his people vvith knowledge and vnderſtanding, for propagation of the Goſpell, for conuerſion of ſoules, and addition vnto his Church ſuch as ſhall be ſaued: and for this end, thy life and thy liuings muſt not be deare to thee; that by Preaching or Printing, Diſputing, Conferring, Writing, Praying and Meditating, (the things wherein that holy Auguſtine and zealous

                        Bernard were conſtantly and continually imployed) thou mightſt be beneficiall to the ſoules of thy brethren: yea, for the accompliſhment of theſe ends, as thou art called, A Light,
                        
                           Mat. 6. and Salt, it muſt not be grieuous vnto thee to conſume and melt thy ſelfe in ſpending thy ſpirits to giue light vnto, and to ſeaſon others. Thy ends in thy Miniſtery, muſt neyther be ambitious,
                           
                              •
                           h. v. 9.
                         like Diotrephes his, that loued preheminence, nor to be exalted on the right hand or the left,
                           
                              〈…〉
                           . 21 with Zebidee's Sonnes: not to ſit onely in Moſes his Chayre, vvith the Scribes and Phariſies: not couetous like Balaams and Iudaſſ
                              •
                           s;
                           Numb. 22. Iohn 13. but Chriſtian and conſci
                           •
                        nable, like Paul's and Peter's, and Iames, who t
                           ••
                        t they might feede the flocke, endured not onely labours, and ſtripes, and impriſonments, but euen death it ſelfe.
                     Art thou a Magiſtrate? thy deſire to liue muſt be the diſcharge of thy duety, the execution of thy function, the deciſion of Controuerſies, the cutting off of ſtrifes, in their cauſes, courſes, and euents; the iudging rightly betwixt man and man, &c. to be a nurſing Father to the Church; to ſtand for Gods Truth and Orthodoxe Religion; to be zealous for Gods glory, to defend the fatherleſſe, right the oppreſſed, to let the cauſe of the Widow come before thee, to draw out and vſe the ſword committed vnto thee, for the defence

of the righteous and the right; for the offence of the wicked and their wrongs: theſe are the ends thou muſt aime at in thy place, whether ſuperiour or inferiour.
                     Art thou a gouernour, a Maſter of a Familie? haſt thou a charge committed to thee? thy deſire to liue, muſt be rightly to diſcharge it, and thy duety in it: as namely, prouiſion for thy Wife, and Familie depending vpon 
                           •
                        hee, walking (like Zacharie) holily,
                           Luk. 2. in reſpect of God; honeſtly and vnblameably, in reſpect of man; Chriſtianly and conſcionably in thy calling and vocation: for that end, as alſo that God may haue glory; in thy priuate duties of Religion, as reading, and praying, and inſtructing of thy Family vvithin the bounds and limits of thy calling, together with a diſcreete gouerning of them that are vnder thy command, by correcting and encouraging as neede ſhall require; that thy houſe, like the houſes of Abraham, Ioſhuah, Criſpus, Stephanus, and Cornelius, may be like vnto a little Church, wherein ſpirituall Sacrifices are offered vnto God daily and duely: that ſo thou maiſt heate and warme thoſe that are within thee, and that thy light may breake out to inlighten others outwardly.
                     So all other men, be they what they will be, from the Throne to the Plough, from the King to the drawer of water, from the head to

the foote, Phyſitian, Lawyer, Courtier, Student, Tradeſman, Artificer, Mechanicall man, Husbandman, Souldier, Seruant, muſt liue, and deſire to liue, not to themſelues, but that in their places, 1. by their Life; 2. their Labours; 3. their Prouokements; 4. their Examples: their light ſhould ſo ſhine here,
                           Mat. 5. that others ſeeing their good workes, might bring glory to him who is the Father of lights: to him which is the light of the Gentiles, and the glory of his people, euen here Simeons LORD, whom Simeon prayſeth, and to vvhom hee prayes.
                     
                        
                           Vſe 2
                        Of Redargution.But ſure the liues of moſt men, from the higheſt to the loweſt, is as contrary to this light▪ and as irregular from this rule, as darkneſſe and irregularitie it ſelfe: for, if we ſhould make a quere, and an inquiſition here, as the Lord will make in Iudgement, for ſuch Simeon
                              •
                           
                        ;
                           E
                                 •
                              ek. 9. if they ſhould now be marked in the forehead like Ezekiels Mourners: where ſhould we be inquiſitiue for them? In the Court? perhaps there might be culled out ſome Ioſeph, as in Pharohs: ſome Obediah, as in Achabs: ſome Daniel, as in Nabuchadnezzars. In great Houſes? ſome Naaman, as in the houſe of Rimmon: ſome Iacob, in Labans: ſome Chuza and Iohanna, as in Herods. In the Campe? ſome Cornelius. In the Citie? ſome Lot. In the Country? ſome Boaz. Amongſt great

ones? ſome Nichodemus. Amongſt priuate men? ſome Nathaniels, that deſire to liue no longer, then God may be glorified of them, in them, and by them. But compare them to the multitudes that ſwarme in euery corner, of Court, Countries, and Cities, of all ſexes and ſorts, (like Aegyptian Locuſts and Graſſehoppers) that liue onely to themſelues, and for themſelues, that limit themſelues in themſelues, in effecting their owne proud, couetous, vaine, ambitious, ſiniſter ends, and carnall deſires, without any reference or relation to Gods glory, or the good of others? and they are very few: one of a Citie, and two of a Tribe, Ier. 3.14. like the after-Vintage, and the Harueſt gleanings; like the few names vvritten in Sardi, Apoc. 3.4. as for example, in particulars, ah ſi fas dicere? ſed fas.
                     
                     In the Sonnes of Leui, how many there be that liue of the Altar and ſerue not at the Altar? that ſcumme away the fat, but pollute the the Sacrifice, like Elie's Sonnes? that ſeeke ſua, non ſuos, their owne gaines, not the peoples good? Qui ſe paſcunt, non oues; that feede themſelues of the flocke, but not the flocke, ouer which the holy Ghoſt hath made them Ouer-ſeers? that ſeeke for nothing (as vvas once truely ſaid of the ancient Abbots, Monkes and Cloyſterers,) but a lazy life and carnall command, Otium cum honore; againſt vvhom

theſe, and all ſuch complaints as theſe, which Gregory and Bernard tooke vp in their times, might be well vſed and vrged? I ſay, how many there be of ſuch, I rather leaue to the conſideration and deploration of ſuch as haue any eyes or hearts, then to the expoſtulation of this place: onely I ſay, whether ſuch are Simeons, or Simons, or Sinons; like Iude, or like Iudas, who ſees not?
                     Secondly, for the Magiſtrates: what are the aymes and ends of moſt of them? To diſcharge thoſe dueties that the Word inioynes them? which thoſe worthy Lights, Moſes, Phineas, Ioſhuah, Samuel, Nehemiah, Salomon, haue by their preſident and practiſe laid before them? No verily: for, then wee ſhould not haue the Sabbath, which aboue all dayes ſhould be ſanctified, ſo profaned; ſo much drunkenneſſe abounding, vncleanneſſe ouerflowing, Oathes breaking forth, by Gods Law capitall and criminall, and by death penall, vnreformed; nay, vnreprehended, vnremoued, yea, vnreproued: which ſhewes that many of them liue onely to the ſatisfying and ſeruing of their owne couetouſneſſe and vnconſcionableneſſe, like Ahab, Feſtus, and that infoelix Felix; or licentiouſneſſe, like Herod; but neyther vnto GOD, nor to doe good, vnleſſe to themſelues.
                     Thirdly, as wee ſee the motion of the head

and Eye, Eccleſiaſticall and Politicall, of Miniſters and Magiſtrates, meerely naturall, (like that of the Elements and Beaſts) after vvhich the whole bulke of the body, of the people, moues: ſo in the heads Oeconomicall, wee ſhall ſee little ſpirituall. For, what is the aime of Maſters and Miſtreſſes in their houſholds regiment? is it Gods glory? the good temporall and eternall of thoſe that are vnder them? doe they liue, or deſire to liue that by their meanes their houſholds might be the houſeholds of Faith? their wiues Chriſts Spouſes? their Children Gods Children, and Heyres of of Grace? their Seruants Gods Seruants, the Lords Free-men? their Kinſemen, of the ſpirituall affinitie and conſanguinitie of Chriſt? that their ſtrangers within their gates, vvith them might enter in at the Gates of Sion? Are theſe their ends? Cuius contrarium verum eſt, the cleane contrary (or at leaſt contradictorie) is verified in moſt. Let experience ſpeake: looke into their houſes, into their regiment, into their carriage and diſportment; and yee ſhall ſee their exerciſes ſuch as vvere vſed in the Siege of Thebes, couetous carding and dicing, or wanton and promiſcuous dauncing: you ſhall finde moe ſhewes of Religion in the vſe of the Word, in the houſe of a Iew; more ſeeming prayers in the houſe of a Turke, Papiſt, or Pagan (who pray oftner to Saints

and Idols then they) then in their houſes, which are rather dens of Diuels, and cages of vncleane Birds, then Churches. What are the deſires of ſuch who ſees not? What their deſerts who knowes not? who feares not?
                     In the ſame ranke are the reſt: where is the Tradeſman, (as Iob of the good Meſſenger) one of a thouſand, let him ſtand forth, whoſe heart tels him, that truely and ſincerely in his Trade and Calling hee aymes aright? and ſo all others, let their ſoules ſpeake. Who in their traffique and commerce with men ayme at GOD, at the profit and emollument of others, and not wholy, or for the moſt part, at themſelues? Who in ſeruing of man ſeekes directly and immediately to ſerue God and not rather himſelfe? Who ſeekes grace and godlineſſe, and not gaine? ſuch an one erit mihi magnus Apollo: I would trauell farre on my feete to finde ſuch a Phoenix.
                     For the other ſort, that liue eyther in no calling, or in a ſenſuall ſinfull calling, ſuch as riotous Prodigoes, profane Eſau's, vaine Gentlemen, gull Gallants, retchleſſe Ruffians, licentious Lechers, graceleſſe Gameſters, filthy Brothellers, Queanes, Curtizans, and beaſtly Bawdes, with all the reſt of that reſtleſſe and retchleſſe crew: alas, what good doe they in the world? what ayme they at, but like Swine to feede? like the rich Churle, to goe brauely

and faire deliciouſly with the Sabarites and Sardanapalus, to inuent and wallow in polluting pleaſures, to feede their fancy, pleaſe their owne humours, content themſelues, delight the fleſh, and damne the ſoule? liuing to eate, eating to liue the life of ſinne; doing as much good to others, as the Moath to the garment, the Caterpiller to the fruit, the Cantharides to the Oyntment, ſpoyling and infecting (like plaguy people) vvhom thy liue amongſt. Therefore theſe and all theſe,Terrae invtile pondus. as they are vnprofitable burthens to the earth, they ſhall be ſwept away from the earth like Iabin and Siſera, and the Sodomites, euen into hell, Pſal. 9.17. As they glorifie not God, which was the end of their Creation and Redemption (which thy forget) ſo God will neuer glorifie them. Therefore let vs all, both men, with Simeon, and women, with Lidia, Dorcas and Deborah, &c. doe good here in life, that wee may receiue good in and after death: liue, and deſire to liue onely to God, and for God here, that vvee may liue vvith God for euer hereafter.
                     Fourthly, and laſtly, here wee are to take notice of that which wee haue obſerued in Moſes before; namely, that Simeon is willing to dye: for the whole Text imports and carries it, that there was in him no vnwillingnes to dye; not ſo much as in ſhow: but a great

willingneſſe, propenſitie, and diſpoſition to his diſſolution, whether wee take his vvords here as Optatiue, Oh that thou wouldeſt let thy Seruant depart, as ſome doe: or Indicatiue, Now thou doſt let, &c. or Precatory, Lord, now let, &c. or plainely, as they are here; all import perſpicuouſly that hee dyed voluntarily.
                     From whence note, that a good Chriſtian is willing to dye: wee may ſee this, as in Simeon, ſo in Paul. Phil. 1.23. who deſired to be diſſolued, and to be with CHRIST. The like might be inſtanced in the death of Moſes,
                        
                           Deut. 34. who at Gods command, went as voluntarily vp to the Mount to dye, and to be ſacrificed himſelfe, as Abraham went to ſacrifice his Sonne. So, if wee conſider the death of the Patriarkes, of Abraham himſelfe, of Iacob, of Dauid, &c. that dyed naturally: as alſo of Saint Steu
                              •
                           n,
                        
                           Mat. 27. Acts 7.
                              •
                           
                         of our Sauiour Chriſt himſelfe, in the Scripture: as alſo of bleſſed Martyres that were put to death violently, we ſhall finde that they went vnto their deaths, and into the Graue, as voluntarily as Noah into the Arke; taking Gods ſtroke vpon themſelues as patiently as Aaron did,
                           Leuit. 10. when God ſmote his two Sonnes, Nahab and Abihu; and as Eli did Samuels report of his houſes ruine, 1 Sam. 3, The Saints very laſt words, being of the ſame ſtraine and Dialect with Simeons, import ſo much, as wee may ſee Moſes, Deut. 32. (with

this good old man here) concluding his life with a Swan-like Song. So alſo Dauid. 2 Sam. 23. So Babilas the Martyr, feared not that his ſoule ſhould returne vnto her reſt: neyther did Ignatius care when hee dyed,Euſeb. lib. 3 c. 30. Vide Grin. Apotheg. morientium. or of what kinde of death hee ſhould dye; nay, though hee were grinded by the teeth of Lyons, becauſe hee was the Lords Manchet, and muſt be made cleane bread for Chriſt. So Melancthon, almoſt in the ſame words with Simeon, If it be the will of God I am willing to dye; and, I beſeech him to grant mee a ioyfull departure. With many moe.
                     Now, the Reaſons which make the childe of God ſo willing to die, are many, the principall are theſe.
                     Firſt,Si qua dies bona eſt, velocibus praeterit horis. Innimica tenacius haerent. becauſe hee findes no good in this life, no ioy, no content, more then a Priſoner in his bonds, a bird in the ſnare, or a beaſt in the ginne: his ioyes being imperfect, and mixed with a thouſand ſorrowes, hauing for one Sunny day a hundred tempeſtuous ſtormes: his beſt dayes being like Iacobs, few and euill; his worſt, many and miſerable.
                     Secondly,Nil boni in vita, nil mali in morte. becauſe there is nothing in this life, which giues true and ſollid ſatisfaction to his ſoule, finding (with Salomon) all Sublunarie things to be vanitie and vexation of ſpirit, as Honours, riches, wiſedome, vvealth, knowledge, Babels building, Moſes and

                        Daniels Aegyptian and Caldean learning, Creſſus and Craſſus his wealth, Midas his gold, Policrates good ſucceſſe, Ezekias his Treaſure, Nero's Muſicke; all other things which ſhould doe good to the nature of man, or delight the minde of man, giuing him no more content, then ayre and winde to an empty ſtomacke: for, as a Quadrangle cannot fill a Triangle, but ſome corner will be capable of more; ſo the whole circuit of this round Orbe, this Quadrangular world, cannot content, the heart of man, which Anatomiſts ſay is Triangular in the forme; God onely, Chriſt and his Spirit, the bleſſed Trinitie, that made the ſoule, can fill it with true delights, and fulfill the true deſires. In which reſpect the Chriſtian, to whom all things elſe are bitter, but Chriſt, is not quieted till hee inioy Chriſt, no more then the animate or inanimate creatures are at peace till they haue their reſt in that centre whitherto they moue: his heart ſtill trembling till it be with God, like the Needle touched with an Adamant, ſtill quiuering and ſhaking, till it looke directly to the North Pole: and therefore as Noahs Doue, ſent out of the Arke, found no reſt to the ſole of her foote, till ſhee returned into the Arke againe; ſo the true Chriſtians, the Lords mournefull Doues, finde no reſting place here, till their ſoules returne to the Arke of their ſtrength, that

God, that ſent them out into their bodies, euen as the Iewiſh Tabernacle had no reſt, but was carryed from place to place till it entred into Canaan. Exod. 26.1. & 33.7.
                     Thirdly, becauſe of the croſſes and afflictions which are incident vnto him in this life: for, as the whole humane nature is ſubiected to the Croſſe, ſo chiefely the Chriſtian. The world which is a Paradiſe to the carnall,
                           Pſal 34.19 Act. 15.21 is a Purgatory to the Chriſtian; Many are the troubles of the righteous; all that will liue godly in Chriſt muſt ſuffer affliction; euery Diſciple muſt take vp one croſſe or other, if hee vvill follow Chriſt, which croſſe-way is the way to heauen; euery childe of God is corrected ere hee be receiued: the pureſt Gold muſt be in the furnace; the Lords owne Wheate is thraſhed, winnowed, and grinded: and Gods trees muſt be pruned: 
                           Ʋt vnda vndam, as waue ſucceedes waue, ſo croſſe ſucceedes croſſe, as Dauids Lyon ſucceedes his Beare, 1 Sam. 17.37. and Goliah the Lyon, 1 Sam. 18.27. and the Philiſtines Goliah, and Saul the Philiſtines, 1 Sam. 21. Now the Chriſtians death is moſt welcome, that changeth his M
                              •
                           ra to Naomi, his bitterneſſe into beauty, which deliuers him from dangers and dolours,
                           Gen. 19. as the Angell did Lot from the fire,
                           Dan. 3. and the three Children from the flames, and Daniel from the Lions:
                           Dan. 6 death (like Zerobabel) deliuers the Lords Iſrael out

of Babilon, Zach. 4.6. therefore death muſt needs be welcomed like a day of deliuerance, a yeere of Iubilie which brings Ioſeph out of Priſon,
                           Gen. 41. 
                        
                           Gen. 31. Iob 41.12. 
                        Iacob out of ſeruitude, and Iob from the dung-hill. Mors enim mal
                              •
                           r
                              •
                           m remedium, & portus humanis tempeſta
                              •
                           ibus, Plutarch. de conſol. ad Apol.
                     Fourthly▪ in reſpect of their ſinnes which cleaue ſo faſt on, which they cannot ſhake off; Sinne, with which they are at oppoſition and deadly feud, dogs them at the heeles, like a Serieant: waytes on them, like a Catchpole: inſinuates into them, like a claw-backe: creepes into their boſomes, as a Serpent ſtings them at the heart, like an Adder: followes them, as their ſhadow: ſtickes cloſe to them, like their ſhirt vpon their skinne, their skinne vpon their fleſh, and their fleſh vpon their bones: inſomuch that it burnes and frets them as Dianiraes poyſoned ſhirt did Hercules, and as the Ticke vexeth the Oxe: which makes them crye out in the anguiſh of their ſoules,In me duo armati, Amor & Odium, Iacob & Eſau, Caro & Spiritus, &c. Hier.
                         vvith Paul, and the faithfull, Rom. 7. O
                              •
                            miſerable man that I am! who ſhall deliuer mee from this body of ſinne? They complaine of the ſtrife of the Fleſh and the Spirit, as Rebeccah of the ſtrugling betwixt Iacob and Eſau. Now death comes and reſcues, and makes thy baile, and playes the Mid-wife, and ends the broyle, therefore welcome to the well diſpoſed.
                     
                        Fiftly, they are here Pilgrimes and ſtrangers, 1 Pet. 2.11. as was Dauid, and the reſt in their ages: they are here exuls and baniſhed men, as Children put forth to nurſe from their Mothers, as Schollers and Pupils ſent to forraine Schooles, and to farre Vniuerſities: and therefore their returning home to their owne Country, their reſtitution to their prouided Kingdome, their fetching home to their Father and friends, their retyring to their Fathers houſe, though it be through the ſhadow of death, muſt needes be acceptable.
                     Sixtly, they know that the day of their death is better then the day of life, Eccleſ. 7.3. becauſe they dye prepared, their ſoules purged, their hearts by Faith purified. As they haue entered into the firſt degree of eternall life in this life, when they beleeued, and receiued the gifts of the Spirit, the earneſt of their Saluation; ſo they enter into the ſecond degree in death,
                           Auguſt. in. Iob. Qui cupit diſſolui, & eſſe cum Chriſto, non patienter moritur, ſed patienter viuit, & delectabiliter mo
                              •
                           itur. when their ſoules are carryed into heauen, and they dye in aſſurance of the third degree, when body and ſoule ſhall be re-vnited to participate of happineſſe, as they haue liued together in holineſſe.
                     Seauenthly, they dye, as with a deſire, ſo in an expectation to ſee and behold the face of Chriſt; of which, with Steuen, they haue ſome glimmering in their deaths: and therefore death to the godly, ſo farre as regeneration

rules, is no more burthenſome then the ſtripping off the cloathes, vnto a louing Spouſe, to goe into the Marriage-bed of her contracted Bridegrome. Hoſ. 2.19.
                     Eightly, they haue kept a good Conſcience with God and man, like Paul, Acts 24. And therefore they feare not iudgement, no more then a true man feares to looke the Iudge in the face.
                     Ninthly, wherein they haue offended God, they haue their ſinnes remitted, and therefore feare not to hold vp their hand at the barre, ſince they are quit before by Proclamation of all the promiſes in the Goſpell, and haue the Kings Pardon ſealed them in the Sacraments.
                     
                        Iacula praeuiſa minus ferunt.Tenthly, they haue oft in life invred themſelues to thinke, ſpeake, record and meditate of death, euen as did Chriſt their head, and his Seruants, Iacob, Moſes, and Paul, as appeares in the Word, and therefore Deaths dart foreſeene,Praemoniti, Praemuniti. wounds them leſſe, being fore-warned of it, they are fore-armed for it. Euen as the Souldier that hath beene long trayned, and in many skirmiſhes▪ is more couragious in the maine Battell, and as hee that hath long exerciſed himſelfe in foyles, is more hardy to fight with ſharpe: ſo the petty conflicts that the godly haue had in their owne breaſts vvith Deaths feare, make them more hardy to encounter Deaths force.
                     
                        Eleuenthly, they entertaine it as a reward for their worke, as a reſt from their labour: as willingly as the hired labourer receiues his hire, and repoſeth his wearied limbes, Dan, 12. Eſay 57.2.
                     Twelfthly, they are perſwaded, and haue their Faith grounded in an happy and bleſſed change, they expect a Metamorphoſis, and an alteration, a comfortable tranſmutation of Earth for Heauen, of the Sea for the Hauen, of Griefe for Glory, of the outward Court, for the Sanctum Sanctorum, of a Mortall for an Immortall body, of Enon for Salem, Sodome for Segor, Aegypt for Canaan, the Wilderneſſe of Sin for the Land of Promiſe, of a Houſe of day terreſtriall, for a Houſe celeſtiall aboue the Clouds, 2 Cor. 5.1. And therefore they are as willing to make this exchange, as a poore begger would be to exchange his poore rags for ſome Princes robes, or ſome poore man to leaue his ſmoaky, rainy Cottage for a pompous Pauilion and decked Chamber in the Court.
                     To reape the Vintage of this diſcourſe,Vſe. the vſe to vs, is firſt of examination, in that it is an argument of a good man to be willing to dye, as here was Simeon. Lay thou thy hand on thine heart, and ſearch in thy ſoule what propenſitie and diſpoſition thou findeſt in thy ſelfe to dye. Many arguments there are in

the Word and tryals both of a holy and a happy man, both affirmatiue, in ſhewing what hee doth: and negatiue, in ſhewing what he auoids, Dauid points at him in the firſt Pſalme, as alſo in the 32. Pſalme, verſe 1.2. as alſo in the 15. Pſalme. So doth our Sauiour Chriſt, in the firſt eight Verſes of the fift of Mathew. So the Apoſtle Paul in the 2. of Cor. ch. 7. ver. 11. with other ſuch places; as namely, delighting in the Word, meekneſſe, mourning for ſinne, hunger after righteouſneſſe, &c. care to pleaſe God, Feare, Z
                           •
                        ale, Indignation againſt ſinne, not letting Mony to Vſury, and the like: yet ſure there is no greater euidence of an honeſt and holy heart, then ſo to walke vprightly with God in life, as alwayes to be willing to imbrace the ſtricteſt Summons of death; to be as ready to depart out of this world, as the Iſraelites were to depart out of Aegypt.
                     Againe, it is moſt vſually a note of a ſoule eyther altogether ſoyled in corruption, or indued with a ſmaller meaſure of Sanctification, to be violently poſſeſſed with a continuated feare of death: and therefore in this particular finde out thy ſelfe, and trye in what caſe thou ſtandeſt; for, the more vnwilling thou art to dye, commonly the more Nature rules in thee, the more earthly, fleſhly, and carnall thou art: the more willing, commonly the

more Grace raignes, the more thou art holy, heauenly, and ſpirituall: in which caſe you ſhall obſerue, that the deſire to liue or not to liue, to dye and not to dye, hath oftentimes ebbed and flowed, according to the meaſure of grace or corruption, of ſinne or of ſanctification. Euery man may finde this in his owne heart vſually, vpon the ſearch.
                     Hence it was,
                           Luke 8.33 that our Sauiour Chriſt hauing the greateſt meaſure of grace, was moſt willing to dye, amongſt all the ſonnes of mortall men, as appeares in the Goſpell, by his often ſpeaking of his death, as deſiring it, Mat. 10.
                           •
                        8 So 16.21.17.22.23. by his haſtning Iudas the actor in it, Iohn 13. in calling Peter Sathan, that diſſwaded him from it, Mat. 13.23. yea, in accounting it his Baptiſme, Luke 20.50. yea, his meate that he was to eate, Iohn 4 32. yea, his exaltation, ver. 28. yea, a thing that hee deſired, Luke 22. And when hee came to act the bitter part in this dying Tragedy, how voluntarily did he ſend out his ſoule? Hee gaue vp the Ghoſt, ſaith the Euangeliſt: the ſpirit was not taken from him, (for no power could doe that) but hee gaue vp his Spirit into the hands of GOD his Father; Emiſit, non amiſit Spiritum, hee ſent out his Spirit (as Noah ſent the Doue out of the Arke) willingly, it was not taken from him compulſorily. Now, that which holds in

the Head, Chriſt, in ſome proportion holds in the Saints, his Members, who are conformed into the ſimilitude both of his life and death; the nearer they come vnto Chriſt, by the vnion of Faith, the more they participate of the Spirit of Chriſt in life; the more willing they are to goe to Chriſt, and to haue a further communion with him, in and after death.
                     
                        
                           Note 2 It is not ſo with the wicked, for the further they runne from God in life, the leſſe ioy they haue to be fetcht before him by death; the leſſe grace, the more griefe to dye; the more vile, ſenſuall, and ſinfull their dayes, the more they deſire to prolong them, being as vnwilling to dye, as the Beare to the ſtake, or the Bull to the ring.
                     The reaſons are theſe:
                     
                        Reaſons why wicked men are vnwilling to die.Firſt, becauſe they haue their pleaſures in this world: to which they are wedded, and with which they are intoxicated and bewitched, as Vliſſes and Diomedes companions with Circes charmes, and Calipſoes Cups, till they be turned into beaſts. Now, what delight hath the beaſt, but in fayre feeding, and carnall companying, according to his kinde? neyther they, being as loath to leaue theſe pleaſures, as the childe his bable, or the foole his folly.
                     Secondly, Death depriues them of their worldly promotions,
                           Acts 12. it throwes Herod from

his ſeate, and Baltazar from his Throne,
                           Dan. 
                           
                              •
                           . it expulleth Monarchs from their Countryes, and with as great a ſway as that Antichriſtian man of Rome kickes off their Crownes, depoſing Kings, diſpoſing Kingdomes, laying their honours in the duſt. And therefore no maruell that the proud Impes of Lucifer feare it, as hautie Hammon did the Gallowes.
                     Thirdly, it pluckes them from their profits; it takes Nabal from his Sheepe; Ahab from his vſurped Vineyard, and Midas from his Gold, which worldlings are as vvilling to leaue, as the dogge the Fleſh-pot, as the hungry Kite the ſauory carrion: to liue in the earth alwayes, it is their deſire, as much as the water is deſired of the fiſh, and the Ayre of the Bird, and the earth of the Moale: they are as content to build tabernacles here, as Peter was vpon the Mount, Mat. 17. but to goe into the earth, that is, d
                              •
                           rus ſermo, a harſh vvord; they are as willing to leaue the world, as the Bird, the Beaſt, and the Fiſh, are, to forſake their nouriſhing Elements; as the ſtarued childe is to part with the deſired dugge. Oh Death, how bitter art thou to a man whoſe portion is in the world? ſaith the Wiſe-man. Ob mors mordens; bitter indeede as gall and wormewood.
                     Fourthly, Death depriues the wicked not onely of their goods, but of their Gods, what

euer they make their Idols, and giue their hearts vnto; whic
                           •
                         Idols they as vnwillingly leaue,
                           Iudg. 17. as M
                              ••
                           hay did his, and as the Papiſts their Idolatrous Maſſe;
                           Gen. 31.19 as Rachel did her Fathers Idols, vvhich ſhee concealed and couered.
                     Fiftly, Death takes them away from their pleaſing companions, which they are as loath to part fro, as Eliſha was to leaue Elias, as Ruth to leaue Naomi, but moſt vnwilling to exchange them for the company of Diuels and Hell-hounds.
                     Sixtly, they are vnfitted and vnprepared for Death: they haue not made their accounts ſtraight; they haue not Oyle in their Lampes; they haue abuſed their Talents of gifts externall and internall, and therefore they quake to be brought by Death to render an account of their Stewardſhip, with the wicked Steward: to meete the Bridegrome, with the fooliſh Virgins: to be called in eoram before their great Maſter, with the wicked Seruant that ſmote his fellow-ſeruants, and with the other vnprofitable Seruant.
                     Seauenthly, they haue no hope in death, except a vaine and wanne hope, ſuch as periſheth like the vntimely fruit of a woman. Death (like Michay to Ahab) neuer propheſieth any good to a wicked man, and therefore he is as vnwilling to dye, as a Theefe and Malefactor

to be brought before the Iudge; as a bad debtor before his creditor; as a Swine to the ſlaughter: for, as the Swine by a naturall inſtinct, knowes that hee is good for nothing but the Shambles; ſo, the wicked, by the rage of his owne conſcience, which is like the flaſh before hell fire; and by an Hiſtoricall Faith, whereby hee beleeues there is a hell, and euerlaſting fire for ſuch as hee is; Fornicators,
                           Eſay 30.33 Mat. 25.41 Reuel. 21.8. 1 Cor. 6.9.10 Iude 4.13. Mat. 7.23. whoremongers, drunkards, wantons, theeues, couetous, impenitent, vnbeleeuers, and all other workers of iniquitie; hee knowes that hee is good for nothing but to be burned, and to be ſtubble and fuell for that flame. And therefore as the Swine ſhewes his diſlike of the Shambles and his ſlaughterer, by whining and crying and repining; ſo the hoggiſh,Epicuri de grege p
                              •
                           rcus. Epicuriſh, carnall man, ſhewes his diſcontent and diſobedience vnto God, and to his ſummons by death, by muttering, murmuring, barking againſt heauen, and blaſpheming.
                     If wee apply this poynt by vſe vnto our times,Vſe. wee ſhall finde infinite millions and multitudes of carnall and wicked men, ſwarming like the Aegyptian Locuſts and Graſhoppers amongſt vs; for alas, how many are there, which beare vp their heads high, and ſet vp their creſts, exalt their hornes, and prancke vp their Peacockes plumes, lifting vp themſelues aboue others in the pride of their harts?

boaſting like Braggadochies, of their birth, valour, learning, wit, wealth, parts, and proweſſe; ſhewing much drunken, and ſwaggering, and irefull, and reuengefull valour, in their baſe and bruitiſh paſſions: and yet the ſame at the imagination and apprehenſion of death, ſhew themſelues as arrand cowards, as the Arcadians Clineas or Dametas; altogether daunted and diſmayed like Gorgon at the ſight of Meduſaes head: they quiuer and quake like an Aſpen-leafe, ſhake and tremble like the Aguiſh ſicke man: at the thought of it their heart trembles, their bloud is con
                           •
                        ealed, and like Baltazar in the like caſe, their countenance is changed, and their knees ſmite together: the ſound of death to them is the moſt harſh of all ſounds, and puts them ſometimes in a deadly ſowne; the noiſe of the roaring Canon is not ſo fearefull to the fainting Souldier, nor the Lightning and Thunder was ſo terrible to Nero, as the ſummons of death to ſuch naturall men, whether by the Harbenger thereof, Sickeneſſe, or from the condemning voice of a Iudge, or by ſuch meanes, for theſe reaſons before mentioned. What doth this argue, but a guiltie conſcience, a ſecure ſoule, a hardned heart, a carnall minde, and a maine meaſure of infidelitie, incredulitie, and want of faith, in the remiſſion of ſinnes, the reſurrection of the body, the immortalitie of the ſoule, and

hope of a better life: which conſiderations, as they haue moued the ancient and moderne Martyres, Ignatius, Policarpus, Laurence, Cyprian, and others in our precedent age, French, Germaine, and Engliſh, to ſubiect themſelues to the mouthes of Lions, flames of fire, and all other tortures and torments, which Madneſſe and Malice could inuent, &c. So the diffidence of theſe, the want of the perſwaſion of Gods loue, and expectation of wrath and vengeance after this mortalitie, makes wicked men entertaine Death as Ahab did Elias, euen as their greateſt enemie, as their Iaylor, their Serieant, their Butcherer, their Executioner, as the curber of their delights, and procurer of their curſe. Yet that I be not miſtaken, I doe not here condemne all feare of death, and make it ſuch an eſſentiall note of Gods childe, as though euery one that feared God did not at any time, or in any reſpects, feare to dye: or that wicked men might not ſometimes, and vpon ſome ſeruile reſpects, with ſome ſhew of alacritie vndergoe death: for, Firſt, I know that there is in all men a naturall deſire to liue, which cauſed Ezekias to mourne when hee was to dye, Eſay 38.10. And Dauid to pray that his ſoule might liue, Pſal. 6.4. and Pſal. 119. As alſo our Sauiour Chriſt to deſire the Paſſage of the cuppe from him, Luke 22. There being a naturall deſire in the beſt of

Gods Saints to liue. Nature fearing her diſſolution, and the body and ſoule being as loath to part as two friends that a long time haue liued and loued together. Secondly, beſides, I know Gods Children may be deſirous to liue, as to glorifie God more: ſo, for ſome other good ends propounded, as for the better ſetting their eſtates to their ſucceſſiue ſeed: for the eſtabliſhing their houſes, for to diſpoſe of their Children in ſome religious courſes: which was the cauſe that Ez
                              •
                           k
                              •
                           as deſired to liue, ſay Interpreters; becauſe when the Prophet brought this meſſage of death to him, hee was without iſſue, and left none to ſuccede him in his Kingdome, as Gods promiſe was to his Father Dauid, 1 King. 8.
                           •
                        5▪3. Thirdly, a godly man is ſometimes in diſtreſſe and perplexitie of minde, as Dauid was vvhen hee made the ſixt Pſalme. at which time hee is vnwilling to depart, till GOD ſhine vpon him againe with his fauour. Fourthly, a godly man may pray ſometimes againſt ſome kinde of death; as our Sauiour Chriſt did, praying not ſimply againſt death, but againſt that curſed death of the Croſſe; fearing not death, but the curſe of the Law that went with death. Fiftly, I know that euen naturall men haue made light account of death, ſuch as the Decians and the Fabritians, Curtius and Codrus, with others amongſt the Romanes, and

Athenians, that expoſed and ſpent their liues for the good of their Country, I know euen of obſtinate Heretiques, ſuch as the Gnoſtiques, and the Circumcellions: more lately Michael Sernetus; many moderne Papiſts; yea, the late Arrian burnt in Smithfield, haue ſome of them vndergone death more willingly and chearefully then thoſe that haue had in them farre more grace and ſanctification:Wicked men may dye willingly for ſiniſter reſpects. but ſome of theſe haue imbraced death ſo welcomly, out of a morall deſire of doing good to their Country, or out of vaineglory, to be ſpoken of, like thoſe Heathen; or out of obſtinacie, or deſperate madneſſe, or peruerſeneſſe againſt the truth, or Diabolicall deluſions, or erronious conceits, or Atheiſme, or opinion of merit, or chiefely pride of heart, to be magnified and famouſed of their fauourites, or ſome other ſiniſter ends, not for Gods glory, or hope of any better condition after this life, as theſe Heretiques. So that my concluſion ſtill holds, notwithſtanding theſe doubts and ſcruples, that Grace kiſſeth Gods rod, though in the hand of Death▪ Nature barkes and bites at the hand that holds the rod: Gods Sheepe going quietly to their graues, like Lambes to be ſacrificed; carnall men gruntling and complaining like Swine to be butchered.
                     
                        
                           Vſe 3 Thirdly, ſince that Grace is willing, Nature

vnwilling to her diſſolution, all are to be exhorted to vſe the meanes to helpe forward their ſpirituall part, to be more willing to curbe their carnall part,Meanes to make vs dye willingly. in it nilling. The meanes are two: firſt, priuatiue, for the remouall of the impediments which lye in the way: ſecondly, poſitiue, in incouraging vs to enter the way of all fleſh. What the cauſes are that cauſe the carnall man to ſing Loath to depart, you haue heard; as namely, the loſſe of his pleaſures, profits, preferments, promotions here, with the like; in all which things wee muſt looke to our hearts, and be watchfull Centurions ouer our affections, leaſt they be carryed with too violent a courſe and torrent, in the proſecution and purſuite of theſe terreſtriall and earthly things; wee muſt not be mad vpon the world as worldlings are: let vs not place our affections on things below, but on things aboue, where CHRIST ſits at the right hand of GOD: let vs vſe this World as though wee vſed it not; as wee vſe Phyſicke and wines, modice, medice, with moderation and mortification, as a Student vſeth recreations, for neceſſitie, not vanitie: let vs not fall downe and worſhip the Diuell, though hee would giue vs it all: let vs not bowe the knee to Baal, nor adore the golden Calfe, nor ſell our ſoules for the traſh and the dongue, the Siluer and Gold. white and red duſt of it, as Iudas did: let

vs touch riches tenderly, with our hands, not with our hearts, as wee doe Thornes, becauſe they are Thornes: let vs not loue va
                           •
                        ne pleaſures, leaſt after their B
                           •
                        eiſh honie wee feele their Waſpiſh ſting: when theſe charmers charme to delude vs, let vs be as wiſe as Serpents, ſtopping both our eares (as ſhee doth) with the taile and the earth; remembrance of our ends (of which the taile is an embleame) and of our earth, whither wee ſhortly muſt. Thus muſt wee firſt learne to practiſe this hardeſt point of Chriſtianitie, in dying to the world, ere euer wee can be willing out of faith and feeling to dye out of the world: for alas, what cauſeth men that they haue as little heart to goe into their Mother-earth, as the Moale hath to come out of the earth; but onely that they loue the earth too well? being deſirous euer to liue vpon the earth, but neuer to lye in the earth. Why liſt not worldlings returne to their duſt, but onely that (as true children of the old Serpent) the curſe of the Serpent is vpon them to licke the duſt, minding earthly things here, their end being damnation hereafter. Phil. 3.17.
                     Secondly, when this is performed, in breaking off thy deſires from the world, which is Terminus à quo, the place which thou leaueſt, then fixe thy eye vpon another world, Terminus ad quam, the place whither thou goeſt.

Looke not too much at the griſly face of Death, which will agaſt thee; but at the end of it, where thou ſhalt ſee as many comforts as Eliſhaes Seruant ſaw, to encourage thee. Euen as hee that is to paſſe ouer ſome great and deepe Riuer, muſt not looke downe-ward to the water, but muſt caſt his eye to the bancke on the further ſide: ſo looke ouer the waues of death, and fixe the eye of thy faith vpon eternall life. Looke not at Death in the glaſſe of the Law, in which it is ſet out, as a curſe and the downe-fall to the gulph of deſtruction, but in the Chriſtall Glaſſe of the Goſpell, as it is changed and altered ſo by the death of CHRIST that it is a ſweet ſleepe, and reſting coole harbour.
                     Firſt, therefore conſider, how there is a bleſſing accompanies and attends thy death, pronounced by the Spirit it ſelfe, Reu. 14 13. which is alone ſufficient to ſtay the rage of thy affections in the ordinary feare of death: for, who feares bleſſings, ſince euen profane Eſau ſues for a bleſſing, and euen the very Heathens ſo much deſired that bleſſedneſſe which their Philoſophers, of all ſorts, ſo much diſputed, but neuer ſo ſoundly determined as God doth here?
                     Secondly, the ſame Spirit cals it, A reſting from thy labour. Now euen the Oxe, Horſe, and Aſſe, deſire reſting from labour, to be

vntyed from their taskes, vnloden from their Burthens all the creatures and the Elements, which groane vnder vanitie, deſire ceſſation from motion: euery thing aymes at his quiet and reſt, and doſt not thou? Now death, I pray thee what is it, but a buſter of bonds; a deſtruction of toyle; an arriuing at the Hauen; a Iourney finiſhed; thy co
                              •
                           ſummatum eſt; thy q
                              •
                           ietus eſt; thy laying away of an heauy burthen; euen ſin it ſelfe, which (as Eraſmus wittily) is heauier then Gold, Siluer, Lead, and Iron, in that the weight of it weighed and preſſed downe the Angels of light into the pit of hell, and payned Chriſt our Sauiour our ſubſtitute, on the Croſſe? What I ſay, is this death, but the ſhaking off of gyues, and an end of baniſhment, a period of griefe, an eſcape of dangers, a deſtroyer of all euils; Natures due, Countryes ioy Heauens bliſſe. Woes Hauen; the Key to ope the dore to Chriſtians, as it did to CHRIST, Luke 24 26 of bleſſednes, reſt, and immortalitie; dignifying, nay almoſt Deifying whom God hath elected,Nil boni in vita, nil mali in morte. and called in grace, and called to the graue? this is the right partition of it into his parts and paſſages, as Antiquitie hath chriſtned it, and our age hath called it, and the godly haue found it: Oh then, why ſhouldeſt thou boggle at it, ſince there is as little hurt in death to the good, as there is little good in life to the bad, as we

ſhall further proue in ſome particulars hereafter?
                     Thirdly, let this cogitation animate thee to ſing Simeons Song, in being at leaſt willing, if not deſirous to depart, becauſe God takes thy part in thy departing, if thou beeſt his: thou haſt as the Promiſe, ſo the Performance of his comfortable preſence. It hath beene the Lords conſtant and continuated cuſtome to be with his Children, like a friend at neede, in their diſtreſſe, whoſe exigents and extremities haue beene his opportunities. Thus hee was preſent with Noah
                        ▪ in the Floud, Gen. 7. with Lot, in Sodomes flames, Gen. 19. with Iacob, in his flight from Eſau, Gen. 33. with Ioſeph, in Dodons pit, and Putiphars priſon: vvith Moſes, when hee went to Pharaoh, when he was with Pharaoh, and ſled from Pharaoh: with Iſrael, in the Red Sea, Exod. 14. vvith Dauid, in Sauls purſuite, 1 Sam. 19. with Eliah, in the Deſart, 1 Kings 19. with Eliſha, vvhen the Syrians came againſt him, 2 Kings 6. with Hezekiah, in his ſicke-bed, Eſay 38. with the three Children, in the fire, Dan. 3. with Daniel, in the denne of Lyons, Dan. 6. with Ioſeph and Mary, and the wiſe Magi, flying from Herod, Mat. 2. with Chriſt, in his combat with Sathan, Mat. 4. and hee will be vvith thee in thy laſt conflict and tryall: for, this is his Promiſe, which he keepes more inuiolably

then the Decrees of the Medes and Perſians, to be with thee when thou paſſeſt through the waters, and through the riuers, & through the fire, that thou ſhalt neyther be ouerflowne nor ouerblowne in any temptation, Eſay 43.2.3.4 5.6. &c.
                     
                     Now God will manifeſt his preſence with thee theſe three wayes, eyther in moderating or mitigating thy paines, as the words of that Propheticall promiſe doe import, making death no more dolorous to thee, then many ordinary croſſes and afflictions which haue befallen thee in life, as ſome of the Saints haue tryed it.
                     Or, by the inward and ineffable comfort of the Spirit, which occaſioned Paul to reioyce in tribulation, ſince euen then, the loue of God was ſhed abroad in his heart by the holy Ghoſt, Rom. 5.35. yea, euen in his grieuous ſickeneſſe, it ſeemes when hee had receiued the ſentence of death, as the ſuffrings of Chriſt did abound in him, ſo his conſolations did abound through Chriſt, 2 Cor. 1.5. God is the chiefe Phyſitian, and chiefe viſitor, when any of his Patients are afflicted, in his owne perſon miniſtring vnto them, ſtaying them with flagons, & comforting them with apples; vvith his right hand holding vp their heads, and vvith his left imbracing them. Cant. 2.9.
                     Thirdly, he ſends a victorious Hoſt, a guard

of Angels to be keep
                           •
                        rs, and Nurſes vnto his Seruants, to hold them vp, and beare them in their armes, as Nurſes doe young Children: and to be their champions and guards againſt the Diuell and his Angels, Pſal. 30. All theſe comforts with many moe, going along vvith thee, like the Cloud and the fiery Pillar with the Iſraelites, ſhould cauſe thee to march valiantly, euen through the Pikes 
                           •
                        f death, to thy appointed Poſſeſſion. And ſo wee paſſe in this paſſage of Simeon, to the third Point.
                  
                  
                     His acknowledgement of the Diuine Permiſſion. In theſe words, Letteſt thou.
                     
                        IN which phraſe obſerue, that what euer comes to paſſe, is by the letting and permiſſion of God, whether in life or death for, there is nothing done in the world, but that which the Almightie will haue done, eyther by permitting it to be done, or by doing it himſelfe. Or, as the ſame Auguſtine, All things are eyther done by Gods helpe, or ſuffered to be done by his permitting, Domino vet adiuuante,

&c. yea, euen thoſe things which are done contra volu
                              •
                           tatem, againſt the will of GOD, yet are not done, praeter eius voluntatem, beſides his will: by which will, with Hugo,
                        Enchir. cap. 101. I meane his good pleaſure, his operation and permiſſion; yea, euen in Sinne it ſelfe, the cauſe of death, God hee hath a worke. God workes in euery euill, but he workes not euill, nor euilly,Lib. de ſac. c. 7. part. 4. as the Papiſts ſlander Caluin to teach. Ag
                              •
                           t in malo, &c. hee workes in the euill, firſt, by permitting; ſecondly, by diſpoſing: by permitting I ſay, not by prouoking. For, though God offer the ſinner obiects (to vſe Auguſtine and Bellarmines Similitudes) and leaues a man to himſelfe, yet hee inclines not his will to euill, and therefore is not the cauſe of euill, no more then the Shepheard by ſetting hay or graſſe before the Sheepe is the cauſe of the Sheepes feeding: or the Huntſman by ſhewing the Grey-hound the Hare or Deere, is the cauſe of his running, but onely the diſpoſitions and inclinations of both to runne, and to feede.
                     Secondly, by ordering and diſpoſing ſin: for this is the propertie of the diuine vviſedome, ſaith Clemens, Vti vtiliter,
                        Strom. l. 1. Aug. Ench. c. 101. 
                        &c. to vſe thoſe things profitably, which are done peruerſely.De malo opere, &c. God out of euery worke that is euill workes that which is good; euen as in the firſt Creation he brought light out of darkeneſſe,

and as a wiſe Phyſitian out of poyſoned Serpents and venemous beaſts, extracts a preſeruatiue againſt poyſon. Thus hee diſpoſed of the Treachery of Ioſephs Brethren, and the Treaſon of Iudas againſt Chriſt, to his owne glory, and the good of his Church: in the preſeruation of old Iacob and his Seede, and the ſaluation of his owne Elect Iſrael. Therefore as in one act of the death of Chriſt, 1. God; 2. Chriſt; 3. the Diuell; 4. the Iewes; and 5. Iudas wrought, but not from one cauſe:Aug. ep. ad Vincent. 38. the Diuell ſuggeſtingly, the Iewes maliciouſly, Iudas couetouſly, Chriſt executiuely, in deliuering himſelfe; God decretorily, in decreeing; and diſpoſitiuely, in diſpoſing the death of his Sonne to the ſauing of the Elect, and condemning of the Reprobate, being the riſing and falling of many in Iſraell. The like is ſeene in other ſinnes, wherein there are diuers agents; ſome ſinfull but GOD alwayes ſinleſſe:Aug. de Gen. ad lit. imp. c. 5. De ciuitate Dei lib. 11. c. 17. Mors non naturae conditio, ſed poena peccati, de praed. & gratia. c. 11. for, Peccatores in quantum peccatores, &c. God makes not ſinners ſo farre forth as they be ſinners. but onely ordereth and diſpoſeth them: being as the beſt Creator of thoſe wils that are good, ſo a moſt righteous diſpoſer and orderer of thoſe wils which are euill. But as for Death, which it the puniſhment of ſinne, not the condition of Nature; God is not onely the permitter and prouident diſpoſer, but the iuſt inflicter of it; yea,

                        vitae neciſ
                              
                                 
                              
                              que
                            arbitrer, the author and ordayner, as of life, ſo of death: for, it is he that formes the light, and creates darkeneſſe; hee makes peace, and creates euill, Eſay 45.7. What euill? Not the euill of ſinne,Non mal
                              •
                            culpae, ſed poenae. but the euill of ſorrow, of ſickneſſe, of troubles, baniſhment, famine; yea, Death it ſelfe, Leuit. 26.
                     This poynt is worthy our further inlargement: namely, that all death, for the Time of it, the Place of it, the Matter, the Manner, the Cauſe, the Occaſion of it, is immediately from God, operatiuely, penar
                           •
                        ly, or permiſſiuely.
                     For the Time:Euery death is determined by God. if death come in the morning, or mid-day, in the euening, or Cocke-crow of life; in the Infancie, or childe-hood, or nonage, or youth, or adoleſcencie, or perfect age, or decaying, declining, or decrepit old age of our yeeres: if it crop vs in the ſprout, or the Spring, or the Summer, or the Autumne, or the Winter of our time, God that is Palmoni, a ſecret numberer, hath numbered our dayes and meaſured our time: for the LORD makes our dayes as it were an hand-breadth. Pſal. 39.5. eclipſing our lifes light as it pleaſeth him, in the Sunne-riſing, or in the meridian of our dayes, as hee did vvith good Ioſias, the vertuous Prince Edward the 6. that worthy ſpirit Picus miramdula, our Engliſh Ioſias, Prince Henry, with diuers others. Againe, ſometimes hee addes vnto our dayes, as hee

did fifteene yeeres to the raigne of Ez
                              •
                           kias, Eſay 38. extending and drawing our the thread of our life to a large extent, as hee did the yeeres of Abraham,
                        
                           Gen. 25.8. Iob. 22.17. 1 Chron. 29.28. 
                        Iob, and Dauid, who dyed all in a good age, full of dayes, going to their graues, as a Ricke of Corne commeth in due ſeaſon into the Barne, Iob 5.26.
                     For the Place, whether we dye in the fields with Saul and Ionathan; or in our beds, vvith old Iacob, Gen. 49.33. or on our beds, vvith Siſera and Iſhboſheth, 2 Sam. 4.5. or in the wars, with the Amorites and Amalekites: or in time of peace▪ as did Salomon, or by land, or by ſea, as did the Aegyptians, God hath appoynted that place for vs to lay downe our bodyes in, and no other, euen as hee appointed a dying place for Moſes in the land of Moab, Deut. 34.1.5.
                     So for the Manner of death, whether it be naturall, when wee fall from the Tree of life like ripe Apples: or if it be violent, when we are by force ſhaken downe like greene Apples: God gathers vs to our Fathers. God ſhewes himſelfe in this act, not onely when immediately hee ſtrikes by himſelfe, with his owne hands,
                           Numb. 16.30.31.32. as hee did Dathan and Abiram, whom the earth receiued; Nadab and Abihu, whom the fire conſumed, Leuit. 10.2. with others; for which cauſe the Lord is ſaid to raine from the Lord, fire and Brimſtone vpon Sodome,

                        Gen. 19. As alſo to haue ſmit Naball for his churliſhneſſe towards Dauid; 1 Sam. 25.
                           •
                        8. but euen thoſe that are cut off by an externall agent, whether by Sathan himſelfe, as vvere Iobs Children, or by others,
                           Iob 1.18.19 voluntarily or involuntarily, they are executed by the decree of the ſupreame eſſence.
                     Thus whether wee conſider Children murthered by their Parents, (as was the Sonne of Conſtantine the great, of Antoninus Caracalla, of Brutus, of Darius, of Cambyſes, and Medea, if wee beleeue Hiſtories.) Or Parents ſlaine by their Children, as was Senacherib by his Sonnes, Eſay 37.38, Fredericke by his Sonne Manfrede, Agrippina by Nero, Semiramis by Ninus, Ʋliſſes by Thelegon, Phocas by his Sonne Heraclus, &c. Or the bloud of Brothers effuſed by Brethren, as Abels by Caine, Ammons by Abſolon, Te
                              •
                           cles by Polymies, Remus by Romulus, Argeus by his Brother Ptolomie Philadelphus, &c. Or if vvee conſider Husbands ſlaine by their Wiues, as the Husbands of the fiftie Daughters of Danaus
                        ▪ ſo the Husbands of thoſe thirtie Siſters of Albina, ſlaine by their wiues, Agamemnon by Clitemn
                              •
                           ſtra, King Sarematar by Circes, Antoninus the Emperour by his Wife Luulla. Or if wee ponder Wiues butchered by their Husbands, as Poppea was by Nero, Queene Gloſinda by Chilpericus, Fauſta the Empreſſe by

                        Conſtantine, as alſo the Wife of Mithridates the King of Pontus, of Egnatius, Calphurinus, Periander, and diuers others, who haue periſhed by the miſchiefe of their Mates. Or if wee reflexe vpon Seruants that haue murthered their Maſters, as Zimri ſlew Elah his Lord, 1 Kings 16.9.10. Or apoſtate Subiects, vile Traytors, that haue effuſed the bloud of the Lords Annoynted, as Iaques Clements, and Rauallack in their aſſarſinations and maſſacrings of the two renowned French Henries, &c. Or laſtly, one man killing another, eyther ſodainely, as Ehud ſlew Eglon with his Dagger, Iudg. 3.21. or treacherouſly as Ioab did Abner and Amaſa, as Rehab and Baanah did Iſhboſheth, 2 Sam. 4.5.6. or combatingly in a Duellie in the field, or any other vvayes; in all theſe, with all the reſt of this nature, wee muſt ſay as the Apoſtles ſaid of Pilate, Herod, and the Iewes, concerning the death of Chriſt, that theſe murtherers haue done whatſoeuer the Lords hand and councell had determined before to be done, Acts 4.28. For, who is he that ſaith it commeth to paſſe, and the Lord commanded it not? Lamen. 3.37. For, euen all things that are, and that happen, Deus diſponendo praeſciuit, & praeſciendo diſpoſuit, ſaith Tertullian, God hath fore-knowne them, fore-ſeene them, and diſpoſed of them. If of all things, then of the liues and deaths of men; yea, euen of murthered

men: for though God prohibite and forbid murther, Exod. 20. yet hee decrees that act which in man is murther, but in God is but an act of Iuſtice. Againe, the very materiall part or ſubiect, is of God, I ſay the naked act of murther, as it is an act, as it is from the liuing ſoule, as it is from the motion of the hand, is from God, without whom neyther the hand nor any part could moue in any naturall motion: but the formall part and deformitie of the act, vvhich makes it properly murther, that is from the Diuell and from corruption; yet not without Gods permiſſion, by the ſubſtraction of his grace (which Hugo cals the cauſe of all ſinne,) from the Agent, and for ſome righteous ends in reſpect of the Patient.
                     The life of this point,Vſe 1. Of Redargution. like the bloud in the veynes, lyes in the vſe: if meetes with the corruption of theſe that referre not death vnto his true cauſe and ground, erring, not knowing the Scriptures: for, is any man ſtrangely afflicted with wondrous and wofull diſeaſes,Death comes not by fortune. as the Gout, Stone, Stranguillio, Sciatica? &c. Is any infected with the plague? ſmit with Leproſie? wounded, or ſlaine by his enemie? bruized by falling from his Horſe, or the like? but chiefely, is he taken away ſodainely, in his full ſtrength, in his caſe and proſperitie, when his breaſts are full of milke, and his bones full of marrow? Iob 22.24.25. Preſently, we breake

our into theſe tearmes; Sure he had ill lucke, hee had bad chance, hee had ill Fortune: or elſe wee ſhoote our fooles bolts, as the Liſtrians againſt Paul, when the Viper ſtucke to his hand, Acts 14. Sure this man was a great ſinner, &c. or as the Iewes of thoſe vpon whom the Tower of Silo fell, and vvhoſe bloud Pilate mingled with their Sacrifices,
                           Luke 13.2. Sure he was a greater ſinner then the reſt: or as others of the blinde man, Iohn 9. wee muſt needes know whether he or his Parent
                           •
                         haue ſinned, For the firſt: it is a pittifull thing, that Chriſtians liuing ſo long in the heate, and light, and Sunne-ſhine of the Goſpell, ſhould be ſo darkened in their vnderſtandings, and ſo vaine in their imaginations, like the once vnconuerted Gentiles, as to turne the glory of the immortall God into a vile and abhominable Idoll; to attribute that which is proper and peculiar vnto God, vnto Heatheniſh Fortune; a word, which as Auguſtine and Lactantius in their dayes baniſhed to the Pagans from whence it came; ſo I wonder that the light of Preaching hath no more diſcouered the blindneſſe of it, and no more reformed the errour of it, that it is no more rooted out of our hearts, and vnſetled our of our heads: but that wee muſt needes make it, as the Epheſians their Diana, ſome great Goddeſſe, as the Sorcerer Simon made himſelfe ſome great man.

I wonder, that with the Romanes wee muſt build Temples, and ſacrifice vnto it, in diſgrace and deſpight of God, and diſparagement of his prouidence, taking the Crowne from the Creators head and placing it on an Idoll, vvhich is a meere Idaea, a fiction, and Chimera in nature: not knowing, or at leaſt not acknowledging with the Scripture, with Antiquitie, with Ierome, Auguſtine,
                        Ierom. in Ier. c. 12. Aug. de gent. cont. Manich. c. 2. and others (called now Fathers, as Iames and Iohn were called Pillers) that there is no euill in the Citie (that is euill of puniſhment, in which predicament Death is,) which the Lord hath not wrought: that nothing comes to paſſe, fortuito caſu, ſed iudicio Des, by chance, but by choyſe; nothing happens by hap-hazzard, but by the peculiar preuidence and prouidence of God; that the will of God is the ſupreame cauſe of all things that are.
                     Not a hayre falling from our heads,
                           Mat. 10.29 30 not a Sparrow falling to the ground, much leſſe a ſickeneſſe or a diſeaſe growing vpon our bodies, much leſſe a day, or an houre, or a minute falling from our life, without the determination and permiſſion of him, that hath numbred our dayes, and ſet downe the period of our age.
                     Therefore let vs baniſh all thought and opinion of Fortune vnto the very Getes and Sauromatanes.Exhortat. Let vs alſo ſuſpend our thoughts

and our opinions of our Brethren, when God doth ſore afflict them in life, or ſodainely inflict vpon them ſome ſtrange death: let vs not iudge leaſt wee be iudged, let vs not enter into raſh and precipitate cenſures of others: wee may be further deceiued in Gods mercies towards them, or his proceedings with them, then was Eliphaz,
                        
                           Iob 2.3.4. 
                        Bildad, and Zophar, in the caſe of Iob: then the Diſciples were in the caſe of the blinde man, Iohn 9.12. For it may be that this man whom thou ſeeſt lying ſicke, a Lazar by the high-way, begging with thoſe blinde men in the Goſpell; him whom thou ſeeſt groaning in an Hoſpitall, rauing in Bedlam, &c. nay, whom thou ſeeſt drowned in the waters, ſtabbed in his bowels, led to execution, to be topt off like a fruitleſſe Tree at Tyburne; is not a greater ſinner then thou, neyther hee nor his Parents haue ſinned more then thou and thine, but that the glory of God might be made manifeſt, that he might be an example vnto thee, that thou maiſt take warning by his harming, leaſt thou alſo periſh: for Gods workes (as his Word) are for thy inſtruction, whether they be workes of Mercy or of Iuſtice.
                     
                        
                           Vſe 2 Secondly, is it ſo, that death is by the permiſſion of God? Nay, is it ſo, that thy death, and ſo the death of euery childe of GOD, is not onely fore-ſeene but fore-appointed of

God? then the conſideration of this ſpeciall prouidence of God, muſt be a motiue amongſt others which wee haue vſed, and are to vſe to incheare vs againſt death. Oh how ought this to adde life and ſpirit vnto thy faintings, that God conſiders euery circumſtance of thy death, as the time when, and the place where, and the manner how; the beginning of ſickeneſſe, cauſe, originall, continuation, and end? that euery fit in thy ſickeneſſe; nay, the very pangs of death are particulerly ſet downe in the counſell of God? Did God ſo (as hee did Dauid) when thou waſt an Embrio, without forme, in thy mothers wombe, when thou waſt made in a ſecret place, and faſhioned beneath in the earth? Pſal. 139.15.16. and doth he not now thinkeſt thou behold thy trouble? Will he not ſtrengthen thee in the bed of languiſhing, and make all thy bed in thy ſickeneſſe, Pſal. 41.2.3. In the 56. Pſalme, v. 8. Dauid prayes that the Lord would put his teares into his bottle. Now conſider with thy ſelfe, hath God a bottle for the teares of his Seruants? much more hath hee bottles for their bloud: and much more doth he reſpect their paines and miſeries, with all the circumſtances of ſickeneſſe and death. How did this comfort the Church of Ieruſalem in the death of Chriſt, in that nothing came to paſſe in it, but that which the fore-knowledge and

eternall counſell of GOD had appoynted. Acts 4.28.
                     Thirdly, the Meditation of this point muſt teach thee to poſſeſſe thy ſoule in patience, to kiſſe Gods Rod, to ſubiect thy ſelfe like an obedient childe to his correcting hand, to couch downe like Iſſacar vnder thy burthen; what miſerie ſoeuer in life, what manner of mortalitie in death doth befall thee, becauſe it is the Lords doings: it is a meſſage from thy King, an errand from thy Father, a ſummons from thy Iudge, a Loue-token from thy Bridegrome, a warning from thy Generall, therefore to be receiued with all loue and loyaltie, ſubmiſſion and ſubiection: without muttering and murmuring, belching and barking againſt God, as the manner of ſome is. Oh conſider the practiſe of Dauid, Pſal. 39.10. I held my tongue (ſaith hee) and ſaid nothing: Why ſo? becauſe thou Lord aidſt it. The ſame conſideration ſealed vp the lips of Aaron, when two of his owne Sonnes were conſumed with fire, Leuit. 10.3. So Eli, when hee conſidered it was the Lord that threatned him and his houſe, was content that he ſhould doe what ſeemed him good, 1 Sam 3.18. Ioſeph thus reuiues his brethren when their harts failed them in a great perplexitie, Gen. 43. Feare not (ſaith hee) for it was the Lord that ſent mee before you. Oh obſerue how the very

meditation of Gods permiſſiue prouidence armes him and his againſt griefe, impatience, and diſcontent: open thou the boxe and apply thou theſe Cordials, and Mithridate to thy owne particular. I warrant you who euer had a window into Simeons Soule had ſeene no ſmall Iubilie of ioy in his inward man, ariſing euen from theſe very thoughts, that it was the Lord that let him depart in peace, after hee had imbraced the Prince of peace: to whom that thou maiſt conforme thy ſelfe, let this one motiue moue thee, beſides many moe. Namely, the greatneſſe of this ſinne of impatience; a ſinne not onely condemned in the Word, Prou. 14 29. & 19. verſ. 19. if it be but againſt man (much more if againſt God, as that of Iobs was, Iob 3.1.2.3. &c.) but alſo puniſhed moſt ſeuerely in the Lords owne people, as yee may ſee at leaſure in euery Chapter almoſt of Ex
                              •
                           dus and Numbers,
                        
                           Exo. 14.11 & 15.24. & 16. v. 2.7. & 17. v. 21 Numb. 11. & 14. v. 1.26. & 21.5. it neuer ſcaping ſcot-free, but bringing a greater iudgement with it then that which did occaſion it? As, doe the people murmure for Quailes, for Water &c. againſt God, againſt Moſes, and againſt Aaron? they ſhall be plagued vvith Peſtilence, and Serpents, and Death, and Murraine and mortalitie. Oh then if thou wilt be angry, be angry with thine owne ſins, the occaſion of all croſſes and of all curſes; the cauſer of Ter
                           •
                        ours and Conſumptions, and Burning

Agues, and Biles, and Botches, and Plagueſores; yea, of Death it ſelfe, Leuit. 26.16 22. Wherefore is the liuing man ſorrowfull? Man ſuffereth for his ſinnes, Lament. 3. Sinne was the cauſe of Ezekias botch, of Geheſies and Miriams Leproſie, of the Philiſtines Emerods, of the Aegyptian plagues; and therefore Chriſt bids the blinde man ſinne no more, leaſt a worſe thing befall him, Iohn 5.14. For, Death by Sinne entered into the world, Rom. 5.12. which Sinne ſtill continueth Deaths ſting▪ wee carrying that ſting in our boſomes, that vvill kill vs: oh then plucke this ſting out, drowne Sin in the ſalt Sea of repentant ſorrow, as the Marriners caſt Ionas into the Sea: and the cauſe being remoued, the effect will ceaſe. The tempeſt ſhall turne to calme when thou turneſt to Chriſt, though thou haſt outward paine thou ſhalt haue inward peace, and ſhalt depart in peace.
                     
                        Doctrine.Secondly, in that God limits, and lets, and permits our departure, it teacheth vs, that the dayes of man are ſo determined, as that no man, no meanes can protract them, or detract from them, beyond and beſides their limits: for God which hath appoynted the ſeaſons and times for euery thing, Acts 1.7. & ch. 17. hath determined alſo the dayes of euery mans life, as hee did Iobs, Iob 14.5. which life as it is like a weauers Lombe, Eſay 38.10. ſo it muſt

laſt till the laſt thread thereof be wouen, like an Houre-glaſſe running till the laſt minute of time be expired, before which time this thread cannot be cut by the power of men and Angels, this Glaſſe cannot be broken: all externall created power cannot cauſe the Lord to alter what hee hath written in the numbring of our dayes, no more then Pilate would change what hee had vvritten vpon Chriſts Croſſe.
                     
                        Obiect. 1.Obiect. But here a ſcruple may ariſe concerning Ezekias, who was told from God that hee ſhould preſently dye, Eſay 38.1. yet after there were fifteene yeeres added to his dayes, 2 Kin. 20.1.
                     
                        Anſw. Firſt, Gods will is alwayes one in it ſelfe, like God himſelfe, how euer in reſpect of vs it may ſeeme contrary or contradictory, as it is ſecret and reuealed. Secondly, there was no change of will or decree in God,Mutatio n
                              ••
                            in Deo, ſed in homine. but in Ezekias himſelfe, who receiued the ſentence of death like the Niniuites conditionally as the Theefe may receiue the ſentence of death from the Iudge, vnleſſe hee carry himſelfe after, more carefully, or get the Kings Pardon preſently. For, all Legall Threats, as alſo Euangelicall Promiſes, haue their relation and reference vnto the condition of Faith or Infidelitie, of Repentance or Impenitencie, by the performance or not performance vvhereof

wee auoid or incurre the curſes denounced: or are capable of, or not capable of the promiſes propounded: therefore when God ſtaid the execution, and as it were repriued this good King, hee did nothing but what hee determined, for hee decreed by this threatning to bring him to the ſight of his ſinnes, and ſo to repentance, that hee might liue.
                     
                        
                           Obiect. 2
                        Obiect. 2. Iob complaines that his breath is corrupt, that his dayes are extinct, and that the graue is ready for him, Iob 17.1. So Dauid complained that the Lord had weakened his ſtrength in the way, that he had ſhortened his dayes; yea, hee feared that God would take him away in the midſt of his dayes, Pſal. 102. verſ. 23.24. So Salomon tels vs, that the feare of the Lord prolongeth dayes, but the yeeres of the wicked ſhall be ſhortened, Prou. 10.27. then it ſeemes a man may dye before his limited time.
                     
                        Anſw. There are two ages or times of man: the one a ripe age, ſuppoſe ſeauenty or eighty yeeres; the other vnripe and greene. Now, all men naturally aſpire and deſire the firſt; which if they attaine not to in ſome meaſure and proportion, they are thought to dye before their time, but yet neuertheleſſe they accompliſh their decreed date. And therefore though Iob and Dauid complayned of the ſhortning of their dayes, yet they deceiued themſelues,

for the one liued after that an hundred and forty yeeres, and ſaw his ſonnes ſonnes, euen foure generations, Iob 42.16. the other dyed old and well ſtricken in yeeres, 1 Kings 1.1. but both of them (not ſeeing the Sunne of Gods fauour through the cloud of the Croſſe) remembred not that Gods power is ſeene in infirmitie, 2 Cor. 12.9.
                     
                        Obiect. 3. Yet it is ſaid that bloud thirſty men ſhall not liue out halfe their dayes, Pſal. 55.23.
                     
                        Anſw. Firſt, that is which they deſire to liue; Secondly, or which in nature they might liue to, ſo Baſil; Thirdly,In Pſal. 55 God haſtens iudgements vpon crying ſinnes, ſuch as that of Murther, and Sodomie, and vncleanneſſe, as hee did on Sodome, Onan and Ioab. For, when ſinne once cryes like Cains ſinne, or is ripe like the ſinnes of the Amorites, God is prouoked and cuts off the workers of it,Secreta eſſe poſſunt iudicia Dei, nunquam iniuſta. ſometimes ſodainely, ſometimes ſecretly, neuer vniuſtly; Fourthly, good men as they participate of Gods bleſſing, long life, Exod. 20. ver. 12. or elſe of life eternall, if they be taken away with Ioſias, in youth, which is better: ſo wicked men fearing death as a iudgement which they feare, it ſhall fall vpon them: for whatſoeuer a wicked man feares, in a ſlauiſh and ſeruile feare, that ſhall come vpon him, ſaith Salomon, Prou. 10.24. A proud man feares diſgrace, he

ſhall be diſgraced; yea, proud Herod ſhall be eaten with Wormes, and that Eſter and Mordocheus, and thoſe Iewes which Ammon feared ſhall bring him to the Gallowes. If Achitophel feare that his counſell ſhall be reiected, it ſhall be reiected. If the Theefe and the Seminarie feares Tyburne, they ſhall be topt there. The couetous man feares pouertie, it ſhall betide him or his, hee ſhall vomit vp his ſweet morſels, his ſubſtance which he hath deuoured, Iob 20.15. ſome part of his ill gotten goods, like the coale in the Eagles neſt, ſhall ſet all the reſt on fire. If Ieroboam feare death, as Abijah threatneth him, the Lord will ſtrike him that hee die, 2 Chron. 1▪2. ver. 12. ver. 20. and ſo all other vvicked men.
                     
                        Obiect. 4. But if our death be determined may carnall reaſon obiect, then we neede vſe no meanes to prolong our life, as Phyſicke, recreation, &c.
                     
                        Anſw. If God haue ordained thee to liue long, hee ordayned the meanes alſo to prolong thy life; as hee ſent Ioſeph before to prouide the Land of Aegypt for old Iacob and his Sonnes to liue and to trade in, when the Famine was in Aegypt, for their preſeruation, G
                              •
                           n. 34.10. and as hee prouided a Whale to receiue Ionas that hee drowne not: ſo he hath ordayned meanes, as meates, drinkes, cloathes,

dyet, Phyſicke, Muſicke, exerciſe, carefull circumſpection in the vſe of thy body, and the like, that thou periſh not: to which meanes if thou beeſt not ſubordinate, thou art guilty of thine owne death, becauſe thou with-drawes thy ſelfe from without thoſe limits and bounds that God hath appointed thee to vvalke in; and ſo art found eyther a fighter againſt, or at leaſt a tempter of God, Deut. 6.16. It is worthy conſidering, that though God had told Paul, Acts 27.24. that all that were in the ſhip with him in that Cretian tempeſt, ſhould be ſafe, yet neuertheleſſe when ſome would haue leapt out of the ſhip, hee tels the Centurion, v. 31. that except they abide in the Ship, they could not be ſaued; they muſt ſtay ſtill and beſtirre themſelues (validis incumbendo renijs) if they will be ſafe; yea, they muſt eate meate to, for their healths ſake, verſ. 34. ſo what God hath decreed eyther concerning thy body or ſoule, thy temporall or ſpirituall eſtate, in life or death, thou muſt vſe meanes, for the well being and preſeruation of both.
                     Wee may out of this boxe, thus opened,Vſe. draw out this Triacle, namely, to goe on conſtantly and couragiouſly in our callings and Chriſtian courſes in the performance of good duties, belonging to the firſt and ſecond Table, to God or man, commanded in the word, commended in the practiſe of the Saints, notwithſtanding,

all not onely oppoſitions and calumniations by the ſcoffing tongues of Iſmaels, but euen piercing perſecutions of the worlds Nimrods, and the bloody Buls of Baſan; what though they menace thy maſſacring, determine thy death, as thoſe curſed crew of Ruffians did Pauls, Acts 23.14. yet they cannot hurt a hayre of thy head without Gods permiſſion: no more then the Iewes could doe ought againſt Chriſt, but what God had before determined.
                     Thirdly, in that Simeon here appeales vnto Gods permiſſion, in reſpect of his departure: it is plaine that hee tooke not leaue of himſelfe to depart; hee askes leaue you ſee, as a Souldier of his Generall, to depart out of the Campe; as a Scholler of his Maſter, to goe home; as an Attendant, to be diſmiſſed of the Court. From whoſe particular we may extract this generall obſeruance: that it is vnlawfull for any man to let out his owne life, or the life of another man (vnleſſe the Sword of Magiſtracie be put in his hand) no man muſt lay violent hands vpon himſelfe, or vpon another: Deus vitae neciſ
                              
                                 
                              
                              que
                            arbiter, God is onely the diſpoſer of life and death. And therefore for the firſt, how euer the world pretend reaſons and excuſes, for to make this baſtardbrat of ſelfe-murther (which comes from Sathan and our corruption) legitimate, as

proceeding from magnanimitie, greatneſſe of courage, or the like; or at leaſt would extenuate it, or make it tollerable, if not approueble and laudable, when it is a curer of all other croſſes, as Cato Ʋticenſis held it; or a preuenter of ſinne, as in Raſis, in the Apocripha, and Lucrece in Hiſtories, &c. yet neuertheleſſe the practiſe is deteſtable, the ſinne damnable, and therefore both in Reaſon and Religion auoidable.
                     Firſt, becauſe it is againſt a double commandement, Legall and Euangelicall: it breaketh the ſixt Commandement: for if a man muſt not murther others, hee muſt not murther himſelfe, euen as if a man muſt not ſteale from another, hee muſt not ſteale from him ſelfe, his wife, his children (which I would haue all Carders, Dicers, Drunkards, &c. and ſelfe conſumers of their ſubſtance to conſider,) if hee muſt not doe the leſſer ſinne, he muſt not doe the greater.
                     Secondly, the Apoſtle ſaith, A man muſt not deſtroy his owne body, but nouriſh and cheriſh it, Epheſ. 5.
                     Thirdly, it is againſt not onely the light of Grace, but euen of Nature; nay, of corrupted Nature: euery creature, from the Lyon to the Worme, from the Eagle to the Wrenne, (as Tully notes) ſeekes it owne preſeruation, fugit
                              
                                 
                              
                              que
                            nociua, flies the contrary. Now the more

vnnaturall that any ſinne is, the greater, the groſſer it is: Inceſt is a greater ſinne then Adulterie; Adultery, then Fornication; Beaſtialitie, then all: wantonneſſe with a mans owne body worſe then actuall pollution with a woman, becauſe more vnnaturall: ſo in murther, Fratricide, the murther of thine owne brother is worſe then Homicide, Man-ſlaughter; Parricide, or Patricide, King killing, or the murther of Parents, worſe then eyther: but Semicide, or ſelfe-murther worſt of all, becauſe moſt abhorring and ſwaruing from the very ſparke and inſtinct of nature.
                     Fourthly, a man ſinnes not onely thus, 1. againſt God; 2. againſt Grace; 3. againſt Nature; 4. againſt his owne Body: but alſo hee ſinnes, 1. againſt the State, 2. againſt the king, 3. his Country, 4. the Church, 5. the Common-wealth, 6. his Friends, 7. his Familie: for euery man is pars Reipublicae & communitatis, a part of the State both Politicall and Eccleſiaſticall, hee is a member of both bodies, and therefore hath not intereſt in himſelfe, to be actiue in his owne death, he muſt be meerly paſſiue. Partem Patria, partem Parentes, &c. Beſides, ſaith the Orator, his Parents, and his Friends (as his Country) for whoſe good hee was borne, as well as for his owne, challenge a great intereſt and prerogatiue in him: all whom hee fruſtrates, and ſo directly ſinnes

againſt all, by cutting off himſelfe, euen as he ſinnes againſt the head that cuts off the hand or foote in the body naturall.
                     Fiftly, this courſe is as cureleſſe as curſed, as fruitleſſe as godleſſe; for it preuents not miſery, but procures it; it redreſſeth it not, but a man runnes further into it, like the fiſh that leapes out of the Frying-panne into the fire: like him that goes from the Engliſh pillory to the Spaniſh Strippado, that they goe from the hell of Conſcience into a reall Hell, is to be feared in ſelfe-murtherers, though God onely can determine it.
                     Sixtly, it argues Madneſſe, Diſtraction, or Frenzie, and ſo the world cenſures.
                     Seauenthly, Impatiencie, that a man cannot attend and waite the leaſure of God to releaſe his croſſe.
                     Eightly, Muttering, murmuring, and Iſraelitiſh fretting againſt God, and ſo rebellion againſt the Almighty.
                     Ninthly, Cowardlineſſe, and faint-hartedneſſe, that a man will not endure that which might be inflicted on him.
                     Tenthly, Vnthankefulneſſe, not to preſerue this Iewell of life which is beſtowed vpon him.
                     Eleuenthly, Selfe-killing is noted as a marke of Deſperation, and brand of Reprobation, as in Saul, Iudas, &c.
                     
                     Twelfthly, the practiſe of it cauſeth not

onely the actors, but their actions, profeſſion, poſteritie, Country, nay, Chriſtianitie it ſelfe to be euill ſpoken of: their names rot and ſtincke (as doe oft-times their bodyes.) Beſides, they are denied Chriſtian Buryall, being (like excommunicate perſons) caſt out of the Church as vnſauory Salt.
                     
                        Vſe. Of Redargution.All which Reaſons (with many moe) being ſo plaine and pregnant againſt this ſinne, argue and demonſtrate vnto mee, that many men are not onely irreligious but vnreaſonable, that dare perpetrate, and commit this horrible ryot and outrage vpon their owne bodyes in ſelfe-murther. Neyther can I but deplore, as I doe wonder, to ſee how the Diuell doth daily get ground and aduantage on humane nature, in this inhumane, vnnaturall, and belluine ſinne, which euen the bruit Beaſts deteſt and abhorre. How many haue wee read of, how many haue wee heard of, how many haue wee ſeene culpable in this kinde? What weekes doe paſſe but our ſoules are made ſad, and compaſſionately ſend out ſighes at the Tragicall fals and fearefull ends of Semicidian ſelfe-ſlayers, the knowledge whereof wee receiue by the intelligence of our eyes or eares? How oft are our hearts made cold, and wee occaſioned to ſmite vpon our breaſts at the vndoubted relation, or our owne viſible ſight of many, not onely amongſt the ignorant,

profane, irreligious, and impatient common people, (that know not what belongs to God, or themſelues, to their duties in life, or their eſtates after death:) but euen of Schollers, learned men, great men, that make away themſelues, ſome by hanging, more by drowning, moſt of all by ſtabbing themſelues, or by cutting their owne throates? The frequencie of which euents Crowners (who by Iuries finde out the principall indited cauſes of theſe murthers) well know: whoſe office Sathan and mans corruption hath made, as more painefull, ſo much more gainefull, then in former ages, wherein Chriſtians liued and dyed more like Chriſtians, at leaſt more like men, or leſſe like Pagans and naturall men, but chiefely leſſe like vnnaturall and bruitiſh men then wee doe, in this and other ſinnes, in theſe our cureleſſe corrupted times, degenerate and declining dayes, &c. For, let a man peruſe all Hiſtories, and looke at the carriage of Chriſtians in their loweſt exigents, when they were moſt expoſed to moſt miſeries ſuch as are particularized, Heb. 11. When the ſword had the keeneſt edge againſt them, in the hands of the tenne firſt Romane Perſecutors, when ſome one weeke ſaw the ſlaughter of more thouſands then there be dayes therein, yet neuertheleſſe we reade of few or none that were their owne ſlaughterers, but in

reſt and patience, they ranne through fires and waters, and burnings, and boylings, and bitings of beaſts, euen into the mouth of tyranny it ſelfe in paſſiue ſuffering, rather then they would rid themſelues of theſe exquiſite torments, by more eaſie (though more vnlawfull) ſelfe-killings: but alas, ſuch are the impieties, ſuch the impatience; nay, ſuch the Atheiſme of theſe our deſperate dayes, that euery croſſe (yea, though triuiall, though but in imagination) muſt be remoued with ſome, by a reall curſe of Selfe-murther. If wee cannot be our ſelfe-caruers, wee thinke thus to be our ſelfe-curers: if not ſelfe-brokers to haue what wee will, wee are ſelfe-butcherers againſt Gods will, like toyiſh children wee will take pet and dye. The loſſe of an office, the riſing of an aemulated Corriuall in the Courts, the forfeiture of a Bond, the feeling or the feare of pouertie, the turning out of ſeruice, the frowne of a great man, the brawling of a Wife, the miſcarrying of ſome, or the charge of many children, the ouer-throw in a ſuite at Law, the reiection of a ſuite in Loue, (to omit weightier matters, diſtreſſe of minde, diſtraction of hart, rage of conſcience, deſpaire of mercy, &c.) euen theſe are arguments ſufficient (and efficient to) in the Diuels Diuinitie, whereby he pleades and preuailes with ſuch whom the Lord hath left to him, and to themſelues, to

make their owne hands their owne executioners: which particular ſinne if there were no moe in man (though it be accompanyed with Legions) as it ſtrengtheneth my faith in thoſe firſt poynts in all Chriſtian Catechiſmes,
                           See Vrſimus and Baſtingius Catechiſmes, in principio. of mans miſery, whoſe nature being viciated and adulterate in the fall of Adam, is now growne monſtrous and outragious, both in the quantitie and qualitie of ſinne: ſo it confirmes my hope in Chriſts ſecond comming, concerning the propniqiutie and neareneſſe of the laſt expected day of the worlds diſſolution, ſeeing not onely Iniquitie doth abound, and Sinne (Sathans daughter) is more fruitfull then euer, euen in monſtrous births; but the Diuell the Father rageth (Lion-like;) and (like Iehu) marcheth againſt man more vehemently with redoubled force and fury, knowing that his time to rauen in is but ſhort.
                     
                         Theſe premiſſes pondered, becauſe Sathan is as wilie as euer hee was, as powerfull, as potent, as politique, more malicious; as thou art more weake then thoſe which hee hath aſſaulted and vanquiſhed in this kinde (for Saul and Iudas in all outward reſpects, were in all probabilitie ſtronger then thou) as thy nature as wicked as theirs▪ (for all branches that come from Adams ſtocke are naturally corrupted) and as it is moſt likely that thou ſhalt be tempted by this Serpent, euen to this

very ſinne of letting out thine owne bloud, which like other ſinnes is in thine own
                           •
                         power; (for what man amongſt many can ſay that he hath not had many thoughts and motions iniected and darted into his heart by Sathan for to perpetrate this ſinne?) So in Gods feare let euery Chriſtian arme himſelfe againſt it, euen with a conſtant reſolution, like good Iob, by whom Saint Iames patternes vs to truſt in GOD, though hee kill him: to fall rather into the hands of God with Dauid, 2 Sam. 24.14. then to fall vpon his owne ſword vvith Saul.
                        1 Sam. 31.4 Diſcuſſe Dauids prohibiting argument, when he was prouoked to kill Saul;
                        1 Sam. 26.9.10. 
                        Shall I lay mine hand (ſaith hee) vpon the Lords Annointed? Surely no, The Lords hand ſhall be vpon him, not mine, hee ſhall ſtay his day. Thou as a Chriſtian art the Lords Annointed, what euer Sathan importune, the worlds croſſes occaſionedly vrge, yet lay not thine hand vpon the Lords Annoynted: it is more vnlawfull for thee to ſlay thy ſelfe, then for Dauid to kill apoſtate Saul: ſtay thy day, wayte the Lords leaſure, in reſt and confidence ſhall be thy ſtrength, GOD will relieue thee in the croſſe,
                           Zach. 12.10 or releaſe thee from the croſſe. Labour for the Spirit of Grace againſt the impatiencie of Nature, and the Spirit of Prayer againſt Sathans Temptations, and the Spirit of Patience againſt the worlds croſſes: learne

out of Epictetus his Schoole, ſuſtinendo, abſtinendo, by abſtaining from the euill of ſinne, by ſuſtaining any croſſe, the ſcourge of ſinne, not to mutter againſt thy Creator, not to marre his Image in thee his chiefe creature.
                     Laſtly, that thou maiſt preuent this ſinne it ſelfe, as a point of inſtruction, neyther vnpleaſing nor vnprofitable, I thinke good to acquaint thee with the cauſes (at leaſt the occaſions) of this ſinne, of Selfe-murther, ſo farre as I can gather them Hiſtorically, is matter of fact, euen from the very Heathens, from whoſe Candles wee muſt borrow a little light to ſee into this poynt: that ſo as is the Maxime both of Philoſophie and Phyſicke, ſubla
                              •
                           a cauſa, 
                              •
                           ollitur effectus; the cauſe being remoued, the effect may ceaſe.
                     
                        
                           Vſe 3 The firſt and chiefe cauſe of this crimſon ſinne of Selfe-murther,Of Inſtruction. (beſides the Diuell tempting and triumphing ouer his conquered vaſſals) is rage of conſcience: for ſome haue beene ſo ſtung with Helliſh furies (as vvas Nero after hee had murthered his Mother Agrippina, ſlaine his Brother, his Friends,Matricid
                              •
                            
                           Nero proprij vim pertulit enſis. Auſon.
                         his Maſters, as Suetonius reports) that they haue conſtrainedly attempted the quenching of this fire with the effuſion of their owne bloud, chiefely when there is ioyned with it deſpayre of mercy, as in Pilate, whom Gregory Turo
                           
                              •
                           enſis relates to haue killed himſelfe after hee

had condemned Chriſt. The like whereof Ioſephus records of Herod, after hee had butchered his three Sonnes,In natricia. 
                        Alexander, Ariſtobulus and Antipater. The Scriptures inſtance in Saul after his Apoſtacie from God; and in Iudas, after he had betrayed CHRIST, &c.
                     2 Others ſome haue beene ouercome by madneſſe or Frenzies: as Lucretius that Philoſophicall Poet, about the forty yeere of his age,Statius lib. 12. Thebaidos. ſaith Politian: Hercules, that burnt himſelfe, being madded with his inchanted ſhirt, that was dipt in the bloud of the Centaure: Aiax,
                        Ouid. lib. 13. Met. that died inraged when Achilies armor was adiudged from him to 
                           Ʋliſſes: to which are to be added ſuch as being ſurpriſed vvith paſſions of loue or hatred, oppreſſed vvith Melancholy, ouer-heated in their ſpirits by ſtudie or the like, haue beene madded and ſo murthered.
                     3 Others haue killed themſelues in the violencie of their diſeaſes,Polit. ibid. as Silius the Poet: Feſtus the friend of Domitian,
                        Martial. lib. 1. 
                        Indignas prem
                              •
                           
                           ret peſtis, quum rabida fauces, &c. Meſſula Coruinus the Orator, that by reaſon of an vlcer in his mouth, pined himſelfe to death, as Celius teſtifies.
                     4 Others in pride of heart, and diſcontent, as Homer, becauſe hee could not reſolue the riddle of the Fiſhermen: Ariſtotle, becauſe hee could not finde out the reaſon of the

frequent ebbing and flowing of Euripus. So Brotheus that burnt himſelfe becauſe he was deformed:
                     5 Others to preuent the luxurious deſires and deſignes of Lechers,Ouid in Ibin. and to preſerue their owne chaſtitie, as Sophro
                              •
                           ia, that Chriſtian Lucrece, as Euſebius cals her, that by killing her ſelfe freed her chaſtitie from the continuall aſſaults of D
                              •
                           cius: Damocles the beautifull Boy that eſcaped the Sodomie of Demetrius by Selfe-drowning.
                     6 Others being aſhamed to liue, haue not beene aſhamed by ſelfe inflicted death, to depriue themſelues of life: as chaſte Lucrece after ſhe was defiled by proud Tarquin, whoſe death not onely Claudian Stroza, Sabellicus,
                        Lib. 1. in Eutrop. Lib. 1. Erotic. and many of the Heathen bewayle, but euen ſome Chriſtians ſpeake and write of it, vvith remorſe. So Cornelius Gallus, that excellent Poet, 
                           Ʋirg
                              •
                           ls friend, that for ſhame killed himſelfe, being accuſed, and it ſeemes guiltie, of miſdemeanours in his gouernment, being Preſident of Aegypt, ſaith Ammianus;Lib. 17. rerum geſtarum. or as Tranquillus writes, becauſe hee was interdicted Caeſars houſe, becauſe he was too tongue-ſawcy, ſaith Ouid, that makes it his blemiſh:
Se linguam nimio non tenuiſſ
                              •
                            mero.
                     
                     7 Others to preuent that ſhame and further blame which their miſdemeanours or the preuailing of their enemies had brought them

too: thus Cleopatra when Anthony was ouercome, leaſt ſhee ſhould be carryed captiue, applyed Serpents to her breaſts,Lib. 1. car. which Plutarch and Horace ſay ſhee kept for that purpoſe, whom her Maides, Neaera and Charmi
                              •
                           , accompanyed in the like death. So Diocleſian the Emperour fearing an ignominious death from the threates of Lacinus and Conſtantine, dranke poyſon, ſaith Aurelius. So Oppia, a veſtall Virgin, defloured, kils her ſelfe for feare of further puniſhment. The like did Fanius Cepio when he was apprehended in a Conſpiracie againſt Auguſtus. The like is related of Cardinall Wolſey, to haue poyſoned himſelfe in the High-way betwixt Cawwood and London, when hee was ſent for to anſwere ſuch Articles as were againſt him: neyther was Achitophels wittie folly awanting in this kinde, who thought by hanging himſelfe to be rid both of preſent ſhame, his counſell being deſpiſed, and future blame, from the fore-ſeene preuailing part of Dauid:1 Sam. 31.4 and Saul pretends this as his beſt argument to kill himſelfe leaſt the vncircumciſed Philiſtines ſhould fall vpon him and mocke him: and Abimelech will be guilty of his owne death, rather then it be ſaid that a woman ſlew him.
                     8 Others out of vaine-glory and deſire of fame, as Empedocles the Scicilian Poet, vvho to be accounted immortall threw himſelfe into

Aetna, Deus immortalis haberi,
                        Hor. in arte Poaetica. 
                        dum cupit Empedocles, &c.
                     
                     9 Theſe that haue deſired the immortalitie of the ſoule after death, haue vpon falſe grounds vſed this vnequall meanes of killing themſelues, as did Cleanthos, Cryſippus, Zeno, and others beſides Empedocles, as did Cleombrotus alſo, after hee had read Platoes Phedo (the Booke which Cato read alſo before his death) all whom Lactantius for that cauſe of making away themſelues, in his third Booke of Falſe Wiſedome, Cap. 8. recites and refutes.
                     10 Some haue beene deceiued by the Diuels Delphicke Oracles, (as Codrus amongſt the Athenians) to preſerue their Countries by their owne voluntarie deaths.
                     11 Others haue beene ſo ouer-whelmed in the flouds of Paſſions, and ſo tranſported from themſelues in the eager purſuit of their deſires, that they haue ſacrificed themſelues to their beloued and adored Idols, ſuppoſe theſe be fictions, 1. of Didoes killing her ſelfe for the loue of Aeneas: 2. Sappho, for the loue of Phao: 3. Phaedra, for Hippolitus: 4. Phillis, for Demophoon: 5. Hemon, for Antigone: though they be all teſtified by Authors. The firſt inſtanced by In Aeneid.
                        Virgil, 
                        Lib. 3. faſt.
                        Ouid, 
                        Lib. 2. & Lib. 8. 
                        Siluis, 
                        In Manto 
                        Politian, and all that haue followed 
                           Ʋirgil: the ſecond by Lib. 5. Siluarum. 
                        Statius: the third by Auſonius:

the fourth by Lib. 3. de ſtellis. 
                        Pontanus: the fift by Lib. 7. 
                        Prepertius, (to ſay nothing of thoſe that haue caſt themſelues into flouds and riuers, and ſo drowned, at the command of their Miſtreſſes, as Pontanus inſtanceth in Galeatius, Caelius in T
                              •
                           
                           magoras,) we haue too many pittifull preſidents euen in our times, of no ſmall number of fooliſh Flies, and deluded doters, who are profuſe of their bloud, which inconſiderately they expoſe to effuſion in ſingle combats, or madly they let out with their owne hands, eyther when their ſuppoſed lawfull loue, or lawleſſe luſt is croſſed by their corriuals, or reiected of their beloued ones.
                     Laſtly, and moſt ordinarily (to omit him that killed himſelfe, by the inſtinct of Gods Spirit, who alſo killed his enemies, that Typicall Sampſon, whoſe fact was particular and inimitable) moſt make away themſelues out of impatiencie vnder the Croſſe, ioyned with Infidelitie and Atheiſme, neyther greatly beleeuing or regarding any future eſtate after death. And therefore as the croſſes and miſeries incident to this our mortalitie are diuers and manifold, ſo many ſnares hath Sathan not onely for the ſoules, but the bodies of vnbeleeuers.
                     Some, in the extremities of warre haue warred with themſelues, and let out their owne bloud with their owne hands, ere they would

fall into the hands of their enemies: vvhich was Sauls caſe when the Philiſtines preſſed ſore vpon him. So Caſſius and Brutus,
                        Se gladio fodit Brutus, Cato fodit & ille, qu
                              •
                           m t
                              •
                           muit Caeſar. Pamphilius Sax
                                 •
                              s.
                         the murtherers of Caeſar, murthered themſelues, ſath Plutarch, with the ſame weapons vvith which they ſtabbed Caeſar, being ouercome by Anthony and Auguſtus at Philippos; for Which Io
                              •
                           ianus and others blame them. The like parts in the like Tragedies, acted Cato, when Pompey was ouercome of Caeſar, who of the Citie Vtica, where he diſpatched himſelfe, was called Vticenſis, ſaith Pliny and Gellius. So Dolobella
                        ▪ one of Caeſars fauourites, when hee was vanquiſhed by Caſſius in his Sirian warres.Lib. 5. So vſurping Fla. Fimbria in his conflicts with Sylla; at alſo Gnorban, when hee was baniſhed by the ſame Sylla. So Norbanus,
                        Lib. 13. when hee was ouercome by Scipio. So Otho the Emperour,Autore Liuio. after one battell loſt in his warres vvith 
                           Ʋitellius. So Petreius, one of Pompeis Captaines foyled by Caeſar: Labio, by Octauius: with many moe. As Portia,
                        Martial. Lib. 6. 
                        Catoes Daughters deſtroying dyet was hot coales after the death of her Husband Brutus:
                        Plutarch. and as Aria accompanied her Husband Petoes proſcription, with her owne death; ſo diuers other Wiues haue voluntarily accompanied the dead aſhes of their Husbands: as alſo Husbands of their Wiues, as Plantius of his Wife Ereſtilla:Valer. de amore coniugali. ſo Marke Anthony when hee heard but a falſe

rumour of the death of Cleopatra,
                        Eutropius Lib. 7. aggrauating his troubles with Auguſtus (ſaith Oreſius) killed himſelfe. Some haue taken to heart the croſſes of their Children: as Boetus that killed himſelfe at the Tombes of his daughters Hippo and Miletia,
                        Lib. 26. Siluis lib. 2 who being defloured by ſome Spartan young men, were caſt into a pit: ſo old Gordianus is by Marcellinus reported to haue hanged himſelfe, when hee heard his Sonne was ſlaine in the warres: ſo Mopſus threw himſelfe downe from a tower when hee ſaw his ſonnes dead before him:Statius lib. 11. Theb. ſo Iocaſta the Mother affrighted with the horrible ſpectacle of her two Sonnes Eteocles and Polinices, that had ſlaine one another, would liue no longer. So Children haue followed their Parents Funerals,Sic Lib. 5. Sylu. as Erigone that hanged her ſelfe when her Father Icarus dyed. So Brothers and Siſters haue ſympathized in ſorrowes, and in Selfe-murthers, one with, and one for another; as Iuturna (Daunus his Daughter) that drowned her ſelfe after her Brother Turnus was ouer-turned by Aeneas,
                        Paulus ſed Diaconus. Others in a deſpayring repentance, for killing other, out of the horrour of conſcience, and Gods remunerating vengeance, haue killed themſelues: as Argobaſtes after he had cauſed 
                           Ʋalentinian the younger to be ſtrangled at Vienna. So Ecelinus the Tyrant after innumerable ſlaughter of others, made hauocke of

himſelfe. Leſſer Croſſes haue occaſioned others ſelfe deſtruction, as the loſſe of friends, ſcandall of name, miſcarrying of ſome things, which they ouer-weeningly loued in life: as Terence that drowned himſelfe, becauſe ſome hundred and ſeauen Comedies, which he had turned out of Greeke into Latine, periſhed by Sea:Hor. in Epod
                              •
                           . ſo Hipponax the Poet made Bubilas the Painter hang himſelfe by his ierking Iambickes. In all which particulars, theſe deſperate ſalues that they vſed, were worſe then their ſores. Theſe were Heathens that knew not God, nor the ſoueraigne good, nor the true being or beatitude of man; the moſt of them they wanted illumination from the Sunne of Righteouſneſſe, and Sanctification from the Spirit of Grace; they were in the ſhadow of death both in life and death, and were vnder the power and Prince of darkneſſe,
                           Acts 26.18 who ruled ſo powerfully in them and ouer them, that oft times they haue made away themſelues for little or no cauſe, as haue alſo ſome in the rancke of Chriſtians, (as Celius and Crinitus write of one Laurence a learned Florentine, who threw himſelfe into a pit in the health and ſtrength of body: as alſo of one Peter Leonius an excellent Philoſopher, and a ſingular wiſe man, that did the like, no probable cauſe being knowne or ſuſpected in eyther:) Let vs feare the Fates and the vntimely fals of

ſuch Cedars whom God hath cut downe, with the Axe of death, put into their owne hands: let vs by faith in CHRIST, and repentance from dead workes, be reconciled to that God who by our prouoking ſinnes may iuſtly deale with vs as he hath done with them: in giuing vs ouer to Sathan and our ſelues. But aboue all things let vs feare to commit ſinnes, or liue in ſinnes againſt conſcience: for the rage of conſcience (the effect of witting, willing, vnconſcionable and cuſtomarie ſinnes) is the blatrant beaſt that kils ſo many in ſelfe-murthers: The ſpirit of a man may beare his infirmitie, but a wounded conſcience who can indure? ſaith hee that was once,Salomon. no doubt, touched in conſcience for the ſinnes with which his ſoule was ſoiled.
                     Laſtly, let vs take heede of Cain
                              •
                           
                         ſinne, deſpayre of mercy, leaſt it worke that effect in vs that it did in him and Iudas; both who offended GOD more in this ſinne, chiefely the laſt, in effuſing his owne bloud, then in ſhedding the bloud of Abel or of Chriſt himſelfe. Apply the promiſes to thy ſoule by faith, fons vincit ſitientem;Auguſtine. there is a fountaine of Grace, and a Well of the water of life,
                           Mat. 5.6. Mat. 11.28 alwayes open to the thirſty ſinner; which Fountaine is greater then the puddle of ſinne, and hath a ſtronger mundifying vertue, and abſterſiue power to cleanſe the ſoule, then Iordan to

purge and purifie Naamans Leprous body.
                     I might proſecute another vſe againſt thoſe who by a continuated cuſtome of ſinne are indirectly and effectiuely, though not intentionally (for euery man in ſinne, commits it,
                           Omnia appetunt bonum.
                           Immo malum ſub ſpecie boni.
                         
                        ſub ſpecie boni, vnder the ſhew of ſome deluding good, as our firſt Parents did, a truth which euen Philoſophers ſaw) but I ſay in reſpect of the effect, ſelfe-murtherers: for there is no ſinne wherein a man practically and actually liues, but as it is damnable to the ſoule, ſo it is preiudiciall and dangerous to the body, the death of both: and that if wee conſider it in his cauſes and effects, whether naturall or ſupernaturall. Naturall, inſtance in ſome: doth not fond luſt cauſe dry bones? doth it not conſume the moyſture? dry vp that radicall humour which is the nurſe and fountaine of life? doth it not inflame the bloud, cauſe burning Feauers? &c. To ſpeake no worſe, in bringing ſuch diſeaſes, that euen modeſtie ſuffers me not to name, as that French (or Neopolitan) diſeaſe, that Anthonies fire, vvhich burnes to the conſumption of the body and confuſion of the ſoule. Doth not Drunkenneſſe cauſe Dropſies? doth not ſtrong drinkes ouer-heate the bloud? For to whom is woe? to whom is ſorrow? to whom is ſtrife? to whom is murmuring? to whom are wounds? and to whom is the redneſſe of eyes? Euen to them that tarry

long at the Wine, to them that ſeeke mixt Wine, which Wine though it be pleaſant both in the colour and the taſte, yet at laſt it bites like a Serpent, and hurts like a Cockatrice, Pro. 23. v. 29.30.31.32. The like may be ſaid of all other intemperancies in meates: by the immoderate exceſſiue abuſe whereof many haue laid their ſtall-fed pampered carkaſſes vntimely in the duſt. Inſomuch that Phyſitians conſidering the innumerable diſeaſes that flow from that vncleane ſincke of Epicuriſme and gluttonizing, haue ſet it downe at an Axiome, Plures gula quam gladio: that the inſatiable belly hath ſlaine moe then the Blade.
                     What ſhould I ſpeake of Auarice and Couetouſneſſe, which waſtes and conſumes the ſpirits by a mad and eager purſuit after the world; euery croſſe and loſſe whereof goes to the hart of the wretched worldling like a dart or a dagger? Of Enuy, which frets the heart as the Moath the Garment, and eates into it, as the ruſt into the Iron? with the deſtroying and deadly effects of other ſuch ſinnes. I might be large in the cauſes ſupernaturall, in confirming that Diuinitie, which not onely Proteſtants commenting,Aret. in locum. Bernardin. de ſena, art. 3. cap. 4▪
                         but Papiſts alledging that place in the Apocalypſe, chap. 3. verſ. 3. If thou watch not I will come on thee as a theefe, &c. haue taught and affirmed, that GOD accuſtometh for the puniſhment of careleſſe and

negligent ſinners, to cut off time from them, and to ſhorten their liues, for their miſimploying and miſpending the ſame, in omitting all good duties, and committing outragious ſinnes: God taking from them that which they haue, or at leaſt ſeeme to haue 
                           Mat. 25.29. Tom. vlt. ſer. 13. 
                              •
                           .3. & 4. & Tom. vlt. ſer. 18. which is Time; a Iewell ſo precious, that as zealous Bernardine de ſena, oft acknowledgeth, if the traffique and marchandize of it might be carryed to hell to be ſold, for one onely halfe houre there would be giuen a thouſand worlds, if the damned had them. Hence it is, that wee ſee many murtherers, riotous perſons, malefactors, ſwearers, ſwaſh-bucklers, cut off by the Sword of the Magiſtrate, or of the enemie, in warre, or priuate quarrels, or by Gods ſword, the deuouring Plague, or ſuch meanes, euen in their youth and ſtrength, when by the courſe of Nature they might haue liued longer: according to the threat of the Pſalmiſt, that bloudy and deceitfull men ſhall not liue out halfe their dayes. Pſal. 55.23. And that Propheticall threat of Iob,
                        
                           Iob 15.32. that the ſinfull man ſhall die ere hee accompliſh his dayes, and that his hand ſhall be cut off like a Vine in the bud, euen when hee is young and tender in the blade, ere hee come to any ripeneſſe or maturitie. To which God himſelfe hath reference in the fift Commandement, which at it annexeth the promiſes of long life to children

that are obedient to their Parents, (how euer ſome are taken away ſoone, as was Ioſias, whoſe ſhort life on earth is rewarded with life eternall in heauen) ſo it intimates the curſe of abbreuiating and ſhortening the life of thoſe that are immorigerous and refractory to their Parents and Fathers, vvhether naturall, ciuill, ſpirituall, or heauenly: illuſtrated in that vvhether fiction or true Hiſtorie,Pomerium de Sanctis. Bernardin Seuenſis. vvhich the Papiſts relate of a young man in the Village of Catalunna, neare Valentia; who being diſobedient to his Parents, and withall a theefe, being deſeruedly hanged about the yeeres of eighteene, a prettie while after his death, hee hanging on the Gallowes, his beard beganne to ſprout, his browes vvaxed wrinckled, his hayres gray, like a man of nintie yeeres: at which all being aſtoniſhed, it was reuealed to the Biſhop of the place, how that ſame young man, after the courſe of Nature, might haue vndoubtedly liued nintie yeeres, and ſo ſhould haue done, but for his diſobedience and other ſinnes the LORD by a violent death cut off from his life, ſo many yeeres as are from eighteene to nintie. Whereupon Saint Ierome well obſerues,Hier. epiſtola 21. that as ſhortneſſe of life is a puniſhment and iudgement againſt ſinners, ſo from the beginning of the vvorld a ſinne hath increaſed in ſeuerall ages, God hath ſhortened the yeeres of

ſinners more and more. Which is plaine, if wee compare our dayes with former times.
                     Hence it is,Haimo, ſic Hector Pintus in Eſaiam 38. that (as Haimo and others note, if God had called Ezekias then vvhen hee threatned him, it had beene Sinnes deſert, not Natures courſe: and vvhen at his teares and prayers, fifteene yeeres were added to his dayes, then his ſinne vvas pardoned, and hee permitted to runne euen that vvhole naturall race which hee ſhould haue runne, if hee had not ſinned:Molle
                              •
                           us Wolphius in Pſal. 102 ver. 24. Vide Marlor. in expoſ. Eccl. in Pſalmos. for vvhich cauſe Dauid prayes that the Lord would not take him away in dimidio dierum, in the midſt of his dayes; that is, ſay Expoſitors, he prayes that according to his demerits God would not as an inflicted puniſhment, vnſeaſonably cut him off, as hee vſeth to doe and deale vvith profane men: but that hee would permit him to enioy and accompliſh the reſidue of his yeeres, vvhich in his determination hee had appointed hee ſhould liue, if hee had perſiſted obedient. All which may be a Spurre and motiue to ſtirre vp impenitent and vngratious wicked men to looke to themſelues, and to breake off their ſinnes by Repentance, l
                           •
                        aſt both from cauſes naturall and ſupernaturall, as the effect of their quelling and killing ſinnes, they be found Selfe-murtherers: being not onely actually euen whileſt they liue, dead in their ſoules, like the vvanton

widdowes Paul ſpeakes of;1 Tim. 5.6. and the Biſhop of Sardis:
                           Apoc. 3.1. but in proxima potentia, in the neareſt probabilitie of the death of their bodies, euen as hee that hath eaten poyſon is but a dead man though liuing, becauſe potentially dead: and as a condemned malefactor is dead, though liuing, becauſe Legally and Ciuilly dead: ſo, theſe are dead whileſt they liue, like condemned Traytors▪ ſtanding at the Kings mercy, when euer hee will take away their liues: the caſe ſtanding with them as with Adam and Eue after they had eaten the forbidden fruit. Feare and tremble yee wicked ones, leaſt God take away life from you, life naturall and eternall: as hee threatned to take away the Kingdome of God from the Iewes, Mat, 21.43. giuing the abuſed treaſure of your life to thoſe that know better how to eſtimate it, and vſe it to his glory, and to the working out of their owne ſaluation.
                  
                  
                     
                     His proper Appellation. In theſe words, Thy Seruant.
                     
                        NOW wee come to the fourth part in this Song, in Simeons Compellation, intitling himſelfe Gods Seruant, with a ſpeciall application in this Pronoune Thy:
                        In locum. 
                        Piſcator giues a note of the ſignificancie of the words in the Greeke, 
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        ; Sernum tuum: id eſt, Me: thy Seruant, by a Senechdoche: as the Virgin Mary vſeth the phraſe in the ſame Figure, Luke 1.48. by an elegancie of ſpeech proper to the Hebrewes; teſtifiing their reuerence to him to whom they ſpeake, as in the Hiſtory of Ioſephs Brethren wee heare them thus ſubmiſſiuely ſpeaking to Ioſeph; Thy Seruants came to buy food, Gen. 42.10. They might haue ſaid, We came, in briefe, but they expreſſe their reuerence. So for the ſame cauſe, Gehezi anſweres his Maſter Elizeus, 2 Kings 5.25. and the woman of Tekoa, Dauid in the ſame tearmes, 2 Sam. 14. when they might haue vſed the Pronoune I, or Me, they haue expreſſed their reuerent reſpect

to God or man, as alſo their humilitie; yea, and the account they made of the countenance and fauour of thoſe they ſpoke to, as here Simeon did. For, if he would haue giuen titles to himſelfe, hee might haue called himſelfe one of the Seniors and Elders of Iſraell, one of the Prophets,
                           Verſ. 30.31 32. here prophecying; or a Rabbi amongſt the Iewes; a Teacher and Explaner of the Law; a Doctor in the Schooles of Ieruſalem, being about the time, or ſucceeding Ieſus the Sonne of Sirack, that writ the Eccleſiaſticus,
                        Anno ante Chriſtum. 40.
                         or Ionathan the Chaldean, that turned the Hebrew Bible into the Chaldean tongue. Hee might haue ſpoken of the number and excellencie of his Schollers, ſuch as Gamaliel,
                        Simeon Hilleles c. de ſacra Script. p. 359. vnder whom Paul was inſtituted, that was his Sonne, or his Auditor, as Zanchie thinkes: with other ſuch priuiledges, in reſpect of his place, dignitie, age, profeſſion, eſtimation, but hee ſingles out, and ſequeſtrates this Epithite from the reſt, and appropriates it to himſelfe, Thy Seruant; counting it his chiefeſt dignitie to performe any dutie to his heauenly Maſter.
                     
                        Doctrine. The chiefe delight & deſire of a Chriſtian is to be Gods ſeruant.This ought to be our chiefeſt practiſe: euery Chriſtian ſhould be of Simeons minde, ſtriuing, ſtudying, indeauouring to deſerue, ioying, delighting, and reioycing in his conſcionable and conſtant deſires to ſerue God.
                     Firſt, wee haue not onely Simeons practiſe

here, but many preſidents,Reaſons and Motiues.
                        
                           Reaſon. 1 which haue preceded, and gone before vs in this particular, men of moſt eminent greatneſſe, excellent graces, ſhining gifts, high places, Gods of the earth, temporall Sauiours, inſtrumentall conuert
                           •
                        rs of the Chriſtian world; of the bloud Royall, allyed to CHRIST the Prince of Peace, Eſay 9.6. both by birth naturall and ſupernaturall, yet haue as deſiredly as deſeruedly paſſed by all other titles, in the exchange of this, to be accounted and called the Seruants of God. Thus Moſes, as by the Lord himſelfe, hee is dignified with the title of Gods Seruant, I
                              •
                           ſh. 1.2. yea, a faithfull Seruant in Gods houſe, by the Spirit of God, Heb. 3.2. So hee counted it greater glory to be a poore Shepheard, and keepe the Prince of Midians ſheepe, that ſo hee might in his ſolitary Soliloquies meet with God on Mount Horeb, Exod. 2. and ſerue God with his afflicted people in the Wilderneſſe, then to be called the Sonne of Pharaohs Daughter, and inioy the pl
                           •
                        aſures of ſinne for a ſeaſon in a Heatheniſh Court, Heb. 11. So Dauid that pious and potent Prince, the ſweet Singer of Iſraell, with greateſt alacritie carrols out this in his holy Hymnes; Lord, I am thy Seruant, I am thy Seruant, and the Sonne of thine Handmaid. So Paul, though an Hebrew of the Hebrewes, a Iew by Nation, a learned Phariſie

by education, an Apoſtle by Profeſſion, a piller of the Church by his Miniſteriall Function, yet with all theſe Nationall and Apoſtolicall Priuiledges, hee ioynes this as the chiefe, A Seruant of Ieſus Chriſt. Nay truely (that which the Antichriſtian Saul of Rome cals himſelfe hypocritically) a Seruant of the ſeruants of the Lord for Chriſts ſake,Seruus ſeruorium Domini. a Seruant to the Saints, to the Church, all things to all, to winne ſome. So holy Iude, the Brother of Iames, of Chriſts kindred according to the fleſh, prefixeth this as the beſt branch of his Pedigree, A Seruant of Ieſus Chriſt, Iude verſe 1. That which was the chiefe grace of Simeon, Moſes, Dauid, Paul, Iude, ought to be our glory, to ſerue him, who is Lord of Heauen and Earth.
                     
                        
                           Reaſon. 2 Secondly, God wonderouſly and worthily eſteemes of his Seruants, as appeares by thoſe honourable titles in the Scripture with vvhich he aduanceth them, for he doth not account them Seruants,1 Iohn 3. Mat. 12.49.50. but Friends; yea, Sonnes; yea, Heyres; yea, Chriſts Fellow-heyres, Rom. 8. his Brethren, his Siſters, his Father, his Mother, his Domeſtiques, and of his Houſhold; yea, Citizens with the Saints, and Burgeſſes of the Heauenly Ieruſalem, Epheſ. 2.19. yea, his Members, 1 Cor. 6.15. The Temples of the holy Ghoſt, verſ. 19. 2 Cor. 6.16. Spirituall men, 1 Cor. 2.15. New Creatures, 2 Cor. 5. Free-men, Iohn 8. Holy men, 2 Cor. 6. The

Lords annointed, 1 Iohn 3. True Iſraelites, Iohn 1. The Lords firſt borne, Heb. 12.23. Gods peculiar people, royall Prieſts, 1 Pet. 2.9. Elect of God, Col. 3.12. Veſſels of Mercy, Rom. 9. Children of the Marriage-Chamber, and ſuch as excell euen their neighbours, Mat. 9. yea, excellent ones, Pſal. 16.3. with ſuch other titles of eminencie, and dignitie, with which his Seruants are aduanced. Now, if it be a grace to be called the Sewer, the Chamberlaine, the Cup-bearer, &c. to an earthly Monarch, as Nehemiah was to Artaxerxes, then what luſter and excellencie is their in ſuch high and honourable places, which the attendants in Gods Courts doe daily inioy?
                     Thirdly, onely the Seruants of God are acceptable vnto God here, and ſhall haue a glorious reward hereafter. Heb. 12.28.
                     Fourthly, the Church and Children of God eſteeme and approue of ſuch as ſerue Chriſt truely and ſincerely, Rom. 14.18. as for others that are eyther ſtrangers from the Common-wealth of Iſraell, without the Church; or ſeruants to their owne luſts and ſinfull ends within the Church, that ſerue not the Lord in ſpirit and truth, they eſteeme them as debaſhed and vile men, vnworthy of the common ayre, vncleane Birds, vnſauory ſalt, the earths burthen, the Churches bane, Sathans Impes, Natures ſhame, Heauens exiles,

Hels Inheritance, and the Diuels due▪ in that caſe wherein they ſtand, till by the power of the Word and Spirit they be brought from darkeneſſe to light, and from the power of Sathan vnto God, from the ſeruice of vaine Idols, to the liuing God, Acts 26.18
                     
                        Vſe 1. Of Redargution.If we, according to our vſe, apply this by vſe, wee ſhall finde Miriades and Millions of ſuch as haue the faces of men, and the names of Chriſtians, and goe vnder the common rancke of Gods Seruants, as farre from Simeons deſires and delight in this poynt as the Diuell himſelfe, that neuer ſince they were borne of their Mothers, did eyther know, or will, or affect or practiſe, or thinke of the leaſt meaſure of the ſeruice of God. Examine their knowledge, and you ſhall finde them as ignorant how God is truely to be ſerued as the Getes and Sauromatanes, and thoſe Paganiſh people that neuer heard of God. Let thouſands that might be culled out, both in the Citie and Country, that are vnder the meanes, and that haue dexteritie of wit, ſtrength of intellectuall powers, ſoundneſſe of iudgement, in attaining, diſcerning, and iudging the things of this life, that belong to their Callings and Functions. Tell mee the difference betwixt a ciuill, morall, temporarie, generall Faith, and ſauing Faith, (without which God is not ſerued and pleaſed) with the markes, proprieties, and

effects of the ſame.Multitudes that liue vnder the meanes are ignorant how God ſhould be ſerued. Let them diſtinguiſh vnto mee betwixt that godly and that worldly, that Chriſtian and that carnall ſorrow mentioned 2 Cor. 7.10. Let them ſhew mee the true qualities and conditions of ſuch a prayer as preuailes with God, and fetcheth a bleſſing from the Throne of Grace: the Notes and Adiuncts of that Confeſſion of ſinnes to which Remiſſion is promiſed 1 Iohn 1.9. Pro. 28.13. Let them tell mee wherein the Euangelicall Repentance of the childe of God in his new birth, or after his fall, differs from the Legall Penitencie of Iudas, Eſau, and the Papiſts; with other ſuch like Miſteries and Principles of Diuinitie: the knowledge of which is a good meanes both for honouring of God, and ſauing of their owne ſoules: and I ſhall be very glad that my ſtrong iealouſie and vehement ſuſpition of their blockiſh ignorance, is deſiredly remoued. I know many like the naughty Seruant, know the will of their Maſter, that doe it not, Luke 12.47. like the Athenians that know how to doe well and will not: that know how to ſpeake well and to worke ill, like that carnall Cardinall that declaimed againſt whoredome, and practiſed ere hee ſlept, what hee inueighed againſt: ſuch, like the Armenian Dragons, haue hot mouthes, and cold hearts: yet an hundred times moe we haue in this our marueilous light, that doe no more know how

to beginne, proſecute, or finiſh any part of the ſeruice of God: then a new admitted Colledge-Student, a freſh-water Souldier, an vnexpert raw ſeruitor, a rude Prentiſe, know what belongs to their places, functions, profeſſions, to the cuſtomes and conditions of their place, the firſt houre of their admittance: a fearefull caſe for ſuch as haue had ſo good meanes, and haue profited nothing.
                     
                        2 Part of the Vſe.A ſecond branch of this reproſe extends to thoſe who want not onely the skill, but the will to ſerue and worſhip God, vnleſſe in a will-worſhip, ſuch as they themſelues conceit and imagine is ſufficient, though mixt vvith ſuch filthy dregs and dung-hill of Ignorance, profaneneſſe, ſuperſtition, formalitie and hypocriſie, as makes God lothe and abhorre their offerings. How many are there in the common folde of Chriſtianity amongſt vs, that in this maine dutie of hearing the Word, and the voyce of the great Shepheard, in the Miniſterie of vs the Vnder-ſhepheards? for one Sermon that they here lend their eares and hearts to, an hundred times to the voyces of ſtrangers, whether Seminaries and Ieſuites, the Popes Factors; or Stage-Players, the Diuels Preachers; or other ſuch Charmers, which infatuate and bewitch their ſoules, as the falſe Apoſtles did the Galathians, Gal. 3.1. I ſpeake not of the manner of their hearing, without

all preparation before, without all reuerent attention, ſubmiſſion, or faith in hearing, or meditation and examination of themſelues and their families after hearing, whereby the word is made vnprofitable to them; yea, the ſauour of death to death: But when doe they heare at all? or whom? where is their Dauids delight in the Law and Statutes of God? where is their longing after the Congregations and Aſſemblies of the Saints? after Bethell? where is their ſoules ſickeneſſe after the houſe of God? to come and worſhip in the holy Temple? there were ſuch men when Dauid, Ezekias, Ioſias, Anna, good Simeon, and the Primitiue Saints were liuing, whom Auguſtine called the Lords Antes, that euery day would haſt into the Lords Barne, to fetch corne, the bread of life, as the Iſraelites gathered Manna euery morning. But our age affords Drones, and Waſpes, and Graſhoppers in their ſtead: the neglect of Gods publike worſhip in the ſolitarie ſeates of many vnfrequented Churches, in the thronged fields, and tippling-houſes in many Pariſhes. In this our numerous people (wherein our Land like a full Bee-hiue, might caſt many ſwarmes) ſhewes that moſt haue leſſe will to ſerue God, then the Diuell, the world, or their bellies. But to leaue the Church-ſeruice, wherein man ſees thy defects and defaults better then thou thy ſelfe. Tell me vaine

men, in the truth of their ſoules (if there be any truth in you) what ſacrifices many of you, chiefely you the common and vulgar people haue offered vnto God in priuate? vvhere is the furrowes and wrinckles in thy face? thy bleared Leah-like eyes, that thy teares haue made, being occaſionedly diſtilled from the Limbecke of a ſorrowfull ſoule for thy ſinnes? where was thy laſt Bochim, place of weeping? thy laſt M
                              •
                           ſpez, where like a true Iſraelite thou didſt poure downe water before the Lord? When didſt thou take vp Dauids courſe, in waſhing thy Couch with teares, and thy bed with weeping? Where didſt thou mourne like Ezekias, 2 Kings 20.3. Alas thy dry eyes and ſtony heart, polluted ſoule and guiltie conſcience tels thee this part of Gods Seruice is yet omitted. Moreouer, where didſt thou volly out thy broken ſighes for thy Sodomitiſh and crying ſinnes? What times, morning, euening, day, or night? What place, what Chamber, Cloſet, Gallery, Garden, Groue, Wood, Field, can witneſſe thee, ſmiting vpon thy breaſt with Ephraim, Ier. 31.19. aſhamed of thy ſinnes, with the Princes and Iudges of Iſrael, like a Theefe taken in the manner, Ier. 2.26. caſting downe thine eyes, and knocking vpon thy breaſt with the penitent Publican, Luke 18.13. mourning like a Doue in the Deſart, and a Pellican in the Wilderneſſe, for

thy tranſgreſſions and enormities? this part of Gods ſeruice is pretermitted.
                           Pſal. 4. When didſt thou commune with thine owne heart in thy priuate Chamber, ſearching the ſecret ſinnes of thy ſoule, with the light of the word, finding out thy preſent corruptions, and recounting the by-paſt follies of thy youth, in the bitterneſſe of thy ſoule: confeſſing them vnto God with the repenting Prodigall▪ laying open the wounds, Leproſies, and ruptures of thy ſoule to Chriſt thy Pihſitian? I doubt this ſacrifice of a wounded ſoule, a broken hart, and a contrite ſpirit, is eyther not at all, or very courſorily performed: this ſeruice and ſacrifice pleaſeth God too well, Pſal. 51.17. for the Diuell to ſuffer it to paſſe without long delayes, many interruptions, and in too many, abſolute omiſſions. But laſtly, tell mee ſeriouſly, how oft haſt thou poured out thy ſoule before the Lord in Prayer for the pardon and remiſſion of ſinnes, for a new heart, a renued ſoule,
                           Pſal. 51.1. v. 12.13.14 Ier. 31.18. Mat 9.24▪
                         for conuerſion, and turning to God, for increaſe of Faith, for the holy Ghoſt, for the gifts of Grace, Wiſedome▪ Chaſtitie, and the like, as Dauid, the Apoſtles and Diſciples of Chriſt,
                           Luke 17. Pſal. 119·76.77. Luke 23.42 2 Cor 9. 1 Kings 3. 
                        Paul; and other of the Saints haue done? haſt thou done this? I aske thee not whether thou haſt oft babbled or not, like the Heathen and our ignorant Papiſts, in pattring ouer thy Lords Prayer, as they doe their Pater Noſters
                        
and their Auees, without Faith or feeling, without heart and affection, with that lip-labour that Chriſt condemned in the Gentiles,
                           Mat. 6.5. Eſay 29.13. and God in the Iewes? Neither doe I aske thee, if Parrat-like thou haſt ſaid ouer thy Creed, and thy tenne Commandements, ſometimes when thou didſt riſe and goe to bed; which are as far from being Prayers, as the Diuell is from truth, or as ignorance is from knowledge, that tels thee they are Prayers which are none. With theſe Heatheniſh and Idolatrous Seruices perhaps thou had lodened the Lord, as the Iewes once ouer-wearied him with the like vanities, Eſay 1.11.12.13. But I aske thee how oft thou haſt indeede prayed? how oft indeede with a Sacrifice of Prayer, kindled with zeale, inflamed with the fire of the ſpirit, heated with feruency, directed with knowledge, grounded on Faith in the Promiſes, proſecuted with Humilitie and Reuerence, attending with Conſtancie and Perſeuerance, accompanyed with Repentance for ſinne, and her hand-maides Contrition and Confeſſion? how oft I ſay with ſuch a qualified Prayer, haſt thou approached the Throne of Grace? put vp thy petitions to heauen? knocked at the gate of Grace, for graces to be giuen, ſinnes forgiuen? how oft with ſuch Incenſe haſt thou viſited the Lords Altar? Seauen times a day, with Dauid? nay, three times with Daniel?
                        
nay, once? nay none in many dayes, vvill thy heart tell thee, if it continue not ſtill hypocriticall, deceiuing thee as Sathan hath deceiued it? Well, and yet thou thinkeſt to be ſaued: But vpon what grounds? rotten God knowes. Indeede euery one that cals vpon the name of the Lord ſhall be ſaued: ſo ſaith the Prophet, ſo the Apoſtle, Ioel 2.32. but thou calleſt not on the name of the Lord, ſaith thy heart, at leaſt not as thou oughteſt to doe, which makes thy prayer an abhominable ſacrifice, therefore thou thus continuing ſhalt not be ſaued.
                     But let mee goe further with thee? Doſt thou pray in priuate? that's well: but doſt thou pray for, with, and amongſt thy family, in thine owne houſe, as did Abraham, Ioſhuah; and the faithfull in their dayes? here thou art mute: and thy heart giues the negatiue. It is apparent God is as frequently and as feruently ſerued in the Houſes, Tents, Tabernacles and Campes of many ſauage and Scythian Souldiers, as in thy houſe. Mahomet hath better ſeruice in moſt families of the Turkes, and the Diuell of the Virginians, then God hath in thy houſe.
                     For, Prayer is ſuch an excellent part of Gods worſhip, that it is oft vſed for the whole ſeruice of God, as Gen. 4.26. and elſe-where, being a dutie whereby as man is profited, ſo

wherewith God is wonderfully pleaſed, and his name glorified, Pſal. 50.15. euen in all his Attributes (both 1. in his Wiſedome, in acknowledging that hee is infinitely vviſe in knowing our wants: 2. in his Power, in that hee is able: 3. in his Mercy, in that he is willing: 4. in his Omnipotencie, and his Omnipreſence, that hee is alwayes ready and preſent to heare and helpe his Church and children: 5. as alſo in his Knowledge, in that wee confeſſe him by Prayer to be the ſ
                           •
                        archer of the hart, and the onely Intelligencer of the deſires of man:) Now where this principall part of Gods Seruice and Worſhip is omitted, or but ſlubbered ouer, (as Elies Sonnes did the Sacrifices) in publike or priuate, how can a iealous and a zealous God indure it? When thou omitteſt, neglecteſt, deſpiteſt, or deſpiſeſt this whole Seruice of God, how ſhall the Lord be pleaſed with thee? thou depriuing God of the principall part of his Glory, hee will fruſtrate thee of thy hoped glory: for, who euer are glorified of the Lord in heauen, muſt glorifie him in ſome meaſure on earth.
                     I might alſo examine in this Quere, how thou performeſt other parts of Gods ſeruice; namely, thoſe which are Euchariſticall and Gratulatory, in prayſing God for his bleſſings temporall and ſpirituall, as did Dauid in his Generation, with others, Pſal. 100. Pſal. 130.

A dutie though commanded by God, Pſal. 50.15. and as a part of his Seruice, ſo of his Glory, Pſal. 50.23. yet neglected as frequently as fouly, as it was of the nine cleanſed Lepers, Luke 17.17. and of Ezekias, 2 Chron. 22.25. vvhereby Gods vvrath is kindled againſt many a man, and his ſeede and poſteritie, as it was againſt Iudah and Ieruſalem. Secondly, they are both depriued of former bleſſings for their ingratitude, and Gods hand ſhut from pouring out any new mercies into the riuen diſhes of ſuch vnthankfull ſoules.
                     Many moe parts of Gods ſeruice omitted by an vngratious and vngratefull vvorld might be proſecuted: whereby it plainely appeares that there are great troupes and ſwarmes of profane and godleſſe men amongſt vs, that haue not God in all their thoughts, like the Hypocrites in Iob 27.10. that haue no delight in God, ſuch Atheiſts as Dauid deſcribes in the Pſalmiſt, Pſal. 14. Pſal. 53. and as Zephanie, Ieremie, Eſay, Ezekiel, and the reſt of the Prophets haue ſtill cryed out againſt, that neuer ſeeke vnto God, that neuer call vpon him: Nay, which thinke it vaine, and a thing neither behouefull for them, nor beneficiall to them, to call vpon God, as the curſed Iewes did in Malachie, 3. v. 14. Nay alas, which is more, as many carnall and careleſſe Ideots amongſt vs, diſcouer vvith their

lewd tongues, the thoughts of their poyſoned and peruerſe hearts, they thinke it concernes not them to ſerue God, to heare, reade, pray, conferre, meditate, and doe ſuch duties, (to which, 1. God, 2. their endangered ſoules, 3. their generall and ſpeciall callings, 4. their vſurped name of Chriſtians, 5. their vowes in Baptiſme, doe obliege, binde them, and inioyne them:) but that theſe things are proper and peculiar to Cleargie-men, Church-men, learned men, Schollers, Preachers, holyday-men, (as they vnholily call vs.) They are not booke-learned they ſay, (though they be hell-learned from a ſophiſticall Diuell, to diſpute againſt their owne ſaluation;) beſides they haue other things to doe,
                           Iohn 11. 
                        Marthaes part to play, to looke for the world, to prouide for wife and children: for ſuch is their Atheiſme and Infidelitie, they dare not truſt God for a ragge, or a cruſt of bread, without their owne ſinfull carke and worldly care, notwithſtanding all his promiſes, Mat. 6.33. of giuing them earthly things, if they ſeeke and ſerue him:How few ayme at Gods Seruice in all their waies & workes.) Hence it is, as their actions declare their affections, many thinke no otherwiſe of their Creation, but that they were borne and brought into the world, euen to ſeeke and ſerue the world and themſelues, not God: and ſo to goe to heauen in a ſtring (as it were) as ſtraight as a line when they are dead. Oh

how many Husbandmen thinke this the end of their liuing, to delue, and digge, and plow, and ſow, and reape, and eate, and drinke, and get his rents; and ſpend his pence in his Sunday-pots: to ſerue his Cattle, Horſe, Oxen, Kine, and Sheepe; himſelfe ſeruing God no more then the very Beaſts and Bullockes, amongſt whom hee conuerſeth? Theſe are alſo the thoughts, this the life of many a daily Labourer and Hireling: thus alſo many vnſanctified Tradeſmen, Merchants, Mercers, Haberdaſhers, Shooe-makers, Taylors, &c. and other Shop-keepers, onely propound gold and gaine, as the end of their labours and trauels vnder the Sunne: how to load themſelues with thicke clay; to beſtow their Sonnes and Daughters in great matches and high places; to giue great portions to their Children,Virtus poſt Nummo
                              •
                           . rather of goods then of grace, and to leaue their ſubſtance to their babes: and to theſe ends the ſeruice of God, euen vpon his owne Sabbath, muſt be ſubordinate, his worſhip muſt be diſpenſed with, in whole or in part, by themſelues and thoſe whom they haue in charge, Iournymen, Seruants, or Prentiſes. Thus alſo ſome irreligious Seruing-man conceits no other end of his liuing, mouing, or being, of his yeeres, ſtrength, and vigour, but to ſerue his Maſter at his Table or at his turnes; or his Horſe, or his Hawke, at his appointment;

beſides his miſſpent time and meanes in the proſecution of his owne ſeruile and ſlauiſh luſts: as for the Seruice of God, to which me thinkes hee hath as many leaſures and opportunities in his vacancies from any needfull morrall imployment, as any of the ſonnes of Adam: hee counts the thought of that ridiculous, the practiſe preciſeneſſe, not worthy his generous ſpirit: his time is wholy ſpent and miſſpent, either in ciuill attendance, according to his place,Mole agendo. nihil agendo, alit
                              •
                           r agendo. Seneca.
                         or in idleneſſe doing nothing, or in reading vaine Bookes, or ſeeing Playes, or friuolous diſcourſes of Horſes or Dogges, or worſe ſubiects; in which things the heart, it ſeemes, is moſt imployed in priuate, elſe could it neuer ſo frequently, by the tongue, vent out ſuch froath. In which remiſneſſe and neglect in and of Gods ſeruice, ioyn'd with that looſe prophanenes which accompanies moſt of their profeſſions, I thinke them much ſecured and hardened by the exemplary irreligious courſes and diſcourſes of their Maſters for the moſt part, whoſe ordinary both words and workes▪ in, and about, eyther the world or their pleaſures, and traded recreations (as their corrupt affections bend) vſually matched with a key-coldneſſe, neglect, if not contempt (at leaſt an indifferencie) in the publike and priuate worſhip of GOD, (ſeruing GOD no oftner nor no better, eyther in the Church

or their domeſticall Chappels, then will ſtand with ciuilitie) reades a preceptory and practicall lecture to all the Seruants; that they ſhould not be more forward and zealous in good duties then their Maſters, neyther to out-ſtrip them in Gods ſeruice if they meane to ſleepe in a warme skinne, and not to expoſe themſelues to the cenſure of more preciſe then wiſe, and to continue in their Maſters fauour.
                     So the mercenary hired Seruant, eyther for the Plough or Cart, or ſuch like, generally throughout the Land, what doth hee more thinke vpon (beſides ſinne and vanitie) then euen to doe his dayes taskes, like the hackney horſe, his eaſe and Prouender, his bed and his victuals being the very God that hee ſacrificeth vnto? Tell him of ought elſe to be done in Religion, you ſhall preuaile as much as Lot with his Sonnes-in-law, they thinke you ſcoffe. Hence it is that this clowniſh rout in moſt places, are ſo forgetfull of GOD, and blockiſh euen to admiration, that they neyther know, or vnderſtand, or can repeate the Petitions of the Lords Prayer, the tenne Commandements, or the Articles of their Creed, or can other-wayes prepare themſelues (as I know experimentally in too many Villages and Pariſhes) for the receiuing of the Lords Supper, which they vſually doe receiue

(as Iudas did the Diuell and the ſop together) then firſt by putting on their cleane cloathes about Eaſter time: ſecondly, asking their Maſters bleſſing: thirdly, muttering ouer ſuch imaginary Prayers as before I haue ſpoken of: fourthly, going to Church to receiue their Maker and that day to be Gods Seruants (as they ſa
                           •
                        ) and at afternoone to walke abroad in the fields, and drinke (ſometimes to drunkenneſſe) promiſcuouſly young men and women together, in the Ale-houſe, and then GOD is ſtoutly ſerued that day: in vvhich predicament and height of ſinne are their ignorant and profane Country-Maſters. Nay, ſuch a cruſt of Atheiſme & ſecuritie is growne vpon the hearts of moſt Seruants, that in moſt Families I haue ſeene of Husbandmen, Plowmen, Graſſe-men, yea, and of ſome Gentlemen to (in the North parts chiefely) I haue ſeldome obſerued God ſerued at the tables, eyther of Maſters or men, by ſaying Grace and Thankeſgiuing, when like Hogges and Dogges they haue ſerued themſelues with the vſurped Creatures.
                     This is the cold and crooked Seruice that our God gets of innumerable multitudes of Miſcreants, that are as vnmindefull of him, as they are vnmercifull to their owne Soules.
                     I ſpeake not of all, I know there are a remnant in Iſraell that forget not God nor bowe

to Baal: neyther doe I diſgrace or diſparage any of thoſe profeſſions for the ſinne of the perſons, no more then I blame the Calling of the Apoſtles for that Iudas was a traitor: yet I cannot but bewayle the great forgetfulneſſe of God, and neglect of his worſhip amongſt vs, in this our outward proſperitie, beautified with the marueilous and miraculous continuated light of the Goſpell. Thus did Iſraell as wee now, as appeares by the reiterated phraſes in the Pſalmiſt, and elſe-where, that in their proſperitie they forgat God. The Lord hath laboured to excite and waken vs as hee did them, by plague, peſtilence and other Iudgements from the Heauens and all the Elements, yet our heads are ſtill heauie, and our hearts are aſleepe. Let vs feare the rod of Aſhur, the inuaſion of forraine powers: let vs not prouoke him to procure out cryes, and o
                           •
                         ſeruice, by giuing vs ouer into the hands of Chaldeans and Aſſyrians. If euer Iſraell be carryed captiue (which God forbid) and be oppreſſed with a Spaniſh or a Romiſh yoake, we ſhall then wiſh that wee had drawne neare vnto God in the Sunnie day of peace, ere we had beene humbled like Manaſſes, Dauid, and Iſraell, by preſſures and afflictions.
                     A third part of this vſe extends it ſelfe to thoſe,3 Part of the Vſe. that running into a further degree of ſinne, and meaſure of iniquitie (as indeed ſinne

(like ill fame) ſtill growes greater in his progreſſe,Vires acquirit eundo. and ſwels more vaſt and poyſonous, like the Dragon that hath eaten the Serpent, after once one ſinne be retained) doe not onely in their owne particulars, and with thoſe that depend vpon them, neglect, reiect, and refuſe the ſeruice of God, though they weare the Liuery and Cognizance of their Maſter, being called Chriſtians, but they maligne, calumniate, and ſtorme at others that are more zealous and forward then themſelues, aemulating (as it is ſaid of the Grey-hound, that thinkes much that any thing ſhould out-runne him) that any ſhoud outſtrip them in the ſinceritie or meaſure of grace, or out-runne them in the courſe of Chriſtianitie, accounting with politique Gallio, Religion to be but Ceremonies and circumſtances, quirkes and quiddities, 
                           〈◊〉
                         the Lords true Nathaniels that ſerue him in truth, in whoſe ſpirit is no guile, Pſal. 31.2. to be but fooliſh and froathy fellowes, more preciſe then wiſe, Gods followers, Gods fooles, as Mich
                              •
                           l thought Dauid,
                        
                           
                              •
                            
                           Sam 6.20. nay, mad, diſtracted, rauing men, as the Iewes, Chriſts Kinſmen, and Feſtus eſteemed CHRIST, Ieremie and Paul: yea, Gods faithfull Seruants, as they haue alwayes beene, ſo ſtill are, as ſignes and wonders in Iſraell in this our blinded age: Eſay 8.18. Yea, monſters, euen to the great men of the world, as Dauid was, Pſal. 71.7.

Yea, a ſcorne, reproach, and diriſion to them that are round about them, Pſal. 79.4. accounted as men of an odde faſhion and carriage from all others, Wiſd. 2.15. nicknamed Preciſſians, ſingulariſts, humoriſts, factious, hypocriticall, and the like: which cenſures they vndergoe from naturall and carnall men, but chiefely from thoſe that haue in them ſome morrall goodneſſe (as Iulian himſelfe had) for our ciuill, honeſt men, and formall hypocrits,Tripart. hiſt. lib 6. 
                        Ciuill honeſt men moſt enemies to Gods Seruants. contenting themſelues with meere externall ſhowes and ſhadowes in the Seruice of GOD, without any ſinceritie of heart, or life of Religion, flattering and ſecuring themſelues in that dangerous and damnable eſtate wherein they feed their ſoules with a vaine & an ayrie hope, that they are as ſafe as the beſt, thinke whatſoeuer is more in Gods Seruants, then they finde in themſelues, to be preciſeneſſe, and affected ſingularitie, as needleſſe, as fruitleſſe in their friuolous conceits.
                     And hence ariſeth their Iſmaelitiſh ſcoffes, and tongue-perſecutions, againſt thoſe that are more aeminent and tranſcendent then themſelues in many graces, becauſe the conſcionable carriage and gratious deportment of the Seruants of God, doth ſwart, cenſure, and condemne their outwardneſſe and formalitie, at which they are as oft gauled and grieued, and fretted at the very hart, as they compare

their tinckling Cymbals with the others holineſſe.
                     
                        4 Part of this Vſe of Redargution.But leauing thoſe whited wals and painted Sepulchers, to his Iuſtice or Mercie, that ſees their rottenneſſe and guilded rubbiſh: there are another ſort of men, if I may call them men (forgetting what the very compoſure of their body, and the inſtinct of Nature tels them) which being void of all grace, and emptie of goodneſſe; neyther knowing, nor willing, nor working what is pleaſing and acceptable to the Almightie, deriding and deteſting good men, and diſliking good dutyes with the former ſort: as neither fearing God, nor caring for his worſhip, nor furthering his ſeruice, nor fauouring his ſeruants: caſting behinde their backes all thought of God, and their owne ſaluation: they ſerue themſelues and their owne end, their luſts, their darling ſinnes, and conſequently the Diuell, Gods and their mortall enemie. And of this ſort there are not ſo few, but they may brag (as the Spirits in the Goſpell) of their number, their name is Legion.
                        Many that liue amongſt Chriſtians are the deuils ſeruants. All places, profeſſions, trades, callings, conditions, eſtates, ſexes and ſorts, and ages, from youth to gray hayres, afford trained Souldiers in theſe ſinfull ſeruices, marching to hell vnder the conduct of the Prince of darkneſſe, the God of the world and worldlings, that rules in and ouer thoſe children

of diſobedience. Alas, how many be there of couetous Mammoniſts, churliſh Nabals, that as truely as Dauid and Simeon profeſſed and confeſſed to the Soueraigne Creator, Lord, I am thy Seruant; ſo they ſay to Mammon, to the Wedge of Gold, to their Siluer Shrine, their Mettall-Idoll, Lord, I am thy Seruant? How many Epicures, Drunkards, and riotous perſons, whoſe belly is their God,
                           Phil. 3.17 and their end damnation, ſay to the deuouring gulph of their vnſatiable guts, I am thy Seruant? How many luſtfull liuers and laſciuious louers, offering the ſacrifice of their vncleane bodies to bewitching women, ſay to Aſmodius, the vncleane Spirit, Lord, I am thy Seruant? How many proud aſpiring ſpirite in Court and Country, flying in their thoughts faſter then Pegaſus or Mercurie vpon the wings of high hopes, plumed with the feathers of their ſelfe-conceited worth, making greatneſſe, not goodnes, the marke of their mounting, may ſay to the high climbing Lucifer, Lord, I am thy Seruant?
                        The Iewes How many ſuch ſaying deſperately (with that Nation which once was called ſtubborne and crooked) Surely we will walke after our owne imaginations,
                        
                           Ier. 18.12 
                        and doe euery man after the ſtubbornneſſe of his owne wicked heart: Ier. 18.12. forſaking the Rocke of the field, and the Cedar of Lebanus for the curſed Thiſtle; the fountaine of waters for

broken pits, the liuing for the dead the great Iehouah for Belzebub, and the God of Eckron: the God of Abraham for the Gods of Nations; the ſeruice of God for the ſeruice of Sinne and Sathan; the Diuell may iuſtly claime and challenge them in death, plead and preuaile to haue them in Iudgement, ſince they haue by an explicite or implicite cou
                           •
                        nant (as it were) ſold themſelues like Ahab and Ieroboam, to worke wickedneſſe in their life time, as wittingly and willingly dedicating and conſecrating themſelues to his ſeruice, as did once deſperate Raffus
                        ▪ who (as is reported) vpon the two ſides of his Shield painted God and the Diuell,
                           
                              •
                           i tu nolis, iſte rogitat. with this Motto, If thou oh God, wilt none of mee, here it one will, offering himſelfe to him who was not a little glad of him, the vnkinde kinde D
                           •
                        uell, who retaines and giues Liueries to all commers; yea, and wages to, ſuch as himſelfe hath, the world in ſhew, but fire and brimſtone in ſubſtance. Eſa. 30.33.
                     
                        Vſe of Exhortation.Oh conſider this, you that forget both God and your ſelues, his ſeruice & your owne ſoules, you that make your members weapons of vnrighteouſneſſe to fight againſt God, wounding him with his owne weapons, the ſtrength of your bodies, and the powers of your ſoules, which you haue receiued from him: now at laſt offer vp your bodies a liuing ſacrifice,
                        
                           Rom. 12.1. 
                        holy and acceptable vnto God, which is your reaſonable

ſeruing of him, Rom. 12 1. Giue vp your members as weapons of righteouſnes vnto God, Rom. 6. verſ. 12.
                     Theſe eyes of yours that haue beene full of adultery, Iud
                              •
                           
                         7 2 Pet. 2.14. hautie and proud,Sinnes of the eyes. 
                        Pro. 6 17. mocking and ſcornefull, Pro. 30.7.How all the members that haue ſerued ſinne muſt and may ſerue God. wandering, Eſay 3.16. Now let them be Doues eyes chaſte eyes, like Dauids eyes, lowly and humble: Caſt away the abhomination of your eyes, Ezek. 20.7 Let them not regard vanitie: Iob 31.1 Shut them vp from ſeeing euill: Eſay 33.15 Make a couenant with them as Iob did: Let them not looke vpon a woman, but let them looke vp to the Holy One of Iſraell, euen as a Seruant lookes to his Maſter: Pſal. 123.2 Set no wicked thing before thine eyes, Pſal. 101.1. but ſet the Lord alwayes before thine eyes to doe the thing that is right, Pſal. 16.8.
                     That Tongue of thine which hath beene a principall ſeruitor of Sathans,Twelue Sinnes of the tongue being ſet on fire by Hell, Iames 3 6 the flame breaking out, by 1. lying, 2. ſwearing, 3. forſwearing, 4. filthy, 5. curſed, 6. guilefull ſpeaking, 7. vaine words, 8 idle babbling, 9. profane ieaſting. 10. corrupt communication, 11. ſlanders, 1
                           •
                        . reuilings; with ſuch other enormities in the whole courſe of thy life and conuerſation, to the diſhonour of God and the pollution of the good name and chaſtitie of

thy neighbour. Now let it forſake the old Maſters ſeruice, in theſe ſinnes: ſet a watch before thy mouth, and keepe the dore of thy lips, Pſal. 14.3. Lye not, Iames 4.11. Let thy lips ſpeake no guile, Pſal. 34.13. but ſpeake the truth to thy neighbour, Zach. 8.16. So thou ſhalt ſhew thy ſelfe a righteous man, Prou. 13.5. Sweare not, neyther by Heauen, nor by Earth, &c. Iames 5.15. but, Let thy communication be yea, yea; nay, nay; for what is more commeth of euill, Math. 5.17. Put away filthy ſpeeches, Col. 3.8. Neyther name fornication, nor filthineſſe, nor fooliſh talking, nor ieaſting, which are not comely, Epheſ. 5.3. But corrupt good manners, 1 Cor. 15.33. Now alſo Put away from thee a froward mouth, Pro. 4.24. and curſed ſpeaking, Col. 3.8. Auoid alſo idle and vaine words, for which thou muſt giue an account, Mat. 5. Be as flow to ſpeake as ſwift to heare, Iames 1.19. (ſince thou haſt two cares, but one tongue) for, in many words there cannot want ſinne, Prou. 10.19. Therefore auoid vaine repetitions and babblings, Mat. 6.7. In ſpeaking eyther to God or man, ſpeake no vaine words, Eſay 58.13. Thus keepe thy mouth hereafter brideled, that thou ſinne not with thy tongue, Pſal. 39.1. Neyther is it ſufficient that thou now purpoſe that thy mouth ſhall not offend in theſe and ſuch like ſinnes, Pſal. 17.3. But as thou haſt beene

tongue-tyed heretofore, and mute, in ſpeaking ought which was good, to Gods glory or thy neighbours good, now it is moſt conſonant to that end and office, which thou hadſt the vſe of ſpeech giuen thee, let thy tongue be a conſonant to ſerue God, to ſound out his prayſes continually. Pſal. 34. Sing to the Lord all thy life and prayſe him whilſt thou liueſt. Pſ. 104.33. Yea, if thou praiſe him before the morning-watch, as did that holy-hearted Dauid, Pſal. 119.147. yea, if at mid-night thou riſe to giue thankes vnto him, Pſal. 119.12. If ſeauen times a day thou prayſe him▪ 
                        v. 164. yea, if thy mouth daily rehearſe his righteouſneſſe and ſaluation, Pſal. 7.15. yea, if all the dayes of thy life thou prayſe thy God, Pſal. 146.2. and make his Statutes thy Songs in the houſe of thy pilgrimage, Pſal. 119.54. yea, not onely praiſing him, but praying to him earely in the morning, Pſal. 5.3. Iob 8.6. yea, at euening, and at morning, and at noone day: ſo oft as thou eateſt: thou doſt but t
                           •
                        at ſeruice for which thy tongue was created: it is Gods due and thy dutie: ſo let thy tongue alſo ſerue man, Gods-Image, in God and for God. Let thy words be good, and to the vſe of edifying, that they may miniſter grace to the hearers. Let thy ſpeech be alway gratious and pondered with Salt, Col. 4 6. Let thy tongue ſpread abroad knowledge, Pro. 15.7

that it may be as the well-ſpring of life: Pro
                              •
                           . 10.11. Vtter the words of grace: Eccleſ. 10.12. that thy lips may feede many. Prou. 10.21. If God haue inriched thee with knowledge, miniſter a word in ſeaſon to him that is weary, Eſay 50.4. confirming him that is ready to fall, and ſtrengthening the weake knees. Iob 44. So thy tongue ſhall glorifie God, thus imployed, Pſal. 50. be a teſtimonie of the ſinceritie of thy heart, Mat. 16. and it ſhall aſſwage the ſorrow of the afflicted. Iob 16.15.
                     
                        Sinnes of the eares.So for the other members of thy body, thy Eares, if thou haſt not ſerued thy God in and by them, now beginne: haſt thou ſerued Sathan with them, eyther in hearing what thou ſhouldeſt not haue heard, profane Enterludes and Stage-playes, filthy Songs, ſcurrulous talke, whereby thou haſt opened thoſe two dores to let in ſinne into thy ſoule? or haſt thou refuſed to heare what thou ſhouldeſt haue heard? haſt thou turned away thine eare from hearing the Law? Prou 28. Haſt thou had heauy and vncircumciſed eares, Ier. 6.10. Pſal. 40.8. Haſt thou beene an Idoll with eares and heard not, Ezek. 13.2. A deafe Adder ſtopping thine eares at the voyce of the Charmer, Pſal. 58.4. now ſerue God with that little part of thy body: now ſtop thine eares at the hearing of ſinne, Eſay 33.15. and open them to heare what the Spirit ſaith, Rex. 2. Cauſe

thine eare to heare wiſedome, Prou. 2.2. Giue eare to vnderſtanding, Prou. 14. Heare counſell, and receiue inſtruction, that thou maiſt be wiſe now in the latter end, Prou. 19.20. Be wiſe, and hearken to the corrections of life, Prou. 15.3. Heare the Word of God: Sit at Chriſts feete with Mary, Luke 10.39. Heare with heede taking, Luke 8.18. Heare with an honeſt heart, verſ. 15. Heare and forget not. Iames 1.24. Heare and practiſe, verſ. 22. ſo thou ſhalt ſerue God with thy hearing.
                     Moreouer, for thine Hands:Sinnes of the hands. if with them thou haſt not ſerued God, working vvicked works to prouoke the eye of the Lords glory, Eſay 3.8. eyther in committing euill, 1. ſtealing from thy neighbour, 2. taking Bribes in thy place, 3. Idleneſſe in thy calling, or in omitting good duties, firſt, eyther of Pietie to God, in ſtretching out thy hands in Prayer: ſecondly, or of charitie to man, in cloſing them towards the poore. Now keepe thy hands from doing euill, and conſecrate them vnto the Lord in doing good, ſo thou ſhalt be bleſſed, Eſay 56.2. Exod. 32.29. If iniquitie be in thine hand, put it farre away, Iob 11.14. If thou haſt ſtolne, ſteale no more, but worke with thine owne hands, Epheſ. 4.28. Keepe them innocent and pure, Pſal. 24.41. Shake thine hands from taking any gifts, Eſay 33.15. Let no blot or ſtain cleaue vnto them, I
                              •
                           b 31.7

Strengthen them to doe good workes, Nehem. 2.18, Open thy hand to thy brother, to the poore, to the needy, Deut. 15.11. Stretch thy hand out, of the increaſe that God giues thee, Prou. 31. And ſtretch out thy hands alſo to the Lord. Pſal. 143. yea, in euery place lift vp thy heart with the hand to God in heauen, 1 Tim. 2. Lament. 3.4. So ſhall thy hands ſerue God.
                     
                        Sinnes of the feete.For thy Feete: if they haue declined and made haſte to deceit, Iob 23.11. if they carryed thee with lewd company out of the way of Gods Commandements, to vanities or to vices, to filthineſſe or to follies, to Playes or to Brothell-houſes: now remoue thy foote from euill, Prou. 4.26. Make ſtraight ſteps to thy feete, Heb. 12. Refraine thy feete from the pathes of the wicked, Prou. 1.15. And keepe the way of the righteous, Prou. 2.20. So ſhalt thou ſerue God and keepe thy ſoule. Prou. 16.17. Walke not in vanities, Iob 31.5. nor in the counſell of the wicked. Pſal. 1.1. but run the wayes of Gods Commandements. Imploy them to carry thee to the houſe of God, to the holy Exerciſes of Religion, where God is ſerued: Delight to ſtand in the gates of Ieruſalem, Pſal. 122.2. looking narrowly to thy foote when thou entereſt into the houſe of God, Eccleſ. 4.17. Thus did thoſe two good Anna's in Samuel and Luke, a mother and a

widdow: as alſo good Dauid, and here old Simeon, rightly and religiouſly vſe their feete in Gods ſeruice, in viſiting ſo frequently, ſo conſtantly, ſo zealouſly the houſe of Prayer, where they met with God, with Chriſt, and with a bleſſing vpon their ſeeking and ſeruing God. And ſo muſt thou, if thou ſet thy ſelfe with thy heart and ſoule, and ſtrength, and ſpirit, and minde, and body, to ſerue the Lord as they did, conſecrating theſe and the reſt of thy members, parts and powers, externall and internall, to Gods ſeruice, which that thou maiſt more willingly performe, let theſe Motiues for concluſion of this Vſe, adde Spurres vnto thee to runne along with old Simeon to the ſeruice of this beſt Maſter, to whom I recommend thee.
                     Firſt, thou waſt created for Gods ſeruice:
                           Motiues perſwading to Gods ſeruice.
                           1. From the end of our creation.
                         as the Apoſtle inſtanceth in one ſinne, ſo I may in all: the body was not made for fornication, nor vncleanneſſe, nor adultery, nor drunkenneſſe, nor for any other workes of the fleſh, which are recited Gal. 5.19. but for the Lord, 1 Cor. 6.23. and the Lord for the body. Therefore Dauid makes this an argument, that wee ſhould fall downe and worſhip the Lord, becauſe wee are the Sheepe of his paſture, and the worke of his hands, hee hath made vs, not we our ſelues. Doth any man keepe ſheepe but hee will eate of the milke of the flocke,

and be cloathed with the wooll? Doth any man build a Palace, a Caſtle, or a ſumptuous houſe for his enemie to dwell in? Did the Lord thinkeſt thou oh vaine man, that ſerueſt thy luſts, thy pleaſures, the World, the Diuell, forme and frame this excellent Fabricke and compoſure of thy body, more ſumptuous, artificiall, magnificent, then the Aegyptian Pyramides, then Salomons Temple, then all ſplendent and glorious buildings vnder the Sunne, that are made of Lime, Stone, Lead, Wood; Glaſſe, Mettals, and the like, and did infuſe (as it were inward proportionable furniture) ſuch an vnderſtanding ſpirit, an immortall ſoule, into this externall ſtructure and building of the body, for the Diuell his mortall enemie to dwell in? to take poſſeſſion and keepe habitation by his eldeſt Sonne, Sinne? Will any earthly Monarch ſuffer a Traitor, a Tyrant, an Vſurper, to intrude vpon his Territories, to dwell in his fortified Cities, to poſſeſſe his Crowne, and vſurpe his Throne? I trow not. And will the King of Kings ſuffer it? Can a meane man indure another man, which means to abuſe him, to inioy his Table, his Bed, his Wife? chiefely that ſhee to whom hee is betroathed and wedded, ſhould proſtitute her ſelfe to his enemie? And will the Lord that is as a zealous, ſo a iealous God, ſuffer thy ſpirituall whoredomes, and fornications, with the

triple enemies of thy ſoule, the deceiuing Fleſh, deluding World, and deſtroying Diuell? Will he endure his Sanctuary to be polluted; his Temple abuſed, the holy Veſſels profaned? Thy body is the Temple of the holy Ghoſt,2 Cor. 3.16, Ch. 6. v. 19. 2 Cor. 6.16. thy members called Veſſels: now if thou ſuffer this great Temple-ſpoyler, this Dioniſius, the Diuell, to abuſe thy veſſels, by offering them to him by vncleanneſſe, to pollute this Temple, this body of thine by ſinne: he that thus deſtroyes the Temple of God, him will God deſtroy as hee threatneth ſeuerally twiſe together. Take heede therefore that thou ſuffer not any ſinnes to take vp the beſt roomes in this earthly Tabernacle and Temple, leaſt by hardening thy heart, corrupting thy conſcience, deprauing thy will, blinding thy minde, ecclipſing thy reaſon, dulling thy memory, diſordering thy affections, ſpoyling and defiling thy whole man, giuing ouer that body of thine which God made for himſelfe, to be ſinnes Brothell-houſe, and the Diuels Play-houſe, wherein all ſinnes are acted, leaſt the Lord burne thee downe ſticke and ſlower, eyther with fire from heauen, as hee did Sodome, or with fire in hell, as hee did Diues. Prepare thy body and ſoule therefore betimes: dreſſe it, and ſweepe and garniſh it, as a Chamber for Chriſt to keepe his Paſſe-ouer in, that the deſtroying Angell may

paſſe ouer thee, vvhen hee comes in Iudgement.
                     
                        Or homini ſublime dedit, &c.I might adde ſecondly, how fitly by Creation thou art made in euery part, as an Organ and Inſtrument to Gods ſeruice: with a body vpwards to heauen (whereas all other Creatures looke low and groueling vpon the earth) with eyes to looke vp to the Hils, and to the heauens, from whence commeth thy helpe;Et refert quaelibet herba Deum. and downe vpon the fragrant and verdant earth, fit to behold how euery creature Celeſtiall and Sublunarie, in their kinde, as it were in a dumbe Oratorie, tels thee there is a God, and a God to be ſerued: beginning and continuing the Quire vnto thee, to ſing and ring forth his prayſes; thy tongue fitted to ſpeake Magnalia Dei, the wonderfull workes of God: and to confeſſe to Gods glory, as Ioſhuah tels Achan, Ioſh. 7. thoſe numerous and haynous ſinnes of thine wherewith thou haſt offended God, more then all the vnreaſonable creatures: how euer the ill Angell eyther ſtrikes thee dumbe (as the good did Zachary) or if thou ſpeakeſt, Sathan oyles the Clocke of thy tongue to ſtrike after his ſetting, and moue after his motion. Thy head abounding with moiſture more then the heads of many Birds, and Beaſts, ready to diſtill into thine eyes, that thou mighteſt weepe for thy ſinnes more then the reſt, as hauing

moe and more monſtrous ſinnes to weepe for, then all the reſt of the other Creatures: and ſo I might ſpeake of all other parts of thy body, and faculties of thy ſoule, ſuperiour and inferiour, as Will, Reaſon, Memory, Vnderſtanding, Phantaſie, the Heart, with the Affections thereof, all fitted for Gods Seruice in the ſame ſymetrie and proportion.
                     From conſidering thy Creation,2. Motiue from out Preſeruation. thinke of Gods great largeſſe and bountie towards thee, in thy Preſeruation: GOD hauing fed, foſtered, educated, nouriſhed, cloathed thee, from thy firſt forming in the wombe, till this preſent minute and moment of time, wherein thou liueſt a rebellious ſinner againſt thy God: of protecting thee euen in thy Infancie, Childe-hood, Youth; in the weakeneſſe of the firſt, forwardneſſe of the ſecond, and raſhneſſe of the third: from many eminent dangers, to which thou waſt ſubiect; and reſeruing thee vntill this preſent houre, in health and ſtrength, from the fury and force of the Elements, Fire and Water, &c. From the might of the Creatures; the claw of the Lion, paw of the Beare, horne of the Bullocke, tuske of the Bore, tooth of the Dogge, venome of the Viper, ſting of the Serpent; all which thy ſinnes haue armed againſt thee, diſarming thy ſelfe: as alſo from the malice of the Diuell, and his ſubſtitute infernall Spirits, who (without

Gods reſtraint) would haue torne thee in pieces and carryed thy ſoule (as they will doe the ſinners in Judgement) in triumph to hell. Now doe not all theſe conſtant and continuated mercies of thy Protection, Preſeruation, Reſeruation, ſo long, ſo louing, ſo large, with the addition and multiplication of ſo many and manifold vndeſerued poſitiue bleſſings? Doe not all theſe (I ſay) call for, vrge, require, plead for, yea, preuaile for thy heart, thy obedience, thy ſeruice, to ſuch, ſo good, ſo great a Maiſter? Sure, if thou giueſt it not him now, franckly, freely, willingly, heartily, deſiringly, thou art a monſter of men, without grace or good nature: but eſpecially if thou payeſt the Lord euill for good, ſinnes for fauours, and ſerueſt Sathan for him, thou art an vngratefull Viper, and condemned of the very Heathens. Neyther will God be ſo abuſed. Make it thine owne caſe: thou takeſt a deſolate Infant (as Pharaohs Daughter did Moſes) and bringeſt him vp; or thou entertaineſt a Seruant, giueſt him meate, drinke and cloath, wages, countenance, houſe and harbour, &c. wouldeſt thou take it well, if this thy adopted foſtered childe, this thy ſo much fauoured Seruant, ſhould reiect thee (thou ſtill out of thy loue continuing his meanes and maintenance) and ſerue thy mortall enemie? Now make Application: thus thou dealeſt with

God, in ſeruing (notwithſtanding all his fauours to thee, temporall and ſpirituall) him who is the profeſſed enemy of God, of Chriſt, of the Goſpell, of the Church, of man, of thee, and of thy ſaluation, the Diuell.
                     Thirdly, conſider thy Vocation,3. Motiue, from our Vocation. thou art called from darkneſſe to light: The grace of God hath appeared vnto thee, teaching to deny vngodlineſſe and worldly luſts, and to liue ſoberly, righteouſly, and godlily in this preſent world. Tit. 2.11. Therefore, as an obedient Childe to thy Father, as a dutifull Seruant to thy Maſter▪ 
                        faſhion not thy ſelfe to the former luſts of thine ignorance, but as he that hath called thee is holy, be thou holy in all manner of conuerſation
                        ▪ 1 Pet. 1.14. The night is paſt and the day is come, caſt away therefore the workes of darknes, and put on the armour of light: Walke honeſtly as in the day, not in chambering and wantonneſſe, not in gluttony or drunkenneſſe, not in ſtrife and enuy, but putting off theſe (as a man puts off an old garment when hee puts on a new) put on the Lord Ieſus Chriſt, and take no thought for the fleſh, to fulfill the luſts thereof, Rom. 13.12. I pray you let vs ponder, that what arguments the inſpired Apoſtle Paul vſeth to the Romanes, Philippians, Theſſalonians, Epheſians, to incite them to the ſincere ſeruice of GOD, the ſame may be vrged and preſſed vpon vs in this Land; yea, vpon all the Chriſtians in

Europe, or elſe-where: for as wee now are paralell with them in the knowledge of God and of Chriſt, by the preaching and reuelation of the Goſpell of Chriſt, ſo wee were once nuzled, and blinded with them, in the ſame cloud and miſt of ignorance and vnbeleefe, ſinners, of the Gentiles, without God in Chriſt. And therfore ſince God hath called vs (whether by the Miniſterie of Paul, or of Ioſeph of Aramathea, or of Simon Zelotes, or who elſe, it skils not) to the knowledge of his truth, and to his ſeruice, by the voyce and ſound of the Goſpell, let our conuerſation be ſuch as becommeth the Goſpell, Phil. 1.27. God might haue placed thee oh ſinfull ſecure man, amongſt the Iewes, Turkes, or Pagans, or thou mightſt haue continued with thy fore-fathers, wrapped and enueloped in the Aegyptian darkneſſe of Popery, where the light of his Truth ſhould haue beene hid from thee: but now that his wayes are reuealed to Iacob, and his ſaluation to Iſraell; ſince thou haſt heard his Word, if thou wilt not fall downe and worſhip him, and worke his will, CHRIST the obiect of the Goſpell, as a ſtone which thou ſtumbleſt at, and a rocke of offence, ſhall fall vpon thee, and daſh thee to pieces: better thou hadſt neuer heard of Chriſt, then now vvith Herod to mocke him, when with the Childe-murthering Herod thou pretending to worſhip

and ſerue him, thou doſt but ſerue thy ſelfe and thine owne ends, by all lewd courſes, ſinfull and ſiniſter meanes whatſoeuer.
                     Fourthly,4. From our Redemption. this is the end of thy Redemption from the ſlauery and bondage of thy ſpirituall enemies, from the power of darkneſſe, of Sinne, and ſinnes puniſhment, the ſecond death, euen to ſerue God: ſo runne all the ſtreames of the waters of the Well of life: ſo Zachary propheſieth: Luke 1.74.75. ſo Paul perſwades the Corinthians, that being bought with a price, they ſhould glorifie God in their bodies and their ſpirits which were Gods. So Peter preſſeth the ſame vpon the diſperſed Iewes, commenting, as it were, vpon, and inlarging Pauls price that was paid for mans redemption, ſhewing firſt negatiuely what it was not; not any of theſe corruptible things, as gold and ſiluer, the earths redundance; not pearles & precious ſtones, the treaſures of the Land and Sea, the Indians ſtore, and the Fiſhes hidden vertues, &c. then affirmatiuely, it was a bloudy bootie that bought vs, and not euery kinde of bloud; not the bloud of Goates or Bullockes, of Men or of Angels, but the precious bloud of Chriſt, as of a Lambe vndefiled and without ſpot: and the end of all this great Miſterie, greater Mercy, in redeeming man from his greateſt miſery, what other was it, as alſo of our Vocation? Sure nothing elſe,

but 1. holineſſe, 2. and the feare of God (which is the ground of his ſeruice) 3. and renounciation of a vaine conuerſation, as appeares by the Contexts, 1 Pet. 1.14.15.16.17.18. So is Titus, a patterne of a good Preacher, taught to preſſe and preach this point; that the end why Chriſt gaue himſelfe for his Church, redeeming vs from all iniquitie, vvas that wee ſhould be a peculiar people vnto him, zealous of good workes, Tit. 1.2.14. with infinite the like places, plainely demonſtrating that as redemption by Chriſt is not generall and vniuerſall; (for then Iudas, Herod, Pilate, Eſau, and others, ſonnes of perdition, ordayned to condemnation, ſhould haue beene redeemed) but limited, proper and peculiar to his Elect, to his Church, to his People. Such as are his Sheepe heare his voyce, obey, and ſerue him; ſo thoſe that continue ſtill in their ſinnes, frozen in their dregges, incredulous and vnbeleeuing, impious in their liuing, impure in their conuerſing, giuen ouer to ſtrange luſts and vile affections, making their belly their God, and the like, are ſo farre from hauing any benefit by Chriſt, that hee is vnto them a rocke of ruine, a ſtumbling-blocke, and a ſtone of offence, the falling of many in Iſraell, like the word and Sacraments, and all things elſe, vnto the wicked contemners of his worſhip, and condemners of his ſeruants; the ſauor

of death vnto death: they accounted enemies to his Croſſe, ſuch enemies as hee will ſlay, as hee hath threatened, their end being condemnation.
                     Fiftly, out Profeſſion, me thinkes,5. From our profeſſion. ſhould be a maine inducement to our practiſe in this point: for ſo reaſons both the Prophet and Apoſtle if we account God our Father, as we doe, Mal. 1.6. Luke 11. then where is his honor? if our Maſter, then where is his ſeruice? And ſure if we call him Father which without reſpect of perſons iudgeth euery man, then let vs paſſe the time of our dwelling here in feare: otherwiſe wee borrowing the ſame vizards vvhich the Phariſies long ſince caſt off with their liues, wee ſhould be branded with the ſame note of painted Sepulchers and whited wals, and adiudged to the ſame woes and Anathemaes that they were, being in the ſame predicament of groſſe and formall hypocriſie.
                     Sixtly, the Good procured,6. From the reward of Gods ſeruice. and Reward promiſed, the Wages expected, ſhould not a little wooe vs and winne vs to this ſeruice: for, all would retaine to ſuch Maſters who are moſt able and willing to worke their welfare; where they may haue the beſt preſent helps, and future hopes of preferment and promotion. Now, who is able to promote, if God doe not? 1. Wealth, 2. Worſhip, 3. Honour, 4. Peace, 5. Protection in danger, 6. Approbation,

7. Acceptation, 8. outward Bleſſings, 9. reward of Inheritance, 10. Curſes remoued, Plagues eſcaped, all theſe are the Pediſſeques, the hand-maides, and Attendants, and Seruants, that attend and waite vpon, and ſerue thoſe that ſerue the Lord, as may be inſtanced and inlarged in their particulars.
                     
                        Firſt reward, vvealth and riches.For Riches, Wealth, and outward bleſſings, as they are promiſed, ſo they were giuen and exhibited vnto Abraham, Iſaack, Iacob, Iob, Dauid, Salomon, &c. with infinite others, as an incouragement to the Seruice of GOD, as the fruits of their Faith, as the reward of Religion: Godlineſſe is great gaine, and hath the promiſes both of this life and of the life to come, and who conſent and obey muſt eate the good things of the Land. That this Poſition is no Paradoxe, that Grace is the way to gaine, and Pietie the meanes to proſperitie, as is Pſal. 1. ſo let any (to ſtand vpon no moe places) read Exod. 23.25. and hee will confeſſe that this is as true, as God himſelfe is true. If any man be troubled with that ſcruple which perplexed Iob, Ieremy and Dauid, in their time, that the ſlaues of Sathan are in outward peace and pompe, and ſeeming-proſperitie, when Gods Seruants are in the ebbe, and going downe the winde, the ſame Scriptures ſalue and ſatisfie the ſore of this Obiection, where it was firſt

made, to which place I referre you, Pſal. 73. and Iob 21.
                     The ſecond meede and reward of Gods ſeruants, is Honour,Secondly, Honour· that continuing as inuiolable, is the Decrees of the Meedes and Perſians, which God auoucheth to Samuel of reiected Saul, Thoſe that honour mee I will honour them, 1 Sam. 2.30. Them whoſoeuer, whatſoeuer, whereſoeuer they be,Quoſcun
                              
                                 
                              
                              que
                            qualeſcun
                              
                                 
                              
                              que
                            vbicun
                              
                                 
                              
                              que
                           
                         Kings and Keſars, poore and peſants, that performe homage and fealtie vnto God, holding their ſoules, their lands, and their liues in Capite from God, thoſe the mightie Iehouah, who onely can ſet vp and pull downe, aduance and deiect, will honour, they ſhall be gracious in his eyes, dreaded of their enemies, as was Ioſhuah and Dauid; and honoured of all thoſe that are round about them.
                     This is Gods Law of Paritie,Lex Talionis. ratified in the high Court of Parliament in Heauen, and put in execution in earth, 1. Abraham, Gods friend, 2. Ioſeph, 3. Moſes, 4. Samuel, deuoted to Gods Seruice, proued the truth of this Promiſe, the firſt honoured in the preſence of his friends, of his neighbours, of his enemies, Gen. 18.18. & Ch. 20.3.23.6. The ſecond found ſtore of Honour where euer he came: in his Maſters houſe, in the Priſon, in the Palace, Gen. 39. & 40. & 41. The third honoured by working Miracles for deliuerance

of Gods people, for confuſion of Gods and his enemies, Exod. 14. Ch. 16.32. The fourth increaſed in honour as in yeeres, growing in fauour with God and man.
                     Infinite ſuch examples might be recited, the time would be too ſhort to ſhew how Gedion, Baarack, Iob, Dauid, &c. the faithfull Seruants of God, were exalted from the Threſhing-floore, Iudg. 6.11. Iudg. 4.6. From the Sheepe-fold; yea, from the Dung-hill, Iob 42.12. to ſit with Princes, yea, to be Princes of the people, Pſal. 78.70. Pſal. 113. verſ. 7.8.
                     
                        Sin brings ſhame and other iudgements.So that if it be ſo that all affect honour and eminencie, me thinkes, wee ſhould take the right courſe to effect what we affect, euen by ſeruing God. Not to ſeeke it, as Mary ſought Chriſt, where it is not, prepoſterouſly and carnally: eyther of the world, as the ambitious Iewes did, Iohn 5.44. nor from the vaine breaths of men, as the hypocriticall Phariſies did, Iohn 12.43. Much leſſe at the hands of the Diuell, as Balaam did. Num. 22. by Diuelliſh courſes, and ſinfull impieties, and horrid villanies,Nimrodians Nabuchadnezzar. Eroſtratus. as thoſe that built Babels Tower, and hee that built Babell, and he that burnt Dianaes Temple, did. Geneſ. 11.3. By Rebellions and Treaſons, as Abſolon did,Rebellions and Treaſons. 2 Sam. 18.18. as the Papiſts by King killings, and Powder-plots: as our drunkards

by their vnreaſonable quaſſing, by quarrelling, fighting and ſtabbing; as our vaine and vicious Gallants in their falſly ſuppoſed manhoods: nor by any other horrid ſinne whatſoeuer; for the way of ſinne is the way to ſhame and diſhonour.
                     For, as wicked and vngodly men ſeruing the Diuell, whoſe Children they are, Ioh. 8.44. by ſeruing ſinne, I Iohn 3.8. ſuffering it to raigne in their mortall bodies, Rom. 6 12. are called and accounted the enemies and haters of God, Rom. 1.30. Rom. 8.7. vnruly and vntamed Heffers, H
                              •
                           ſ. 4.16. Spurners againſt God, Deut. 32.15. A rebellious and a falſe ſeede, Eſay 57.3.4. Conſpirators, and ſuch as ſtretch their hands out againſt God, as Iob and Ieremie call them, Ier. 11.9. Iob 15.25. Diſpiſers of the Spirit of Grace, Heb. 10.29. Stout againſt God in their words, Mal. 3.13. Contemners of his wayes, Iob 21.14. Setting their mouthes againſt heauen, Pſal. 73.9. Diſpiſing both the Word of God, vvith the Iewes, 2 Chron. 24.19. Pſal. 50.17. and the Workes of God, as did the Gentiles, Rom. 1.21.22. And the Miniſters of God, as the Elders of Iſraell, and the People, did Moſes and Samuel, Exod. 16.8. 1 Sam. 8.7. And the Iewes, CHRIST and his Diſciples:1 Kings 20.28. Dan. 3.15. 2 Kings 19. but euen the perſon of GOD himſelfe as did the Aramites, Nabuchadnezzar, Senacherib, Rabſekah,
                        
and others: ſo the Lord hath threatned to deſpiſe ſuch deſpiſers, 1 Sam. 2.30. to deride ſuch deriders, and to lay their honors in the duſt, Pſal. 2.4. Curſed are they of the Lord, like the inhabitants of Meros, Iudg. 5.23. euen with all the curſes pronounced from Mount Eball, Deut. 27. Becauſe they ſerue not the Lord, the Lord accounts baſely and vilely of them, euen as of Oxen and Aſſes, Dogs and Swine, Eſay 1.3. 2 Pet. 2.22. As droſſe and dung, and vnſauory Salt, fit to be caſt away: yea, though Coniah, the Sonne of Ieho
                              •
                           akim, were as the ſignet vpon the Lords right hand, yet if hee deſpiſe the Lord, hee ſhall be pluckt thence, accounted as a deſpiſed and broken Idoll, or as a filthy veſſell, Ier. 22.24. & 28. Nay, though Saul be a King, if hee reiect and forſake the ſeruice of God, God will reiect and caſt him away to, 1 Sam. 15.16. Yea, Ieruſalem, if ſhee refuſe to obey her God, ſhall be an habitation of Diuels, Reu. 18.2. The Iewes, though Ruhamah, ſhall be Lo-ruhamah, though Ammi, Gods people, yet if they forſake the ſeruice of God, they ſhall be Lo-ammi, none of Gods people, Hoſ. 1.6.9. But (as at this day it is ſeene) a diſgraced, deſpiſed, and contemptible Nation: and ſo will the LORD deale with all other wickedly wretched contemners and deſpiſers of his Glory, his Word, his Workes, his Ordinances: they ſhall be

blamed and ſhamed, and come to an ignominious and odious end.
                     Euery creature ſhall conſpire their deſtruction that ſerue not their Lord and Maſter,Gods hand ſhall be vpon his enemies in many iudgements. the Creator. The Angels ſhall ſmite them, as they did Pharaohs firſt borne, Zenacharibs Hoaſt, and Herod, Acts 12.23. Men ſhall laugh at them, and the righteous ſhall haue them in deriſion, Pſal. 32.6 7. They ſhall not continue in honour, but be like the dumbe beaſts that periſh, Pſal. The Diuell ſhall tryumph ouer them, and cry at their deſerued Plagues; So, ſo, there goes the game. They hiding their ſinnes, and not confeſſing them to Gods glory, ſhall not proſper, Prou. 28.13. Their ſoules ſhall be ſmit with feares like Puſhur and Cain, Gen. 4. Ier. 10.3. There ſhall be no peace to them, but ſonitus terroris, a ſound of terrour round about, Eſay 57. Iob 15.20. &c. For their good names: theſe ſhall rot and periſh, Prou. 10.7. euen like their wealth and ſubſtance, vpon which Gods curſe ſhall ſeaze, Deut. 28.16.17.18. They ſhall be made a wonder, a Prouerbe, and a reproach amongſt all people, an aſtoniſhment; an 
                           •
                        iſſing, and continuall deſolation, Deut. 18.37. Ier. 25.9. And for their ſeede, it ſhall not proſper: the ſword ſhall deſtroy them, Iob 27.14. for, the Lord will root out the memoriall of the wicked from the earth, Pſal. 34.16. Therefore

as Dauid concludes to the comfort of Gods Seruants after the enumeration of many bleſſings, Thus ſhall the man be bleſſed that feareth the Lord: ſo I may ſay in theſe particulars, and many moe plagues denounced from the mouth of GOD, as in Leuit. 26.16. Pſal. 49.12. Pſal. 
                        
                           •
                        07.10. Prou. 3.33. vpon the wicked in this life, beſides thoſe which they ſhall feele and finde in their death, Iob 13.26. Pſal. 49.14. And in Iudgement, Dan. 12.2. Eſay 2.11. Reu. 1.7. Reu. 6.15. Mat. 25. and 41. and in hell, Marke 9.43.44. Luke 13.28. Reuel. 9.6. Loe thus ſhall the man be plagued that ſerueth not God.
                     If any beleeue not theſe teſtimonies, let him looke his owne face in the glaſſe of the examples of Pharaoh, Herod, Nebuchadnezzar, Holofern
                              •
                           s, of Iulian the Apoſtate, 
                           Ʋalerian, Antiochus, Nero, Domitian, Decitis, Diocleſian,
                        Theod. lib. 3 c. 11. Euſeb lib. 7. c. 20. Lib. 7.14. 
                        Baiaz
                              •
                           t, with infinite others, from the Word. and Hiſtories, as they are recorded by the Machabees, Tacius. Suetonius, Dion, Oroſius, &c. and they will ſpeake, that from the beginning of the world till now, ſinne alwayes brought ſhame, and that Gods diſhonour brought Gods disfauour, death to the body, damnation to the ſoule: which conſiderations may be whips and goads to driue vs to the dutie vrged.
                     It is contrary with the godly, their ſeruice

is the path way to honour: the people that hearken vnto Gods voyce, are a precious people vnto him, high aboue all Nations, in praiſe, in name, and honor, Deut. 26.17.18.19. Aske the verdict and cenſure of all the Prophets, and Apoſtles, and the Seruants of God, Eſay, Micah, S. Paul, S. Iames, S. Peter; yea, of Chriſt himſelfe:Holineſſe is the way to Honor. and according as they were inſpired by the Spirit of Truth, and knew in their owne experience, they will ſay that the way to be great, is to be good: to riſe, is to fall; to be exalted, is to be humbled vnder the mighty hand of God, 1 Pet. 5.6. The way to ſeeke glory, and honour, and immortalitie, is to continue in well doing. Rom. 2.7. to be fixed, eſtabliſhed, and to indure for euer, is to beleeue, and to fulfill the will of God, Eſay 7.9. 1 Iohn 2.17. and that the onely thing that is good for man, is to walke with God, M
                              •
                           c. 6.8. Yea, T
                              •
                           lly and Ariſtotle, that made Honour the ſubſequent and effect of Vertue and Goodnes: the Aegyptians that painted it betwixt Humilitie and Labour: the Romanes that ſo compoſed their Temples, that a man muſt firſt paſſe by the Temple of Humilitie and Vertue, ere hee could touch the Shrine of Honour; ſaw with the eyes of Nature, that the way to be great is to be good. Yea, to ſerue that goodneſſe, which the Heathens onely coniectured, but Chriſtianitie defined to be the

ſoueraigne good, and that is God himſelfe; who is both more willing to preferre his Seruants to earthly dignities here, if it be good for them to be exalted: yea, and infinitely more able then Aſſuerus was to honour Mordocheus, Heſt. 6.6. Nabuchadnezzar Daniel, Dan. 5.7. Pharaoh, Ioſeph; yea, or Saul any of his Captaines or followers, for all his baoſts of his Fields and Vineyards, 1 Sam. 22.7. ſince his alone is Greatneſſe, and Power, and Glory, and Victory: ſince all that is in heauen and Earth is his, Riches and Honour, Power and Strength, &c. as Dauid acknowledgeth, Hannah ſingeth, and Cirus confeſſeth, 1 Chro. 29. 11.12. 1 Sam. 2.7.8. Ezra 1.2.
                     
                        God is moſt 
                              ••
                           herall of all Maſters.For, I pray you, what was the moſt that any of thoſe great Monarchs could doe for any of their Fauourites and Followers in their chiefeſt graces, when they ſet their wits a-worke, what to doe for ſuch a man whom the King will honour? Cloathing in Purple, and royall apparrell, ſetting on their heads a Princely Diadem putting a Chaine of gold about their neckes, Rings vpon their fingers, mounting them on their Steedes, or ſetting them in a gorgeous Chariot, with Proclamations before them of the Kings fauours towards them, was the chiefe luſter and eminencie that earthly Keſars could dignifie their chiefeſt Seruants withall, Gen. 41.42.43.44. Heſt. 6.9.11. &c.
                     
                     
                        But what are all theſe Honours that the King of Aegypt, the King of the Medes, or of the Babilonians could profer in reſpect of that Honour which God beſtowes vpon the meaneſt of his Saints and Seruants? Surely toyes and trifles: for in ſtead of theſe fine Linnens and royall Roabes that are expoſed to the corrupting Moath and conſuming Time, God will clothe his with the externall and internall Roabes of Grace, the righteouſneſſe of Chriſt, Eſay 49.16. Rom. 13.14. they ſhall not haue a fading but a flouriſhing, not a mortall but an immortall Crowne, not of Gold but of Glory; that is, they ſhall not haue a Chaine of Gold onely, Pſal. 45.13. but of golden Graces knit together by Saint Peter, 1 Pet. 1.4.5.6. &c. In ſtead of a Ring they ſhall be placed as Signets on the Lords right hand, Ier. 22.24. I cannot ſay they ſhall aſcend vp in a chariot (though Elias were ſo taken vp) but they ſhall be aduanced to choiſe manſions in ſuch a Kingdome as ſurpaſſeth all the Kingdomes of the earth, as much as the Sun the Clouds, or Salomons Throne Iobs Dunghill, Epheſ. 2.6. Iohn 14.2. Rou. 3.12. where they ſhall be Kings and Prieſts for euer, Reu. 1.6. Such honour haue all his Saints. Pſal. 149.9.
                     If any man obiect that he ſees no ſuch honour that Gods Saints haue: that they are

rather made here a gazing ſtocke to men and Angels; deſpiſed, reuiled, and euill ſpoken of; yea, reputed as the filth of the world, 1 Cor. 4.9.12.13. and the off-ſcouring of all things.
                     
                        Anſw. It is true indeede: But of whom? Of ſuch, whoſe neyther prayſe nor diſprayſe is to be reſpected: of profane men, children of Beliall: of fooles and naturaliſts: (for ſo are all vngodly men tearmed, Pſal. 14.1. Pſal. 53.1. Luke 12.20. Ier. 4. &c.) Of ſuch wee are reputed fooles for Chriſts ſake, yet are wee wiſe in Chriſt; though weak, yet ſtrong; though deſpiſed, yet honourable; 1 Cor. 4.10. Honourable, though not with wicked men, yet wee ſhall be hereafter, when wee muſt ſit in ioynt Commiſſion with Chriſt, in Iudgement vpon them. In the meane ſpace wee are honoured of God, and if he be with vs who can be againſt vs? Rom. 8.31.
                     
                        Gods Seruants beſt regarded and rewarded.Beſides, if this Motiue will not fixe vpon thee, yet let the greatneſſe of reward, the excellencie of the wages, the liberall allowance of Gods Seruants ſtirre thee vp at laſt to ſing this beſt part of Simeons Song with heart and voyce, that thou wilt be Gods Seruant: It is a blaſphemous ſcandall that the Iewiſh Atheiſts caſt vpon God, that it is a vaine thing to ſerue God and they had got no profit in keeping his Commandements, Mal. 3.14. For, ſure there is a reward for the righteous: doubtleſſe

there is a God that iudgeth the earth, Pſal. 58. 10. A reward euen in this life, euen before the Sonnes of men, Pſal. 31.19. Euen at Dauid was annoynted long before hee was crowned, 1 Sam. 16.13. 2 Sam. 2.4. So here the Lord annoynts vs with the oyle of Gladneſſe in the Church militant, though wee haue not the Crowne (till Chriſts appearing) tryumphant, 2 Tim. 4.8.
                     Yea, euen here the Lord is a Sunne and a Shield to his Seruants, he giues grace and glory, and no good thing will hee with-hold from them that liue vprightly: Pſal. 84.11. For what good thing doth mans heart deſire which God doth not promiſe and performe to his league Subiects?
                     1 For their Wealth: he giues them wealthy wages; an hundred-fold, Marke 10.30. Hee builds the Hebrew Mid-wiues houſes, Exod. 2. and giues his Seruant Dauid a great portion; for, he loueth the proſperitie of his Seruants.
                     2 For Health: the Lord will make their bed in their ſickneſſe Pſal. 41.3. Yea, the voyce of ioy and health is in the habitations of the righteous, Pſal. 110.1.
                     3 For Strength: the Lord, himſelfe is their ſtrength, Pſal. 27.8. and they ſhall be ſtrong in the power of his might. Eſay 6.10.
                     4 For Fame: their memoriall ſhall be bleſſed; Prou. 10.7. yea, their righteouſneſſe ſhall

ſhine as the light, and their iudgement as the noone-day, Pſal. 37.6. euen as Salomons did to the furtheſt South.
                     5 Yea, their Enemies, that haue traduced them, ſhall will they nill they, acquit them, and iuſtifie them, euen as Saul twiſe iuſtified Dauids integritie, 1 Sam. 18. and Chap. 26. and Pilate, Pilates Wife, the Centurion, nay, euen Iudas himſelfe, together with the Sunne, the Earth, and the Stones, acquitted CHRIST, (who is tearmed Gods righteous Seruant in Eſay,) and proclaimed his innocencie.
                     6 Nay, rather then they ſhould want their deſerued commendations, God himſelfe will prayſe them liuing and dead: as hee did in Moſes funerall Sermon, Iohn 1.
                     7 Nay, iuſtifying them euen againſt the accuſations of the old accuſer Sathan, as hee did, Iob, Iob 1. Hence wee haue theſe Encomiums of Dauid, Ezekias, Aſa, Ioſias, Moſes himſelfe, with others in the old Teſtament, to be men after Gods owne heart; men of vpright, perfect, and relenting hearts, and of meeke ſpirits.
                     Hence alſo Chriſt himſelfe ſo famouſeth the Centurion, the Canaanitiſh woman, the good Seruant, Nathaniel, Mary Magdalene, &c. Hence Paul ſo commends Mnaſon, Gaius, Philemon, Appia; &c. Luke in the Acts, Steuen, Dorcas, the noble Baraeans, Bernabas, vvith

others, for their Faith, their Sinceritie, Zeale, Almes deedes, Liberalitie, Hoſpitalitie, Loue to the Word, ſearching the Scriptures, Holineſſe, with other Graces: ſo much doth God delight in the flouriſhing fame of his Church and Children.
                     For Peace:True Peace. where righteouſneſſe flouriſheth, there is abundance of peace. Peace keepes her Throne amongſt Gods Seruants, for though they be at warre with the black Prince of Hell, and his blacke Guard the wicked, and with the World, and chiefely with their owne corruptions; yet they haue peace with GOD, with Chriſt, with the Angels, with the Church, with her Children, with their Brethren, vvith the Creatures, with their owne Soules and Conſciences, ſuch as none knowes, ſaue thoſe that inioy it.
                     For Fauour:GOD grants the ſuites of his Seruants. they are in wonderfull grace with their Maſters: they haue freedome of acceſſe to the throne of Grace, vpon all occaſions; the golden Scepter is alwayes ſtretcht out vnto them: they may haue eaſier acceſſe to the God of heauen, and more gratious welcome, with obtayning of their Suites, and Petitions, and Prayers, then any Courtier with a temporall Prince: it being as truely verified of God towards his Seruants, (as it is recorded of Auguſtus Caeſar and Traian, theſe morrally good Emperours) that hee neuer ſent

any diſcontented or empty away that was a ſuror to him. Witneſſe thou Salomon when thou didſt pray for Wiſedome; thou Paul, when for ſtrength againſt Sathans buffets; thou Ezekias and Dauid, when you called for deliuerance from enemies; you Iſraelites, when you cryed in bondage; thou Moſes, for preſeruation at a dead lift; thou Prodigo, thou Publican, thou penitent Theefe, thou Manaſſes, thou mourning Mary, when you prayed, and ſued with teares for mercy; thou Anna, thou Iſaack, thou Zachary, with thy Wife Elizabeth, intreating for Children: nay, laſtly, let the experience of all Gods Seruants for this fiue thouſand yeeres, ſpeake; and ſpeake thou mine owne Soule, in thy young yet true experience, what thou haſt found and felt, and declared in the great congregation: if euer petition were put vp from a ſorrowful ſoule, a beleeuing and a touched heart, a zealous ſpirit, that receiued not a gracious anſwere in euery requeſt concerning body or ſoule, that concerned eyther Gods glory to giue, or his ſeruants good to receiue. For thou Lord wilt bleſſe the righteous, thou wilt ſhine vpon him with the light of thy countenance, and with fauour wilt crowne and compaſſe him as with a ſhield. Pſal. 6.12.
                     For Mirth: the Lords Seruants ſhall reioyce and ſing for ioy of heart, Eſay 65.14.

they ſhall reioyce vvith ioy vnſpeakeable, 1 Pet. 1.8. and their ioy ſhall no man take from them. Iohn 16.22.
                     For Pleaſures:The godly haue a taſt of heauen here. though they be not fatted with the carrion of the world, like the Diuels Crowes, nor taſte not of this bitter Ratsbanes, ſweet-ſower poyſon of Sinne, which at laſt ſtings like a Cockatrice, yet they haue pure and perfect pleaſures, ſuch as the worlds ſwine neuer taſted▪ they are fed with hidden Manna, they keepe a conſtant Iubilie, and a perpetuall Chriſtmas; feaſting Chriſt, as feaſted by him, in that communion they haue with him, in the Word, the Sacraments, Prayer, &c. In vvhich they are ſatisfied with the fatneſſe of Gods Houſe, and drinke abundantly out of the riuers of his pleaſures, Pſal. 36.9.
                     Theſe wages with many moe, are as the earneſt penny, and the Hirelings entring penny, (with vs called the Gods penny) which God giues as aſſurance and part of greater and better payment hereafter; being but a little portion and pittance of that which they ſhall haue hereafter? but as the Prologue to the Comedie, as a Beauer to a Banquet, as a Mite to a mountaine of Gold, as the Candle light to the Sunne. For hereafter indeede is the great reward, Mat. 5.12. ſo great, ſo ſhining, that as it hath dazeled the Aegles eyes of the deareſt of Gods Seruants, when they haue ſet themſelues

to behold it▪
                        Tom. 10. ſer. 1. lib. Medit. c. 18 Dicere quā
                              tum volo, non valeo.
                         as of Auguſtine and others: ſo I can but ſhew it you a-farre off, as Moſes was ſhewed Canaan, a type of Heauen.
                     Then, for the comfort of thoſe that haue imployed their bodies and their ſoules in Gods ſeruice here, & to prouoke others now to ſacrifice their bodies to God as is moſt reaſon, as the Apoſtle cals it, a reaſonable ſeruice, Rom. 12.1. let them know theſe bodies ſhall then be like the Angels in heauen, Mat. 22.30. they ſhall ſhine as Starres, Dan. 12.3. yea, at the Sunne in the Kingdome of the Father. Mat. 13.46. For their Soules, they ſhall be glorious, without ſpot or wrinckle, Epheſ. 5.17. they ſhall behold the face of God in righteouſneſſe, and haue fulneſſe of ioy in Gods preſence. Pſal. 16.11. For their eſtate, they ſhall be Kings, and raigne with God, and Prieſts to ſing Haleluiahs vnto him, Reu. 1.6. (for as they haue ſerued Chriſt on earth, ſo they ſhall ſerue him in glory, Reu. 22.3.) yea, and they ſhall be Iudges to, to ſit vpon thrones, and iudge the twelue Tribes of Iſraell, Mat. 19.28.
                     I could tell you further of their ioyes out of the Scripture, in their eminencie, excellencie, fulneſſe, glorious greatneſſe, and perpetuitie, Pſal. 36.8. Mat. 25.11. Eſay 21.11. 1 Cor. 2.20. how incorruptible the Crowne is, how ſtedfaſt the Kingdome, how conſtant the ioy, how euerlaſting the feaſt, how ſecure the

reſt, how endleſſe and infinite the pleaſure is which is prouided for Gods ſeruants after their departure out of this vaile of miſery, 1 Pet. 5.4. Reu. 21.6. 2 Theſ. 3.7. Iohn 16.22. Heb. 12.28. &c. with all the accruments, and additions, and amplifications incident to this poynt: eyther in reſpect of the place, the higheſt heauens; or the company, innumerable Angels, the congregation of the firſt borne, God the Iudge, Chriſt the R
                           •
                        deemer, Heb. 12.22. &c. but I contract my ſailes, and leaue the reſt to your ſearch and meditation, and to the ſpirit to make application; onely deſiring euery ſoule that is as yet a ſlaue to his vſurping ſinnes, to conſider, as Hell that hee gaines, ſo the gaine that hee looſeth, that is, Heauen: thinke of it ſeriouſly and betimes, leaſt thou thinke of thy gaining loſſe thou getſt by ſinne, when thou muſt for euer ſtand to the bargaine, as the rich Diues did in Hell, when he ſaw Lazarus in Abrahams boſome, Luke 1.6. when his bad and baſe choiſe was repented, but not redreſſed.
                     Laſtly, if theſe bleſſings, here and hereafter,God bleſſeth the wicked oft for his Seruants cauſe. moue thee not, yet lend mee thy patience a while to peruſe and ponder the curſes, and plagues, and euils, that thou ſhalt auoid, by being Gods Seruant. Many a man thou knoweſt is exempted from many common calamities, by the countenance of ſome great man,

to whom he retaines, as from being a common Souldiour in the time of warre, and the like: ſo in any common plague or iudgement the Lord knowes how to deliuer his; yea, though thouſands fall on their right hand.
                     And ſurely this is a wondrous priuiledge that the Saints haue: firſt, that as God bleſſeth oft the wicked for their ſakes, as hee did Laban for Iacobs cauſe, and Potiphar and Pharaoh for Ioſephs cauſe: his bleſſings being not onely vpon the houſes and families, but vpon whole Nations, Countries and Cities, for the cauſe of his Seruants (euen as heatheniſh Empyres, amongſt the Babilonians, proſpered for Daniels cauſe, and ſo Cyrus, Artaxerxes and Darius for the cauſe of Ezra, Nehemias, and other captiue Iewes that ſerued the true God: and the Heatheniſh Romanes for the perſecuted Chriſtians cauſes, as Hiſtories manifeſt) and as it is a further priuiledge, that God oft not onely preſerues from dangers, but ſaues from deſtruction, ſinfull, Sodomitiſh, and profane places and perſons, for their cauſe to, as hee did thoſe in the indangered ſhip for Pauls cauſe, and Noahs kindred for Noahs cauſe, and would haue ſpared Sodome for Abrahams and the righteous ſake, if they could haue beene found: ſo it is a wonderfull prerogative to, that when the Lord by the prouocation of the vnrighteous, is minded to bring deſtruction

vpon a Land or Country, hee firſt deliuers his Seruants; 1. eyther by death, as hee did Ioſias
                        ▪ and good Auguſtine, before the ſacking of Hippo by the Vandales. 2. Or by conueying them to ſome other place, as he did Lot, when Sodome was burned. 3. Or by providing ſome meanes for their eſcape, as the Arke for Noah, when the World was drowned. 4. Or by ſauing them by his immediate Power and Mercy, as hee did Moſes and the Iſraelites vvhen the wicked were drowned, euen Pharaoh and all the Aegyptians, 5. Or when his owne Seruants are by men appointed to the ſword, hee reſcues them with their enemies whom he ſets in their ſtead, as he reſcued Eſter, Mordechai, the Iewes, Daniel, and the three Children, when wicked Haman and others their accuſers, in their roomes, ſatisfied the Gallowes, the flaming fire, the mouthes of the Lyons, &c. ſauing the Corne and burning the Tares. 6. Or if his Seruants fall into the ſame temporall puniſhments with others, as Ionathan that was ſlaine with Saul, and good Zwinglius that dyed in battell, which is vſuall: yet euen thereby the righteous are brought nearer heauen; and the more violent their death is, the ſooner they are in ioy, vvhen the godleſſe ſhall be throwne downe to Hell, euen as with the ſame Fla
                           •
                        le is beaten chaffe to be burnt, and pure Corne to be preſerued.
                     
                        
                        Theſe ruling ſinnes are damnable without repentance.I could draw out theſe Motiues ad infinitum, and from the Eſtates, and Excellencies, and Priuiledges of Gods Seruants, in theſe and other peculiars, in which thou haſt no part nor portion, ſo I might if the point were not too tedious and burthenſome to thy memory, preſſe thee as much on the left ſide, from the conſideration of thy fearefull eſtate, in the caſe wherein thou ſtandeſt, being (as thine owne heart tels thee) the ſeruant to many a reigning and ruling ſinne; and ſo conſequently no ſeruant of God (vnleſſe like the wicked Seruant, the falſe Steward, and traiterous Iudas) thy deſerts being a Halter and Hell. For as Chriſt ſaid it of Couetouſneſſe, ſo I ſay from Chriſts ground, Mat. 6.24. thou canſt not ſerue God and Mammon, God and the World, God and the Diuell, God and thy Belly, God and thy Bagges, with the Vſurer; God and Herodias, God and Rimmon, God and Baal, Chriſt and Antichriſt, God and Babels beaſt, God and the Pope: no more then one man can ſerue two Maſters; no more then one Riuer, by one ſtreame, can runne two wayes at once; no more then one man can moue vpwards and downewards at one time; no more then one woman can loue lawfully the bed of her Husband, and the boſome of a ſtranger; or one man his owne Wife and the body of an Harlot. For, God and Sinne are oppoſed ex diametro, and

will no more mixe then oyle and water; nay, then fire and water, then Heauen and Hell.
                     Now then being a Seruant to ſinne, thou conſequently art none of Gods Seruant: for his ſeruant thou art to whom thou obeyeſt; yea, if it be of ſinne vnto death, Rom. 6.16. and ſo by an immediate dependance and relation, thou art the ſlaue of him, that is the baſeſt ſlaue in the world▪ that is, the Diuell, for hee that commits ſinne is his, 1 Iohn 3. vvho was the firſt, and ſtill continues the author of ſinne, of lyes, murthers, blaſphemies, and the like.
                     Now then ſee thy danger:The caſe of Sathans captiues opened. as hee cauſeth thee to lye as hee did Ananias and Saphira, Acts 5. and to ſweare, as hee did Senacharib, and to commit Adultery, as hee did Herod, with other ſinnes, as he did Dauid and Peter, when hee ſifted, tempted, and roſe vp againſt them. So, ſo long as thou liueſt in ſinne, hee is entered into thee, as into Iudas, Iohn 13.27. and doth poſſeſſe thee; thou art in his power; Acts 28.18. He rules thee as the Horſe-man doth the Horſe; hee hath thee as a Beare by the ſnout, as a Dogge in a chaine; thou moueſt after his motion: oh thy fearefull ſubieiection. Thou art vnder the moſt deceitfull Maſter, the moſt deluding Laban in the world, who for delight that hee pretends thee, will pay thee damnation that bee intends thee;

as hee hath done to Laban himſelfe, Caine, Eſau, Iudas, and all that haue ſerued him. Beſides thou art vnder the moſt maſſecrating mercileſſe tyrant in the world: Phalaris, Buſiris, Nero, Dioniſius, Pharaoh, with all their buls, and their burnings, and their burthens, (of his inuention, as our Papiſts Powder-plot was) were mercifull men in reſpect of him: for he layes the heauieſt burthen in the world vpon thee, euen that which preſt himſelfe out of Heauen into Hell, puſht Adam out of Paradiſe, and preſt Chriſt himſelfe vpon the Croſſe; and that is Sinne. And after thou haſt laid downe this bruitiſh body of thine in the duſt, hee hath prepared intollerable and eternall burnings for thee in his owne Territories; whoſe fires the burthen of thy ſinnes muſt kindle and maintaine, and the Riuer of Gods wrath increaſe and make more violent. Oh therefore betimes caſt off this more then Aegyptian yoke; forſake the ſeruice of thy old ſophiſticating Maſter, Sathan; and ſerue thy new and liuing Maſter, Chriſt Ieſus, ſo ſhalt thou not onely auoid thoſe plagues temporall and externall, which are threatned to thoſe that diſobey God, Exod. 23.33. Deut. 7.4. Deut. 28. Deut. 29.45.46.47. &c. Eſay 1. Pſal. 7. &c. which I pray thee ponder at leaſure: as alſo thoſe eternall hereafter. But thou ſhall be partaker of all thoſe bleſſings

and bounties which God hath reuealed and prepared for thoſe that ſerue him.
                     I thought to haue added another vſe, namely, as the matter, ſo to haue preſcribed the manner and forme of Gods ſeruice, with the parts of it, vvith thoſe ſeuerall carriages that thoſe muſt vſe for their actions, their affections, their ſpeech and words, at home and abroad; what vſe to make of all their time, with their ſeuerall ſtints and taskes in the performance of ſeuerall and ſucceſſiue ſacrifices and ſeruices. But I will not dull the Reader by this prolixe point. I referre thee vnto ſome of my Brethren that haue writ well and worthily of it: as Mr. Rogers his Chriſtian Directorie; Mr. D. Hill, in his Tract how to liue well, by way of Queſtions and Anſweres; Mr. Cooper his Chriſtian Sacrifice; which I wiſh not onely in the hands, but vvrit in the hearts of all that intend Gods ſeruice, and their owne ſaluation.
                  
                  
                     
                     His deſired Diſmiſſion. In this word, Depart.
                     
                        THE fift part, according to our Texts firſt diuiſion, now comes into our examination, and that is Simeons Departure or Diſmiſſion, the Latine compriſeth this and that which wee called the Diuine Permiſſion, in one word, Nunc dimittis, 
                        
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        , Nunc eſt tempus vt dimittas, &c. è vinculis corporis, as Piſcator renders it; Lord, now it is time that thou vnlooſe mee from the bonds of the body: from which reading, which I thinke warrantable and naturall, theſe Poynts ariſe. Firſt that euen the Lords Simeons, godly men, and ſo conſequently all men, muſt dye for the matter of death. Secondly, that death is onely to man a diſſolution, for the nature and manner of death. Thirdly, that this life is but a ſhort life, out of which wee are euery day ready to depart, like him that is about to take his leaue of his viſited friends. Fourthly, that this life is but a miſerable life, in vvhich wee are bound and fettered, death being our

vnlooſing. Fiftly, that our naturall death is but one, and once, which is our diſmiſſion from the earth. Sixtly, that the ſoule is immortall, not dying vvith the body, onely departing out of the body.
                     For the firſt point: it is plaine that godly men dye; ſanctified Simeon that ſpoke this is dead: it needes no confirmation but experience, as hee that will not beleeue that the fire is hot, let him put his finger to it; if any beleeue not that the godly dye as well as the wicked, let him looke at their Sepulchres amongſt vs, as Peter tels the Iewes, that the Patriarke Dauid was dead, and his Sepulchre was amongſt them.
                     The Reaſons why the godly dye are theſe:Why the godly dye. firſt, becauſe they are inuolued and vvrapped in the common ſincke of originall ſinne, with the reſt of Adams poſteritie, and therefore they muſt participate of death, the common puniſhment; from which no perſons, orders, or degrees are excepted or exempted, no not infants themſelues, Eccleſ. 3.1. Pſal. 49.10. Heb. 9.27. To explaine this.
                     It is confeſſed by all Diuines, that GOD which is called the God of the liuing, onely created life, and not death: which being a priuation of life, was neuer in the number of thoſe Ideaes and formes which were from all eternitie in the minde of the Creator, but was

brought in by ſinne, for which it is now impoſed penarilie vpon all fleſh, Rom. 5.12. ſo Ch. 6.23. 1 Cor. 15.21. From whence it is conſequent, that if man had not ſinned, man had not dyed. I ſay not man could not haue dyed; for his body being compounded of the foure Elements, and ſo of foure contrary qualities, heate, cold, moyſture and dryneſſe, in themſelues repugnant, was naturally mortall; yet hee ſhould not haue dyed, if hee had not ſinned: but ſhould haue beene preſerued and vpheld by a ſpeciall, ſingular, and ſupernaturall grace. Which grace of originall Iuſtice being loſt by originall ſinne, man alſo loſt the priuiledge of immortalitie, and became mortall.
                     
                        Simile.Euen as (to vſe the Schoole-mens Similies) a Ship vpon the Sea, her ſaile hoiſt, the winde blowing, & the waues working, muſt needs naturally follow the motion and working of the Sea: but if this Ship be tyed to an Anchor, by ſome ſtrong Cable, ſhee is held, faſt and fixt, without any far fluctuation: but if this Cable be cut, ſhee goes whither the windes and the waues driue her. Or as a mans hand is ſubiect to be wounded by ſword, dagger, or dart, but if he haue on a good Gantlet the hand is ſafe; which Gantlet being pluckt off or broken, the hand is expoſed to danger: So, Man being naturally mortall, yet being armed with originall

righteouſneſſe againſt the ſtroke of death, being tyed and chained with the golden chaine of ſpeciall grace, ſhould not haue moued in the naturall courſe of death: but as ſoone as euer man by the inſtinct of Sathan, tyed himſelfe with the cords of ſinne, God tooke away that other chaine of Grace, diſarmed him of munition and armour, and expoſed him to be carryed through the ſwift torrent of this preſent life, by the violence of the contrary qualities of the Elements, euen into the dead Sea, or Sea of Death.Mare 
                              •••
                           
                           tuum.
                     
                     Secondly, becauſe of the reliques and remainders of their originall ſinnes and corruption, which are ſtill reſident and fixed in them, (howſoeuer pardoned by Chriſt) the godly muſt dye, that ſo theſe remnants may be quite taken away and aboliſhed, and the root of old Adam abſolutely ſtocked vp.
                     Thirdly, fleſh and bloud (of which they partly conſiſt) cannot inherit the Kingdome of God, but muſt firſt be changed. 1 Cor. 15, verſ. 50.
                     Fourthly, that as by other croſſes and afflictions, ſo by dying they may in ſome ſort be made conformable to their head Chriſt, in his death and ſufferings, Rom. 8.29.
                     Sixtly, that the godly might haue experience of Gods power, in the reſuſcitation and raiſing vp of their dead bodies.
                     
                        Seauenthly, that the godly may haue ſweet and comfortable experience of the difference betwixt this mortall life and that immortall glory in the life to come, which will be ſo much more ioyous, as they ſhall taſte their prepared ioyes through the iawes of death, as Sampſon did his Honie in the Lyons belly: for as it is a miſery to haue beene happy,Miſerum eſt fuiſſe foelicem. ſo it ſets a better edge and reliſh on any mercy, when it comes by an exemption from a former experienced miſery: euen as deliuerance was more gratefull to the Iſraelites after their Aegyptian yoke, and as hony is more ſweet to him that hath beene dyeted with Aloes; ſo ioy in glory ſhall be more ioyous extracted out of the paines of life, and pangs of death vnto the godly.
                     
                        Vſe of Conſolation.Hence let the Saints ſing, clap their hands and reioyce; let the ioyfull ſhout of a King be amongſt them, in the ſweet contemplation of the vnlimitted mercies of God, towards them; that whereas in Adam as they were branches of his ſtocke, and ſo fruitfull in vnrighteouſneſſe, in his ſinne, ſo indammaged and indangered, by their originall corruptions, beſides their actuall tranſgreſſions; that God might in iuſtice haue puniſhed them both with the firſt and ſecond death, according to that menace in Paradiſe, to our Protaplaſts: In that day which you eate of the forbidden fruit, you ſhall

dye the death,
                        
                           Aug lib. 3. de ciu. Dei. Qua die me deſerueritis per inobedientiam, ego vos deſeram per iuſtitiam, &c. (as Auguſtine interprets it) in that day which you forſake me by rebellion▪ I will forſake you by my iuſt iudgements execution: yet it hath pleaſed God ſo farre to mitigate both the guilt and the puniſhment of both, that in and by Chriſt they being redeemed from that ſecond, that eternall, ſempiternall death of the ſoule; the temporall death which is onely a change of a worſe life for one infinitely better, is ſo farre inflicted, or rather impoſed as makes for Gods glory, and their owne greater good.
                     Secondly,2. Vſe of Commination. let this withall terrifie the wicked which are out of CHRIST, and as yet haue no more part in him then the Diuell and Iudas (by reaſon of their witting and willing ſins, by which voluntarily and frequently they crucifie him againe to themſelues) that if the godly muſt haue their teeth ſet on edge in dying the firſt death of the body,
                           Phil. 3.17. for theſe ſweet fruits which proued ſower Grapes, that Adam and Eue taſted in the Garden, by reaſon of theſe remainders and reliques of corruption that are in them: how much more ſhall they, as they are threatned, as God hath decreed and denounced, drinke the dregs of Gods wrath, euen to the bottome, not onely in taſting the firſt death but the ſecond; not onely that which is the ſeparation of the ſoule from the body, but which ſeparates both body and

ſoule eternally from God, at they are corrupt and fruitleſſe trees, twiſe dead: ſo if the godly which are trees of righteouſneſſe, planted by the riuers of Grace,C
                              •
                           m co
                              •
                           
                           ritur Cedru
                              •
                            Paradiſi, quid faciet Virga Deſ
                              •
                           rti? be pluckt vp, that they may be tranſplanted in glory, much more ſhall they by ſtockt vp by the Axe of death, cut downe in wrath, like the barren Fig-tree, and throwne into Hell fire: yea, as they are called dead coales, Pſal. 17. and God a conſuming fire, Deut. 9. Hebrewes the laſt, &c. ſo they are as ſure to burne (vnleſſe quenched by repentance) as they are fit to burne.
                     Neyther doth the Lord take ſuch avvay ordinarily, by a naturall and peaceable death, as hee did Simeon here: but oft-times in the whirlewinde of his wrath, by ſome vnnaturall, and violent, and ſodaine death, as the fruit of their prouoking ſinnes. 1. Sometimes for their abuſe of his worſhip, as hee did Nadab and Abihu: ſo Iudas that came from the Communion and hanged himſelfe: as alſo the Corinthians who dyed for their vnworthy receiuing the Sacrament. 2. Sometimes for rebellion againſt Magiſtrates, as Corah, Dathan, and Abiram. Numb. 16. 3. Sometimes for abuſing the Seruants, Prophets, and Miniſters of God, as the two and fortie Children whom the two ſhee Beeres ſlew: the two Captaines with their fifties, that came to lay hands on Elias, 4. So for murthering the Saints, as Achab and Iezabel.
                        
So the tenne perſecutors, infamouſly famous for the abundance of Chriſtian bloud which they ſhed, came all to fearefull ends, according to the curſe threatned, Pſal. 56. Pſal. 139. & Math. 26. that Bloudy men ſhall not liue out halfe their dayes: and, They that ſmite with the Sword, ſhall periſh by the Sword. 5. For gurmundizing, gluttonie, and drunkenneſſe, as Iobs Children, Iob 2. Baltazar, Dan. 5. and the Iſraelites ſlaine whilſt the Quailes were in their mouthes, Numb. 11. 6. For couetouſneſſe, as Ananias and Saphira, Acts 5. 7. For Luſt and Luxury, as Coſ
                              •
                           ee and Zimri, and the vncleane Iſraelites, Numb. 25. 8. For Tyrannie and oppreſſion as Pharaoh and his Hoaſt, Exod. 14. 9. For Pride againſt God, as Herod, Acts 12. 10. For the effect of pride and malice, Blaſphemie againſt heauen, as Senacharib and his peſtilent Paraſite Rabſekah, 2 Kings 19. as alſo for other ſinnes.
                     But now wee are to hoiſt vp ſailes into a Sea of matter,Doctrine. All muſt dye. which flowes eyther neceſſarily from the Text, or by conſequence of this laſt proued point, and by argument from the greater to the leſſer, from the better to the worſe; that if Simeon and the Saints muſt dye, then vnſanctified ſinners: and ſo from the ſpecials, and by inductions from all particulars the generall may be concluded, that all muſt dye. So much the Text giues vs leaue

to touch; for if we be here, as Tully intimates, Tanquam in diuerſerio; as gueſts lodged in an Inne: or as thoſe that come to a Mart, a Market, or a Faire; or as thoſe that come to viſite their friends, not to inhabite long here, but to depart, as Simeon here imports. Then hoc commune malum, this departure is the deſigned lot to all the worlds paſſengers: Wee here giue no reaſons of the point, omitting or pretermitting them, till we come to diſtill ſome comforts againſt death: onely for explanation or further ſatisfaction. Ponder the premiſes, that ſince the godly which haue no ſinne,Pſal. 32.1.2. Non vt non ſit, ſed vt non imputetur. I meane (with Dauid and the Auguſtane Confeſſion out of Auguſtine) no imputed ſinne, muſt die; ſince children that haue no actuall ſinne doe dye, becauſe the ſtaine of the roote is propagated to the branches, as Auguſtine,
                        De praed. c. 2. & lib. cont. 
                              •
                           ortunatum. cap. 2. In Lucam. 
                        Anſelme and Ambroſe haue in moe phraſes explained, if Adam himſelfe did dye, not ſo much as hee was a created man but as hee was a corrupted ſinner. Then ſure as life was the fruit of his obedience, if he had ſtood; à Deo donante, from Gods free giuing; ſo death is inflicted vpon his fall, à Deo vindicante, from God puniſhing.
                     
                        
                           Moriendum eſt omnibus. Tullie Tuſ. 9. lib. 1.And as now it is Gods Statute-Law enacted, that all Adams Sonnes partaking of Adams ſinnes muſt die, ſo it muſt be executed: nay, wee ſee it is executed. Philoſophers, and Poets,

and the learned Heathens, who themſelues, ſince their workes and writings haue felt the ſmart of deaths ſtroke, haue acknowledged it, Chriſtians haue confeſſed it, Experience hath ratified it in the conſumption and conſummation of all ages, all ſects, all ſorts, perſons and profeſſions, that all muſt dye: omnia peribunt, &c. I, thou, hee, they, and euery man beſides, that are, were, ſhall be, this way ſlides. Wee haue Gods ſtatutum eſt for it, that as in Heauen all liue, and none muſt or can dye; in Hell all dye an eternall death, and none muſt or can liue: ſo in earth all muſt dye, and none can for euer liue. This is an ineuitable yoke, impoſed on all fleſh, Nam rigidum ius eſt, &c. the Law is ſtrict, vnalterable; to ſtriue againſt the ſtreame vnauaileable:

                           Lanificas nulli tres exorare Puellas,
                           Contigit, &c.
                        
                        
                           The vnpartiall Fates, to whom we all are vnder,
                           With rule imperiall cut lifes thread aſunder.
                        
                     
                     Many meanes haue Galeniſts and Phyſitians vſed for the preſeruation of life: many Workes and elaborate Bookes are extant, of the conſeruation of health; but neuer none writ, or diſputed of the exemption from death, becauſe it were in vaine. If any Phyſitian could adminiſter ſuch a ſimple that vvould perpetually

prolong life: if any Lawyer could plead the caſe with Death, not to enter violently vpon their bodie (which is his tennant-right) and preuaile. If any Diuine did preach that ſinners ſhould not dye, and performe it: the firſt ſhould haue moe Patients; the ſecond, more Clyents; the third, moe Auditors, then euer had any of their fellowes in their functions: But to teach, or plead, or practiſe this point, which the Diuell guld our firſt Parents with in Paradiſe, You ſhall not die, were to be a Lyar like him, it were to build Caſtles in the Ayre,Hom. lib. 2 od. 3. ſic od. 12. od. 28. &c. to ſow the winde, and reape the whirlewinde: for, Omnes vna ma
                              •
                           et nox, &c.
                     
                     
                        Deaths tract wee all muſt tread: our lifes faire light
                        Muſt be obſcur'd, and ſet in Deaths darke night.
                     
                     How many glorious Lights in the vvorld, Kings, Kefars, Emperours, Popes, Potenta
                           •
                        es, Dukes, Earles, Lords, Barons, &c. Learned, wiſe, prudent, potent, &c. haue already periſhed, and vaniſhed, like Comets and blazing Starres, leauing no more tract behinde them, then a Serpent that goes ouer a ſtone? of whom wee retaine nothing but the Images corporeall of their bodies, or mentall of their mindes; by the help of ſome Painters, or their owne or others pens, that haue onely ſhewed

to poſteritie, that ſuch men there once were, but now are not. What haue wee ſauing the Images of moe then an hundred famous Emperours of the Eaſt and Weſt, Chriſtian and Heathen?
                     Amongſt the reſt, vvhere are the ſeauen Henries, the ſixe Conſtantines, the fiue Ottoes, the fiue Charleses, the fiue Lodouicques, the foure Leo's, the three Theodosij, the three Fredericques, the three Tiburiuſſes, the two Clandij, the two Alberts, the two Anaſtasij, the two Martians; the two Rodulphs, the two famous Caeſars for warre and peace, Iulius and Auguſtus, with the reſt? Is not the lampe of their life extinct? Thoſe whoſe voyces commanded the Nations, are they now able to ſpeake? (as it was ſaid of Alexander) thoſe that vvere able once to deliuer others from death, could they free themſelues?
                     Beſides, where are now more then two hundr
                           •
                        d of Romaine Biſhops, and triple Mitred Popes: ſome of whoſe roaring Buls made once all Chriſtendome quake and ſhake? Where are now the twelue Gregories, the nine Bonifaces, eight nocently Innocents, the ſeauen Clements, the ſixe Alexanders, ſixe Vrbans, ſixe Adrians, twelue Benidicts, the fiue Celeſtines, the fiue Nicholaſſes, the foure Sixtuſſes, the foure Sergij, the foure Anaſta
                              •
                           ij, the foure Foelixes, the foure Eugenij, the three Silueſters,
                        
the three Victors, the three Lucij, the three Iulij's, with the reſt? Doe they not all know now that which As Alexander 6. Iohn 11. Ioh. 22. &c.
                         ſome of them Atheiſtically in words, in writings, and in life, haue denyed? that their bodies were mortall, their ſoules immortall? that there is a Heauen for the godly a Hell for the vvicked; but no Purgatory paſſage to eyther the one place or other, for eyther ſort?
                     
                        The deaths of the worlds Worthies of al kinds epitomized.Beſides, where ſhall wee ſe
                           •
                        ke but amongſt the dead, for all the Romane Caeſars, the Aegyptian Ptolomies, the Latine Murrhanes, the Albane Siluies, the Syrian Antiochuſſes, the Arabian Arabarcques, the Argiue Abantiades, the Perſian Achaminedes, the Theban Labdacides, the Lybian Lybiarcques: and all the reſt of thoſe renowned Kings which had ſuch diuers denominations from their worthy Predeceſſors, and from thoſe Countries ouer which they ruled?
                     Nay, to come nearer home: where are all our Engliſh Kings, that haue awfully ſwayed the Brittaine Scepter ſince the Conqueſt? Where are the two Conquering couragious Williams, our three Richards, our ſixe Edwards, our eight Henries? Hath not Death made a Conqueſt of them? Haue we any remnants of them ſauing their Weſtminſter Monuments; their Enſignes, their Vertues? Could their Scepters, Crownes, Coulours, Honours, Miters,

Power, or pompe of theſe Potentates, reſiſt Deaths all-ſubduing, all-ſubiecting rod, which brings vnder moe, then Mercuries charming wand in the Poet? No verily.
                     
                        Non ducis imperium, non regia Mitra, coronae
                        Pontificis ſummi, &c.
                     
                     
                        Both conquering Dukes, and Princely Crownes,
                        The mitred Popes, proud Cardinals,
                        Imperiall Scepters, Prelates Gownes
                        Death vaſſalizeth and inthrals.
                     
                     So, if wee ſhould continue in this Quere, and demand what is become of all thoſe worthy Generals, Ioſhuah, Gideon, &c. Achilles, Hector, Aiax, Melciades, the Gracchies, Camillies, Fabians, Aſdrubal, Hannibal, &c. Or thoſe tryumphing Conquerours, Cyrus, Alexander, Scylla, Marius, Caſſius, Scipio, Metellius, Ʋalerius, Pompey, Caeſars, Antonie, Octauian, Claudian, Aurelius? Death hath carryed them in tryumph, as they others. Abſtulit, &c. For,Hor. lib. 2. cap. 16. ſpeedy Death ſtopt ſtout Achilles breath.
                     So, where are thoſe huge and vaſt Gyants, the Sonnes of Anack, the Nimrods of the world, Tipheus, Anteus, Enceladus, Titius, Polypheme, Atlas, Hercules, Cacus, Oreſtes, &c. as terrible in their times, as Goliah was to the Iſraelites? Now it is a wonder (no terrour) to ſee their aſhes and their bones: now fearefull

Hares leape ouer dead Lyons (as the Grecians ſcoft at dead Hector.)
                     So, if wee ſhould reflexe vpon theſe learned Lights and Lampes, in Diuinitie or Humane Learning; the Fathers of the Greeke and Latine Church: graue Tertullian, learned Origen, wittie Bernard, eloquent Chryſoſtome, zealous Auguſtine, iudicious Ierome, and the reſt. Or vpon theſe wiſe Heathens, deepe Philoſophers, Ariſtippus, Empedocles, Democles, Zenocrates, Anaxagoras, Pithagoras, Diogenes, Socrates, Plato, Ariſtotle, the ſeauen Grecian Sages, &c. Or vpon theſe famous Orators, Pericles, Iſocrates, Alcibiades, Gorgias, Pollio, Lucius, Craſſus, Zenophon, Hortenſius, Demoſthenes, Cato, Cicero, Quintillian. Or vpon theſe Laureate Poets, Eſchilus, Pindar, Euripides, Ariſtarchus, Heſiod, Menander, Simonides, Sophocles, Anacraeon, Eunius, Statius, Perſius, Claudian, Ʋarro, Plautus, Lucan, Homer, Terence, Ouid, Ʋirgil, &c. Or vpon theſe famous Legifers, and Law-giuers, Mercurie amongſt the Aegyptians, Licurgus amongſt the Lacedemonians, Solon amongſt the Athenians, Numa amongſt the Romanes; as alſo vpon Androdamus, Philolaus, Beceorus, Carneades, &c. Or vpon theſe profound and famous Lawyers, Vlpian, Iaſon, Druſus, Bartolus, Baldus, Iuſtinian, D
                              •
                           cius. Or vpon theſe expert Phyſitians, Hermogenes,

Diſippus, Celſus, Nicomachus, Eſchulapius, Hippocrates, Auicen, Galen, &c. Skilfull Aſtronomers, Aſtrologers, and deepe Mathematicians, Thales, Manethes, Promethius, Eudoſius, Protagoras, Beroſus, Archites, Zoroaſter, Ptolomie, Anaximander, &c. Or ſubtill Geometricians, Polemon, Pauſanius, Marinus, Theodorus, Di
                              •
                           aearchus, Nicephorus, Euclides. Or theſe accurate, and faithfull Hiſtoriographers, Thucidides, Ioſephus, Herodotus, Diodorus, Egiſippus, Iſodore, Eutropius, Liuie, Saluſt, Plutarch, Appian, Plinie, Suetonius, 
                              •
                           'oſſi
                              •
                           onius, Oroſius, Euſebius, Tacitus, Iuſtin, &c. Or theſe exquiſite Muſitians, Zenophocles, Himenaeus, Amphion, Chiron, Arion, Linus, Philades, Orpheus, &c. Or theſe famous Painters and Caruers, Timantes, Ariſtarchus, Timagoras, Piraſius, Zeuxis, Apelles, Phidias, our Engliſh Michael and Raphael, with infinite moe, of worthy ſpirits, eyther inuenters, or perfecters of Arts and Sciences, whether Liberall or Mechanicall; ſuch as haue beene Eupaters, well-willers and Benefactors to humane Societies, which Antiquitie hath dignified, liuing as more then men, accounting them as Heroes and Semidians, and Deified as Gods; are they not all dead like men? Haue they not gone the way of all fleſh, as Dauid ſaith of himſelfe? 2 King. 2. Yea, though ſome of them were Metaphoricall and terreſtiall Gods, (as Dauid
                        
propheſieth of all Princes) they are dead like men: their honour is laid in the duſt: an Epitaph writ vpon a marble ſtone, a Monument, or Statue erected to them, or for them, an Enchomiaſticque Verſe in the numericall lines of ſome Poet, or a narration vvhat they haue beene, or what they haue done, good or euill, in the workes of ſome Hiſtorian, is all which is left of them (euen as a linnen ſhirt was that remained of that victorious Saladine:) yea, theſe whom wee haue deſeruedly called worthy ſpirits, as Alexander, Tamberlaine, Iulius Caeſar, Prince Arthur, in former times: as alſo the reſt of thoſe nine Worthies amongſt the Heathens, and thoſe other nine amongſt Chriſtians in former times: as alſo that Noble Sidney, that ingenious Picus Mirandula, that ſubtill Scaliger in our times; haue now their earthly tabernacles, (the lodges and organs of ſuch purified ſpirits, and heauenly inſpired ſoules) diſſolued; their bodies deſcending as their better part aſcending: and ſo it ſhall be with vs, and with all of vs.
                     
                        
                           Ouid ad Liuiam.Tendimus huc omnes 
                              •
                           etam properamus ad vnam, &c.
                     
                     
                        Th'Earth is our common Hauen thither ſaile we,
                        Deaths bonds to breake, alas, how ſmall preuaile we.
                     
                     
                        That which was ſaid to Adam,
                        A true de
                              •
                           
                           cant of death. is ſaid to euery one of vs, Duſt thou art, and to duſt thou ſhalt returne, Gen. 3.19. Michael Glyeas amplifies it thus, as hee is alledged by Bramami
                              •
                           lerus the Germane; Puluis es, ex puluere es, &c. Duſt thou art, of duſt thou art, and into duſt thou ſhalt returne. As if one ſhould ſay of the congealed Ice. Aqua es, ex aqua es, & in aquam redib
                              •
                           , water thou art, of water thou art, and into water thou ſhalt be reſolued: (for the Ice is an excellent embleme of our bodies, which are more brittle then Ice.) Neyther is it any otherwayes vvith our terreſtriall bodies, in ſome proportion, then with the celeſtiall. For as all the Starres, how euer gliſtering and glorious, ariſing in the Eaſt, moue to the Weſt, ſome in a faſter, ſome in a ſlower motion: ſo wee moue to our earth, as naturally downeward as ſtones and thoſe heauy things: for, Omne graue deorſum; the earth is our proper center, to which wee moue and decline, ſome ſooner, ſome later.
                     And as the Planets Saturne, Iupiter, Mars, Mercury, Sol, Venus, Luna, moue in their proper motions; ſome quickly within a ſhort ſpace, ſome ſlowly circkling the Heauens: as the Moone within a Moneth, the Sunne in twelue Moneths, &c. which their courſes being finiſhed, they returne againe to the place from whence they had their firſt beginning of

motion: ſo wee being fixt in our places and ſtations in this life, in our ſpeciall callings, when wee haue finiſhed our courſe and done our taske, wee moue directly into that place from whence we came, euen into the bowels of the earth, ſome in a quicker, ſome in a ſlower motion: ſome in their youth, ſome in their age; but all of vs now or then.
                     
                        Serius aut citius, metam properamus ad vnam.
                     
                     
                        Wee all doe tend one way: and ſoone or late
                        We clapſe our earth in lifes expired date.
                     
                     With Brutus, wee kiſſe our mother; vvee. goe to lodge in this common Inne: our generall mother, the earth, receiues vs into her bowels againe, as the Fiſh Scylopendra ſwallowes her little frye, and ſome Bird her yong ones, in ſome common danger, vvhich they ſafely caſt forth againe, as the Whale did Ionas: vvith the little Silke-worme vvhen our vveb is ſpunne vvee dye, vvhich death vvee can no more auoid then the tall Cedar, or greene Popler can auoid the Axe of the huſbandman; or the ſayling ſhip the bluſtering vvinde, or cloud threatning waues: for of all things in the world it is moſt certaine we ſhall dye, all other things are expoſed as much vnto vncertaintie as to vanitie. A man knowes not how proſperous his iourney ſhall be by

Sea or by Land: if hee make a bargaine it is caſuall and vncertaine whether it will be thriuing and ſauing or no.
                     If a man marry a wife it is vncertaine whether hee catch a Fiſh or a Frog, a Shrew or a Sheepe; a Rebeccha, or a Zantippe. If a man beget a childe, it is vncertaine whether hee proue a wiſe man or a foole; rich or poore, and ſo in all other humane things in this life there is caſualitie and incertainetie, onely that we ſhall end this life and dye, we are moſt certaine. Euery thing in the world preacheth and proclaimeth this vnto vs. The Sunne that riſeth and ſetteth daily ouer our heads, tels vs our lifes Sunne ſhall ſet: the cloaths vpon our backes, that weare and waſte, are memorials to vs of the wearing and waſting of our bodies: the graues vnder our feete tell vs, that others muſt tread vpon vs as wee tread vpon others: the duſt that blowes in our eyes tels vs, that we are but duſt; yea, the bodies of Beaſts, Birds, and Fiſhes, that we eate for meates, in our diſhes, tels vs, that our bodies ſhall be meate for Wormes: Intentant omnia m
                              •
                           rtem; All tell vs, death is as certaine, as the houre is vncertaine.
                     The naturall cauſes of death (beſides theſe cauſes that Diuinitie giues) proue our death.Naturall cauſes of death.
                     
                     Firſt, the Elements ſtriuing and wraſtling within our bodies in their diſcord, ſetting out

of tune the Harpe of our Health, tels vs, that ſome malignant humour predominating, will ere long breake a-ſunder the ſtrings of life.
                     Secondly, this Meſſalina, this vnchaſte and vnſatiable woman, called Materia prima, the firſt matter, alwayes burning with luſtfull appetites, and deſires of new formes, ſtill plots the corruption of her old ſubiect.
                     Thirdly the radicall humour conſumes after it be come to his height of augmentation, like the Sea that recoyles and ebbes when ſhee is at full: which moyſture though it be reſtored againe by dyet or Phyſicke for the quantitie, yet it is not ſo pure as the ſpent for qualitie, ſaith Fernellius.
                     
                     Fourthly, the bloud, as it growes old, beginnes by little, and little to condenſate and waxe thicke, and ſo corrupts.
                     Fiftly, the Spirits waſte by vſe and labour, (which vveares euen Iron and hardeſt mettals) the body and the minde by corporeall and mentall exerciſes, like two vnthriftie Heyres, ſpending them faſter then the father and foſterer of them the Heart, can digeſt and gather them: all theſe ſay dye wee muſt; nay, that dye all muſt: Rich Diues as well as poore Lazarus, Salomon as well as Naball, the vviſe as well as the foole, fayre Abſolon as well as foule Thirſites, Muſicall Nero as well as harſh Menius, tall Saul as well at little Zacheus,
                        
godly Ionathan as well as his vngodly Father; high and low, rich and poore, one with another, participate of the common condition of humane nature, once to dye. Yea, the Princes of the earth cannot with-draw their neckes from this yoke;
                           Pſal. 82.6. euen thoſe that are Gods on earth ſhall dye like men; though mighty Potentates, like Nabuchadnezzars Image, be high and tall in birth and bloud; though their heads be of Gold, in wearing golden Crownes; though their breaſts and armes of ſiluer; though they were as rich as Creſſus or Craſſus, and had ſiluer, with Salomon, like the Seas ſand; though their bellies were of braſſe, made as it were a caldron, wherein the ſtomackes heat boyles ſo many meates which the mouth as Caterer prouides, and the pallate as Sewer taſtes; though their thighes be of Iron, in reſpect of potencie and power, yet their feete that props all this are of clay, their end is earth; the ſtone from the mountaine, the corner ſtone cruſheth them, ſends ſome meanes or others of their mortalitie: which cruſhing cannot be preuented; there is no writ of priuiledge to exempt any from it, no perſons, no place, no perſwaſions can procure an immunitie from not dying. Death is as inflexible as vnreſiſtable: inflexible, for eloquence which charmed Argus, will not charme Death. Tullies tongue could not ſaue Tullies life, vvhen

                        Antonie ſends for head and tongue and all; (no more then Iohns zeale could ſtop Her
                              •
                           
                           dias malice to ſaue his head;) Achitophels policie, Aeſops wit, Mithridates his being a good Linguiſt, Ariſtotles Philoſophie, Philo Iudaeus his learning, Demoſthenes Oratorie, Arions Harpe could not moue inexorable Death for an houres ſparing, when their glaſſe was run. Nay, beautie vvhich is the beſt perſwader (though a dumbe and ſilent Orator) can finde no more fauour with Death then Lais did with cold Anaxagoras. For ſure, Rebeccha, Bathſheba, Eſter, Helena, Irene, Abſolon, Ioſeph, with others moe, men and women, were goodly Creatures, yet if a man could now ſee their Sepulchers, hee ſhould ſee (that like that faire Ladie, which was found lying beſides Prince Arthur in Glaſtenburie, vvhom Mr. Speede mentions) all beautie is but duſt: and as inexorable, ſo vnreſiſtable: Nobleneſſe and Royaltie are vnable to encounter it; Alexander, Iulius Caeſar; and moſt victorious Princes, haue vailed their Bonnets, and done homage to it; yea, it hath preyed vpon Agamemnon, and Nabuchadnezzar, as a Theefe and Pirate vpon rich prizes. Old age is venerable, youth is luſty, but death reuerenceth not the gray hayres of the one; for though Adam, Enoch, Sem, Methuſalem, Malaleel, Iaired, Noah, Heber, and others, in the primitiue times; as alſo

                        Arganton, Neſtor, Valerius, Coruinus,
                        Silius lib. 3 de Argant. Ouid. lib. 14▪ de Syb. Propertius lib. 2. de Neſtore. Sic Iuuen. Sat. 10. 
                        Epiminedes, Metellus, Terentia, Clodia, Hipocrates, Sybill, and infinite others amongſt Chriſtians and Heathens, liued ſo long, that the Hiſtorians write, and Poets ſing, that, Tercentum Meſſes, &c. That they liued their one, two and three hundreds, yet though their lifes day were very long, at laſt came Euening Song.
                     Neyther reſpecteth it the greene lockes of the young, but like an Eagle and Vultur ſeazeth on the fleſh of Infants; as in the murther of Bethlems Infants, and in the death of many Children younger then Dauids Childe, that dyed. Experience ſaith, that Prima quae, &c.
                        Seneca in Her. ſur. Hor. carm. lib. 1. od. 28 Hor. carm. lib. 3. od. 11▪
                         The houre that gaue them breath, did end that houre in death, as Seneca ſaith of others: Yea, Miſta &c. Both young and old, Deaths cruell armes infold. Et fugacem, &c. The man can neyther flie him, nor the youth paſſe by him.
                     
                        Hazael was as ſwift as a Roe, and Atlanta was too ſwift for a woman, yet Death ouertooke them. Goliah was a great fellow, but Death was greater. Sampſon was ſtrong,
                           Iudg. 15. but Death was ſtronger; it killed him that killed a thouſand with the iaw-bone of an Aſſe;Enceladus Iaculator audax. Hor. lib. 3. od. 4. Dan. 8. it cut downe him that pluckt vp trees by the rootes. That Enceladus that great darter, could not ſhunne his darts, neyther can any: for it is like that Ram
                           •
                        ne which Daniel ſaw in his Viſion,

that ſhakes his hornes againſt the Eaſt and the Weſt, the North and the South, and the beaſts are notable to reſiſt him. It is like a Harueſter that with his Sickle cuts downe all, Corne and Tares, good and bad.
                     
                        Mors reſecat, mors omne necat, nullum
                              
                                 
                              
                              que
                            veretur.
                     
                     
                        What ere it meetes with, vp it ſheares,
                        For none it fauours, none it feares.
                     
                     
                        Mors à mordendo. Vel à morſu vetiti pomi.It is a mad Dog that bites all, as it hath his name (like the Vſurer) of biting, ſo Mor
                              •
                            mordet omnes, &c. It bites all, yea, euen the biting Vſurers, and grindes thoſe that grinde the faces of the poore. It is a fire vnſatiable, burning the greene Iuie and the cragged Oake; young and old. It is a Tyrant ouer Tyrants,Iunenal. Sat. 10. bringing them to their graues, cum eaede & vulnere, (as it did Nero and Domitian) with bloudy heads. It is like the Sea, terrible, not to be dramd, not to be turned out of his channell; carrying all away with it, by as many wayes as there be wayes to the Sea: all waters runne to the Sea, and all men tend to their earth.Me veſtigia torrent, omnia te aduerſum, ſpectantia nulla re
                           
                              •
                           rorſum. Prou. 7.
                         It is like the Lyon in the Fable, to whoſe denne many Beaſts went, but none returned. It accepts as many as comes, like the Harlot in the Prouerbs, but none returnes, ſince (like thoſe Oxe-like beaſtly fooles that goe in to a whore) they goe into the

chamber of death: like a couetous Niggard, it receiues all, but parts with none. Spaires none ne
                              
                                 
                              
                              que
                            moribus nec aetati: Nay, ſaith a Papiſt, nec Matri vitae, nec vitae; neyther the Virgin Mary (which they ſay is the Mother of life) nor CHRIST the life it ſelfe: then much leſſe will it ſpare vs: for, Pallida mors equ
                              •
                            pulſat pede; &c.
                     
                     
                        With aequall foote it knockes the gate
                        Both of the rich and poore eſtate.
                     
                     And that ſo indifferently, that as one ſaith, if hee ſhould make choyſe of a Iudge in the whole world, he would chuſe Death: it is not corrupted like a corrupt Officer, but is as vnpartiall as imperiall. Thus much for the neceſſitie of dying.
                     Now it is time by Vſe and Application to bring home, vvhat hath beene ſaid,Vſe. vnto the heart of euery Reader.
                     Firſt therefore, from the neceſſitie of death, let it teach vs not too much to be in loue with life, or with any thing in this life. What a folly is it for a man to ſet his heart vpon a ſtrange woman, in a ſtrange Country, whoſe face it is likely hee ſhall neuer ſee more? If Sampſon had knowne how ſoone he ſhould haue beene taken from his Dalilah, hee would neuer haue ſo doated on her: if Sichem had knowne how ſpeedily his luſting loue to Dinah would haue

occaſioned his deſtruction, hee would rather haue loathed her before his folly with her (as Ammon did Thamar after) then haue loued her. If wee did but ponder how ſoone vvee are to leaue theſe periſhing pleaſures, and profits, which will be our ruine, and irreuocable deſtruction, wee would caſt them from vs, as a menſtruous cloath, wee would hate them as wee doe a Toade, deteſt them as wee doe the Diuell, and flye from them as Moſes from his rod when it turned into a Serpent. Oh the thought of death may moderate euen lawfull affections, and curbethem in their idolatrous exorbitancie, from being immeaſurable, leaſt by a violencie of deſires they be carryed away after any outward thing that wee doe inioy, and may cauſe vs (as it did the holy Patriarks, Prophets, Apoſtles, primitiue Chriſtians, ancient and moderne Martyres,) to leaue father and mother, wife and childe, houſe and land; portion and pence, for Chriſts cauſe voluntarily, as Moſes did the pleaſures of Pharaohs Court, ſince (as Horace hath it) Linquenda tellus, &c. Wee muſt leaue them, will we nill wee. Neceſſarily, and ſure, if vvee ought to leaue in affection the good things that vvee liue by, much more vvee ought to leaue both in Affection and Action, the ſinnes that vvee periſh by, ere vvee leaue the vvorld; leaſt wee dye as vvicked men haue

dyed before vs, as wretchedly as vvickedly.
                     Secondly, ſince wee muſt all dye,2. Vſe of Inſtruction. and that as wee haue heard, becauſe vvee haue ſinned, then if wee loue life, (as all doe naturally) let vs hate ſinne that depriues vs of life.Thoſe that loue life muſt hate ſinne, the cauſe of death. A man that loues his Wife dearely, cannot loue him that would make a breach betwixt them, or deuorce him from her: hee that loues his life, me thinkes, ſhould not loue the intentiue murtherer, that plots and contriues his death. This diſturber, this deſtroyer, is Sinne: It is a right Faux, a plotter of thy perdition, a right Cateline, a conſpirator of thy calamitie: it watcheth opportunities, as the Foxe doth the Hare, as the Lyon doth the Dogge, as Iael did S
                              •
                           
                           ſera, as Iudith did Holofernes, and as Delilah did Sampſon, when to deceiue thee, when to deſtroy thee: yea, euen when it fawnes vpon thee, and flatters thee, and playes with thee, then (like the Cars play with the Mouſe) it purpoſeth to prey vpon thee. Thus it fawned and flattered vpon Adam and Eue, and offered them (as Witches and poyſoners offer Children) an Apple to play withall, but by this Apple it killed them, ſo hath it done all mankinde beſides, and wilt thou fauour it?
                     Zealous was his ſpirit that once expoſtulated with one, as I now with thee. Peccatum omnes maiores tuos occidit, & tu fouis? Sin (ſaith one) hath ſlaine all thy Predeceſſors, and Anceſtors,

and wilt thou make much of it? Wouldeſt thou deſire to looke vpon, and gloriouſly to ſheathe that Sword or Knife that killed thy good Father, thy kinde Mother, thy ſpeciall Friend, thine onely Childe? This, Sinne hath done, or will doe. Couldſt thou finde in thy heart to bid thoſe Varlets welcome that did kill the Kings of France? Now canſt thou finde in thy heart to entertaine and retaine that ſin in thy ſoule, which hath killed all the Kings in Chriſtendome? then periſh thou by it with the reſt: if thou wilt not be warmed be harmed. But ſure to loue that ſinne that not onely hath killed thy Progenitors, but that labours to imbrew his hands in thy bloud to, that ſweetens his temptations to poyſon thee, that ſpreads his ginnes daily to trap thee, that bends his bow ſtill ready to ſtrike thee, that lyes in ambuſh ſtill to ſurprize thee, and yet to truſt it, and follow the luſts and commands of it, to obey it, is great folly: but to make it thy boſome-friend, to lodge it in thine owne bed, to ſet it at Table with thee (as Dauid did his treacherous Companion) to carry it about with thee, to ſuffer it to haue free acceſſe euery day to the Caſtle and beſt Chamber of thine heart, through the dores of thy eares▪ and the vvindowes of thy eyes, and the entrance of thy mouth, to acquaint it vvith all thy ſecrets; I ſay it is extreame madneſſe▪ For the pleaſing

of ſinne, thou doſt preiudice thine owne life, temporall, ſpirituall, and eternall, and diſpleaſeſt GOD; and wilt prouoke him to cut thee off; for vvhereas other Kings deſtroy onely the forraine Caſtles and Cities of their enemies, to eſtabliſh their owne Crownes: ſo GOD, for ſinne deſtroyes the Citie and Caſtle which himſelfe hath built and made, the body and ſoule of ſinfull man.
                     Thirdly,3. Vſe of Mitigation this conſideration of Deaths commaund ouer euery created nature conſiſting of body and ſoule, whereby all humane fleſh is deſigned to the graue, ſerue notably to comfort and erect the poore deiected and reiected vvormes of the world; and to deiect and caſt downe the high lookes and eleuated thoughts of the proud and potent: for, if both the one and the other conſider well, that as they had both one originall and beginning from the earth, their foundation being from the duſt and clay, and that both of them ere long ſhall be paraleld and equalized in the graue, where they ſhall ſee corruption. Neyther ſhall the meane man too much diſtaſte his owne eſtate, and emulate the mighty; neyther ſhall the proud Potentate exalt his Creſt, and inſult ouer the pooreſt Peaſant.
                     
                        Alphonſus in one word reſolues what it is that equalizeth the poore man with the Prince, the Mechanicall with the Monarch, and that is the

graue; ſome ſay, ſleepe (in vvhich the poore man participates halfe his life time with the rich; nay, oft-times in the better ſhare; the poore Labourer ſoundly ſleeping when Agamemnon and Aſſuerus are vvatching, when Ieroboam and Nabuchadnezzar are troubled in their thoughts about golden Calfes, and ſuch things, as they dreame and doate vpon; which made Caeſar vvilling to buy the bed of the indebted poore man of Rome, who ſlept better then hee:) but vvhether that Deaths yonger brother Sleepe,Death onely makes the Prince & the Peaſant equall. vvorke alwayes this effect or no, it is as little materiall as it is vncertaine. I am ſure Death the elder Brother, brings all ſtates and conditions to this paritie.
                     Hence the vvitty Painters pictured it (like Loues Cupid) blinde, and vvithout eyes, hitting and hurting at randome, Kings, Princes, Popes, Prelates, Lords, Lownes, &c. vvithout difference and diſtinction of degrees, Crownes, Diadems, Scepters, Miters, Pals, Roabes, Rotchets, Ragges, Purples, and Leathren Pelts, being all Enſignes of his Trophies.
                     
                        Subtua Purpurei veniunt veſtigia Reges,
                        Depoſito luxu, turba cum paupere mix
                              ••
                           .
                     
                     
                        The rabbling rout and purpled Kings
                        Are all alike Deaths vnderlings.
                     
                     
                        Yea, Mors Sceptra Ligonibus aequat.
                     
                     
                        There Scepters and the ſheep-hookes ſympathize;
                        The Carter doth the Courtier aequalize.
                     
                     This thought much poſſeſt Auguſtine and Bernard in their Meditations, and therefore they ſend vs to the graues and ſepulchers of the deceaſed,Aſpice diuitum tumulos, &c. to ſee if wee can finde any difference in their bones, and munmiamized earth, ſaue onely in the externall pompe, and ſuperficiall verniſh of their Monuments: nay, ſure there is no difference at all, vnleſſe (as once it was ſaid wittilie) that the corrupted bones and putrified bodies of the rich, being more crammed and fatted with ſurfetting and drunkenneſſe, doe ſmell and ſauour more ſtrongly then the withered karkaſſe of the frugall and abſtenious poore man.
                     This Conſideration cauſed the wittie Cynicke, when hee was vpbraided by Alexander,
                        Diogenes. what hee could finde him to doe amongſt the ſepulchers of the dead (for indeede there was his choyſe ſtudy,) Oh (quoth hee) I am here ſearching for the bones of thy Father Phillip of Macedon, and I cannot diſcerne them from others. An anſwere as ſound as Satyricall, as Dogmaticall as it was dogged: for,Seneca in Agamemnon. 
                        Victor ad Herculeas, &c. For, though a man could conquer more then eyther Philip or Alexander in their times, and could extend his conqueſt

beyond Hercules his Pillars, yet his portion of earth ſhall be but a few feete, no greater then the meaneſt of his vaſſals, when he ſhall mete it out with his owne dead body, as Alexander himſelfe was forced to confeſſe, when by an occaſioned fall hee was conſtrayned to imprint his body in the duſt.
                     And ſure if Alexander had rightly applyed to himſelfe eyther Diogenes his girds at his ambition, or his inclining dying condition, he would neyther haue ſo ſoared ouer all the world beſides, liuing; neyther ſhould he haue ſubiected himſelfe to the quipping cenſures of the wiſeſt in the world, dying: for as it is recorded after hee was dead, and his bones were put in a veſſell of Gold, diuers Philoſophers meeting to ſee this dead and vnexpected dumbe ſhow. One quipt at him thus; Yeſterday hee that treaſured vp Gold, now Gold him. Another thus; Yeſterday the world would not content him, now a Sepulcher of ſixe feete muſt containe him. Another thus; Yeſterday hee preſſed the earth, now the earth preſſeth him. Another thus; Yeſterday hee ruled the world, now Death ouer-rules him. Another thus; Yeſterday all the liuing followed him, now hee followes all the dead: and euery one had the like diuerſitie of Deſcant; the laſt knits vp all their cenſures thus, Heri multos habebat ſubditos, &c. Yeſterday he had many ſubiects, now all are his

equals. Thus did theſe liuing Hares inſult ouer this dead Lyon: ſo will the meaneſt inſult ouer thee in the like caſe, though thy loftie lookes now ouer-toppe thine equals; though thy pride trample vpon thine inferiours, as Pope Alexander did on the necke of Fredericke
                        ▪ and dare conteſt and contend with thy ſuperiours: therefore leaue thy hautineſſe, and learne humilitie; doe not magnifie thy ſelfe againſt thoſe that are mightier, or aboue thoſe that are meaner then thy ſelfe; ſcorne not to ſit at table with him that muſt lye in the ſame bed with thee, I meane, in the earth: looke not at thy white feathers and proud plumes with the Swanne and the Peacocke, but at thy blacke feete, the earth, thy originall. Quid ſuperbis puluis & cinis? Why art thou proud, duſt and aſhes? what art thou but duſt? If Honourable, Noble, Worſhipfull, Witty, Wealthy, Learned, Beautifull; thou art but honourable duſt, noble duſt, worſhipfull duſt, witty duſt, learned duſt, beautifull duſt. This is the proper adiunct to all the beſt and the reſt of thy Epithites. What is one piece of duſt, of ſand, of ſlime, better then another? Why boaſts thou of thy Babell, of any thing within thee, or without thee, thy beſt things being none of thine but Gods, thy worſt the Diuels and thine owne, not worth a proud thought, thou thy ſelfe being the earths, and none of thine owne.
                     
                        Neyther let the holy, humble, pious, poore man-be too-too much deiected, eyther at his owne meanneſſe, or at the greatneſſe of the inſol
                           •
                        nt inſulting debaſhed men of this world, who ouer-toppe them, and ouer-droppe them to, as the high Oakes doe the lowly ſhrubs: but let them haue patience a-while, and they ſhall euery way paralell them.
                     As men in the Scripture are compared to Trees, ſo the Compariſon holds well. Goe into a Wood and Forreſt, thou ſhalt ſee as great difference of Trees in their kinde, as of the Starres in their kinde; ſome Aſh, ſome Oake, ſome Cedar; ſome tall, ſome ſmall, ſome ſtraight, ſome crooked, ſome young, ſome old: but now, marke theſe Trees cut downe and burnt in the Furnace, in the Iron-workes, or the like, and tell mee if thou canſt diſtinguiſh betwixt the aſhes of one tree and another. Looke at the accounts of the Merchant, one Compter ſtands for an hundred pound, another for twentie pound, another for tweluepence, another for a Cypher, this for more, this for leſſe, but when the account is done ſhuffle them all together, and who can tell the difference betwixt this Compter and that, they are all but baſe mettall. So in this life there is difference betwixt man and man, in reſpect of inferioritie or Superioritie, Magiſtracie or Miniſterie, Prince and Subiect, Maſter and Seruant,

one man is of more value, (as Dauids Souldiers ſaid of him) then a thouſand others: one ſpreads out his boughs like Nabuchadnezzar, (as Daniel interprets his Viſion) farre and neare: one is high in place, like a tall Cedar, another like a lowly ſhrub: one is a Figure, another a Cypher. But now when the Axe of Death cuts all downe, when like Compters we be all ſhuffled together, and put in the common boxe, the Graue, then who can ſay, here are the aſhes of Alexander, here of poore Irus?
                     
                     Beſides,Similes, illuſtrating Deaths effect in aequalizing all. thou ſeeſt a Stage-play (as it is to be doubted thou ſeeſt too many) there thou obſerueſt one acts the part of a King, another of a Captaine, another of a Reueller, another of a Gentlemen, another of a Gourtier, another of a Pander, a Knaue, a Clowne, a Foole; thou wouldeſt thinke ſome vaine fellow in his borrowed brauery to be a King, or in his acted knauery and folly (as is moſt likely) to be a very Knaue and a Foole: but when the Play is done, they are all alike, Rogues by Statute, if they wander; or ſilken Beggers howſoeuer.
                     In this our life wee act diuers parts, ſome Comicall, ſome Tragicall; ſome in this kinde, ſome in that, vpon the Stage of this world: in the time of acting, one is by his place and office a King, another a Baron, a third a Knight, a fourth a Squire, another a Phyſitian,

Lawyer, &c. one a great man, another a poore Mechanicall Artificer, according to our ſeuerall ranckes and callings. But now vvhen the Stage ſhall be diſſolued; the world burned, our parts acted, wee ſhall be all alike in reſpect of our interred bodies: and wee ſhall be iudged all alike in our particular or generall iudgement, according to the workes which we haue done in the body, therefore ſince wee are all earth, as like as one Egge to another, ſince all of one mettall, and like Leaden pellets, caſt in one mould; ſince all of one cloath, differing a little in the ſhape; ſince all muſt goe alike to the earth, and all be alike in the earth: let vs not be too much exalted with greatneſſe, like the Horſe which is proud of his trappings, which muſt be pulled off vs when wee are ſtabled in our Graues: nor let vs be too much deiected with our meanneſſe of place and condition, ſince Death will bring the two vnequall lines of the high and low eſtate to be paralell in the center of our earth: at which time Se
                           
                              •
                           a
                              •
                           s Epitaph will fit the Tombes of both rich and poore:

                           
                              Seneca in Agam.Hic ſeruus, dum vixit erat, nunc mortuus idem,
                           Non quam tu dari magn
                                 •
                               minora poteſt, &c.
                        
                        
                           This poore man whilſt he liu'd, a ſeruant was;
                           Now dead: the rich, in nothing doth ſurpaſſe.
                        
                     
                     
                        Thirdly, ſince we muſt all dye,3. Vſe of Direction. it behooues all of vs, and euery one of vs, to meditate of Death, and to prepare our ſelues for Death, euen as hee that is to take a iourney, or to depart into ſome forraigne coaſts, thinkes of it, contriues it, and fits and furniſheth himſelfe for it: eſpecially if hee be vpon going, and that his voyage muſt preſently be vndertaken. Thus the caſe ſtands with vs, our long Voyage (called here our departing) muſt be vndergone; it is vnauoydable, vndiſſpenſable, for the matter; vnlimited, vncertaine, where, when, and how, for the manner; yet haſtning and approaching, for the time: therefore it ſtands vs in hand to prouide, wee muſt beſtirre our ſelues to prepare our viaticum.
                     
                     The fatall and impoſed neceſſitie of this departing we haue manifeſted, and might further manifeſt the neceſſitie of dying, 1. From Gods Decree, which is immutable, Heb. 9.27. Eſay 14.24. Mal. 3.6. 2. From mans ſins deſeruing, Rom. 5.12. 3. From the change that GOD by Death vvill make in our bodies, Phil. 3.21. 1 Cor. 15.35. Iob 14.14. 4. That the godly may be rewarded, Eſay 23.18. & Ch. 26. v. 19. and vengeance rendred on the wicked, Eſay 24.8. 26.21. 5. Becauſe wee are formed onely of duſt and clay, which cannot laſt, Gen. 3.19. Iob. 4.19. 6. From the nature of all fleſh (yea, euen of the long keeping

Peacocke) which will not keepe for any long time from rotting and corrupting. 7. From the defect of radicall moyſture, Iob 8.11 Eſay 7.10. All which are ſo ſtrong inducements to warrant that we ſhall dye, that in reſpect of the premiſes, man aboue all other creatures is ſaid to be mortall, as both the Pſalmiſt cals him, and Philoſophie defines him.Homo eſt animal rationale, mortale. An Epithite appropriated to him, aboue the reſt of the creatures (though they dye as well as hee) to put him in minde of death, more then them, of which it ſeemes hee is forgetfull. But a great many moe Motiues wee haue of our ſetled and ſerious preparation for this vnwelcome gueſt, Death, from the conſideration as of his forcible, ſo of his ſpeedy entrance: which will not, nor cannot long be deferred nor delayed: for, as rauening Time, this old deuouring Saturne, hath already ſwallowed downe all former ages; ſo he comes with as ſwift a foote to deuoure vs, and all the earths children in his gurmundizing iawes. Swiftly indeede, for as an Arrow out of a Bow, as a ſhip on the Sea, as a Bird in the Ayre; nay, as our thoughts, ſo ſwift is our time: and how euer wee runne on in ſinne, yet euery day runnes on with vs to our graues, marching vehemently with Iehu; our life ſliding away, whether wee eate, drinke, walke, or talke, like the Ship that ſailes, how

euer the Paſſengers perceiue not: nay,Sen. Epiſt. 24. 
                        Tune quo
                              
                                 
                              
                              que
                            cum creſcimus, vita decreſcit; euen when wee grow and increaſe, then our life doth decreaſe. Yea, ſo mortall are wee, and ſo momentanie our life, that euen whilſt vvee liue wee may be ſaid to be dead, not onely potentially dead, (as hee that is poyſoned, or the theefe condemned, is ſaid to be but a dead man) though the one be yet wraſtling for life, and the other vnexecuted; becauſe the one is potentially, the other ciuilly dead in Law, euen ſo wee are dead in Law, as Adam and Eue were, becauſe wee haue ſinned like them, but vve are for the greateſt part euen actually dead.
                     For, let vs take the life of man as it is diuided into ſeauen parts, Infancie, Childe-hood, Adoleſcencie, Youth, Man-hood, Old age, and the Decrepit olde age. Now in theſe ſucceſſiue ages, what is the latter alwayes ſaue the death of the former,De 4. Nouiſſimis. pag. 90. as both Inchinus and Seneca haue wittily noted? What is Childe-hood but the abolition and death of Infancie? what Adoleſcencie but the death of Childe hood?
                           How inliuing wee dye
                           Nay are dead in part.
                         Youth of Adoleſcencie; Man-hood of Youth; Old age of Man-hood; and Decrepit age of Old age, and of Decrepit age Death it ſelfe is the Death. Which truth though our eyes be blinde to ſee, and our hearts dead to ponder, yet our tongues (like Caiaphas his prophecying

againſt our wils) confeſſe it. For I pray you, when an old man, or a man of middle yeeres findes an vnaptneſſe and vnableneſſe in himſelfe to performe that which in his youth he did and delighted to doe, what is his phraſe? Oh, ſaith he, that whorld is paſt with me; intimating that he is dead and departed from the world, in reſpect of that age.
                     Oh then how had euen the very Childe neede to prepare for his finall departure, ſince one part of his life is dead already, his Infancie? how the youthfull Ephebus, that hath two parts dead, and but fiue at furtheſt to liue? how the youth, that hath three parts dead in him, and but foure to liue? how the luſty man that hath foure parts of time ſpent certainely, and hath but three parts to liue and thoſe vncertaine: how the old man chiefely, that hath acted fiue parts of his life already, and hath but two to act, vncertaine, by reaſon of his faultring tongue, and dryed braine, whether hee can act theſe or no, before Death ſtrike him non plus? But chiefely the Decrepit gray-headed man, who is dead ſixe times, and now hath but one age vpon his weake and wearyed backe, about to reſt him in his graue? How ſhould theſe premeditations excite our preparations? that as we are compared to fruit in the Scripture, being called the fruit of the wombe, the fruit of the loynes, &c. ſo betimes

to bring forth fruit worthy of repentance, ere we fall, like mellow fruit, from the tree of life: If wee haue paſt ſome ages wee are dead to thoſe, euen as in fruit, the flower is the death of the bud, and the fruit is the death of the flower. Therefore let vs be fruitfull in doing good, ere vvee be pluckt away, and be no more.
                     Oh how ſoone fruit periſheth? How ſoone doth it ripen, how ſoone rot? How doe the Wormes that breede of it, and in it, conſume it? The North and Eaſt winde blaſts it: the Mill dew infects it, Caterpillers ſpoyle it: now by violence it is pluckt from the tree; now rotten-ripe it fals and ſo feſters. So it is with all the ſeede of man, the fruit of woman, wee haue all one manner of grafting, and of growing, but a thouſand different wayes of decreaſing and decaying:

                           Omnibus eſt eadem laethi via, no
                                 •
                               tamen vnus
                           Eſt vitae cunctis, exitij
                                 
                                    
                                 
                                 que
                               modus.
                        
                        
                           All haue one way to life, one way to death;
                           Yet many wayes doth ſtint our vitall breath.
                        
                     
                     Moe wayes lead to the Sepulcher then to any Princely Palace, Molle patent adi
                              •
                           us, &c. Meanders Labyrinth had not ſo many windings as Death hath wayes.
                     
                        

                        Hos Bell
                              •
                           , hos aequora poſcunt, &c.
                     
                     
                        Warres, waters, fancies, frenzies, loue, mad luſt,
                        Beſides diſeaſes doe diſſolue our duſt.
                     
                     As Seneca and Silius once ſung, as pithily as Poetically.By how many meanes we dye. Hiſtories of all times, places, and perſons, Sacred and Humane, conſort and confirme this experienced truth. The old World wee know was drowned; ſo was Pharaoh with his Aegyptians. Sodome and Gomorrah, Ziglah, the two Captaines and Companies of fifties, that came againſt Elias; Nadab and Abihu, Achan, and his familie, burned. Herod eaten with wormes: Daniels accuſers deuoured with Lyons: the mocking children, vvith ſhee Beares: the Philiſtines ſmit with Emerods: the Iſraelites cut off many thouſands in the dayes of Moſes and Dauid by Plague and Peſtilence. Bethlems Children and the Sichemites, butchered by the Sword: Ieruſalem and Samaria, by the ſword and Famine: Er and Onan, killed by the Diuine power: Ananias and Saphira throwne downe dead by an Apoſtolicall Spirit: Simon Magus his necke broke by Peters Prayers: Iulian killed with a Dart by the Prayers of the Church.
                     If wee would wade into Heatheniſh Stories, vvee might adde to the Catalogue vvithout number, ſuch as haue periſhed by vvater, as Hylas in his Colchos voyage, Orontes, Lucaſpis,

Palinurus, Iearus, Laeander, Sappho, Menander, &c. whom Virgil and Ouid ſo oft mention. by fire, as Sardanapalus, Empedocles, in Aetna: Phaeton, Dido, in the Poet. Some deſtroyed by wilde beaſts, as many Martyres in the Primitiue perſecution; as Satur
                              •
                           einus by a Bull, Ignarius, Policarpus, by a Lyon; Felicitas, by Leopards; Milo the wraſtler, by a Wolfe; Ba
                           
                              •
                           il
                              •
                           ns ſlaine by a Hart; Hatto the Biſhop of Mentz; eaten with Mice; louely Adonis, cunning Dedalur, prophecying Idmon, torne in pieces by Bores. Some by Dogs as Euripides the Poet, dogged Diogenes, weeping Heraclitus, Philoſophers; apoſtate Lucian, &c.
                     
                     How many haue beene ſtrangled vpon the Croſſe, not onely Martyres, as Andrew, Peter,
                        Diuers examples of ſeuerall ſorts of deaths. 
                        Gorgonius, Simeon the Son of Cleophas, Peter, Aulanus, &c. following their head Chriſt: but euen many Kings as Policrates, the Spartan Leonides, Sindualdus, Arnulphus, Hanno of Carthage, &c. Beſides Malefactors, ſuch as Helen the Graecian Whore, Daphitas, the Grammarian, &c. and ſuch as haue hanged themſelues, as Iudas, Achitophell, Phillis, Erigone, Biblis. Some haue beene ſtoned to death by others, or ſhot with arrowes, as Achillis by Paris, Procris by Cephalus, Acron by Romulus, Hyrene by Siſinnius; yea, a ſtone from a wall, as vpon Abemelech, out of a ſling, as Dauids againſt Goliah, or throwne with the

hand, as that which Patroclus threw vpon C
                              •
                           
                           brion in the Troyan warre (beſides the fall of wals, ſuch as that of the Tower of Shilo) hath beene the death of many. I cannot reckon all the meanes of our mortalitie, Hoc opus, hic labor. So many Creatures as I contemplate; nay, ſo many things inanimate as I ſee, me thinkes I ſee ſo many Actors in the Tragicke fall of man. The Thunder in the heauens hath ſlaine many in earth; if that which Virgil writes in the firſt, third, and ſixt of his Aeneidos of Enceladus, and other Gyants, ſlaine by Iupiter, Aiax by Pallas, Ouid of Typheus, Propertius of Semele, be a fiction: yet the report receiued of the death of Anaſtatius the Emperour, Zoroaſtres the Magitian,Plinie. 
                        Tullius Hoſtilius, by Thunder, and that which wee haue heard and ſeene in this kinde, is Authenticke: What heapes and hauocke the Sword hath made in warre, let theſe millions ſpeake, that haue periſhed not onely in the vvarres, betwixt the Kings of Iſraell and Iudah, in which in one battell there ſell fiftie thouſand betwixt Ahas and Ieroboam,
                        Ioſephus lib. S. ant. ſaith Ioſephus: as alſo betwixt the Iudges and Kings of Iſraell, vvith their enemies, when Achab ſlew an hundred thouſand Syrians, Gideon an hundred and twentie thouſand Midianites. But euen in th
                           •
                        ſe amongſt Chriſtians, when Charles Martill in one battell ſlew three hundred and fiftie thouſand

Gothes. In thoſe amongſt Pagans, Caeſar bragging of an eleauen hundred and nintie thouſand that had fallen vnder his conduct: beſides thoſe in ciuill warres betwixt him and Pompey, Scylla and Marius, &c. beſides thoſe that fell in Tamberlaines Trophies ouer the Medes, Albanes, Meſapotamians, Perſians, Parthians, Armenians, Turkes, &c. In Sicinius Conqueſts in fortie fiue ſet battels: of Hannibals ouer Cornelius Scipio, Sempronius, Flamminius, Aemillius, and Terentius, where there were ſlaine at once fortie Senators: of Alexander ouer Darius, ſlaughtering an eleauen hundred: of Craſſus, killing twelue hundred of Spartacus Armie: Lucullus two thouſand of Mithridates Troupes: Ptolomie fiftie thouſand of Demetrius hoaſt. Others moe in many maine battels recorded by Sabellicus, Liuie, Plutarch, Volateran, teſtifie, how much humane bloud the ſword hath effuſed; how many Tragedies poyſon hath acted, not onely the ſodaine and frequent fals of ſo many Mitred Popes out of Peters ſuppoſed vſurped Seate, doth declare, but the diſmall deaths of famous Emperours and Kings, as of Conſtantine the Sonne of Heraclius, Zimiſces after one yeeres raigne, of Carolus Caluns, of Henry of Lucelburge, Lothar of France, Lodouicus Balbus, Diocleſian of Dalmatia, Lucullus, of whom Pliny: nay, of Alexander himſelfe,Lib. 23. c. 3 with infinite

others, who were as certainly poyſoned as Socrates and Pope 
                           Ʋictor.
                     
                     Nay, ſo eaſily is the thread of our life cut, ſo ſoone our web vntwiſted like Penelope's, or rather ſwept away with the Spiders, that euen in our meates and drinkes wee may ſuſpect, that Mors in 
                              •
                           lla, Death is in the pot: haue we not the teſtimonie of Sextus Aurelius, that ingurgitation of meate, and too much repletion not being concocted in the ſtomacke, occaſioned the deaths of Septimius, Se
                              •
                           erus, and Valentinian Emperours? Doth not Ignatius aſcribe the fall of Iouinian to the ſame cauſe, as alſo G
                              •
                           egory Turonenſis imputes the ſodaine death of Childericus the Saxon, being found dead in his bed, to the ſame crudities and ſuffocations by intemperancie. The like cenſure giues Euſebius of Domitius Apher, that ouercome of his meate, dyed at Supper. Neyther doth Hermippus indite any thing for the death of Archiſilaus but his exceſſiue ingurgitating of Wine. As I my ſelfe once in Cambridge, ſaw a drunken dogge in forme of a man, vent out his ſoule, with diſgorging his exonerated ſtomacke.
                     Neyther are wee onely ſubiected to our diſſolution by too much repletion, occaſion of ſo many diſeaſes; yea, of death it ſelfe, that plures gula quam gladio; the panch deſtroyes moe then the ſword: but the defect of meate

and drinke hath contracted the liues of many in all parts, and thoſe no leſſe mighty. Millions haue tryed wofully the maſſacres of famine in the ſiege of Ieruſalem and Samaria, Narriners by Sea, Cities in ſiege, Souldiers in the Campe, and the poore in dearth: yea, this hath beene the cruelleſt death that Tyranny and Ielouſie could inuent. Thus was Richard the ſecond diſpatcht of his Countrimen: thus was Boniface the eight plagued by Phillip: Boniface the ſixt by one Cincius a Romane Citizen, Ariſto the Poet by the Athenians: Earle Vgoline by his vngratefull Countrimen: thus were Orator, Fortunatus, Foelix, and Silinus Martyres, pinched at Alexandria, and periſhed.
                     Nay, ſo ſoone wee are and are not, that God doth not onely ſometimes with his owne ſtroke immediately from himſelfe, cut vs ſhort; ſometimes mediately by man, for, and in the midſt of our lawleſſe luſts, as Coſbie and Zimbri were ſlaine of Phinees, Arcibiade
                              •
                           
                         of Lyſander, ſaith Plutarch, Iohn the twelfth, by the Husband of a Whore, in the midſt of their filth: (as it is reported by Tertullian, that Spenſippus the Platoniſt: by Pontanus, that Beltrand Herrerius: by Paulus Diaconus, that Rodoald King of the Longobards: by Cornelius Tacitus, that Tigillinus the Ruler of the Watch: by Celius
                        ▪ that fayre Phaon: by Pliny, lib. 7. that

                        Cornelius Gallus, and Heterius, Romane Gentlemen: and by other Authors, that others haue periſhed in their pollutions in the very venerious act:) but we periſh ſometimes euen in, and by our lawfull affections, euen the ouermuch opening and dilating of the heart in ouer-ioying, and the too much contracting of the ſame againe by ouer-ſorrowing, hath brought thouſands to their graues without gray hayres.
                     How many Authors haue we to teſtifie that which ſeemes more incredible, that an ouerioying may preſently depriue vs for euer after inioying any of the ioyes of life. What vvas the reaſon that Sophocles and Dioniſius, both of them being victorious in the cenſure of the Critticques, for their exquiſite Tragedies, dyed ſodainely, ſaith Plinie, lib. 7. c. 37. euen of an ouer-ioy, as Valerius and Volateran alſo think, how euer Lucian and Sotades alledged by Crinitus, thinke contrary? The like is reported of Chilo imbracing his Sonne, crowned at the Olympicke games: of a Romane woman at the ſafe returne of her ſon, which ſhe thought was ſlaine in the wars at Canna: of Philippides, when his Laureat Poems were preferd: of Diagoras of Rhodes, when his three ſonnes, ſaith Gellius, lib. 3. nott. at. or his two ſons, ſaith Tullie, lib. 1. Tuſc. were victorious in the publicke Wraſtlings: of Philemon, when hee ſaw

an Aſſe eate Figges prepared for the table: all who tell vs, that euen this affection of Ioy, with a ſweet tickling (like that ſtinging of the Serpent Dipſas) may kill: much more may ſorrow (as Iacob confeſſeth, and Iudah intimateth in Geneſis, haſten our heads to the graue, ere our haires be very gray: Griefe being to the heart (vnleſſe it be godly griefe for ſinne, which neuer hurts but heales, 2 Cor. 7.10.) that the Moath is to the garment, the Catterpiller to the fruit, eating the heart (like Promethius his Vultur) bringing death as the Apoſtle alſo ſaith, 2 Cor. 7.10. But if theſe things be able to ouercome this Microcoſme, this little world of Man: if Fire, and Water, and Famine, and Fulnes, and Thunder, and Stones, be able to ſunder vs from halfe our ſelues (our bodies) as the furnace can the Mettals; if all the Creatures, the Lyons paw, Bores tuske, Buls horne; nay, the leaſt of the Lords hoaſt, the Gnat, the Flye, the Louſe, the Mouſe be armed againſt vs, as againſt Pharaoh and Hatto, be able to giue vs our parting-blow, to ſet vs packing hence; nay, if our owne affections be ſufficient to infect vs: how much more are wee indammaged and indangered by diſeaſes and ſickneſſes? to which as man is more ſubiected then any other Creature, as Galen and Hipocrates haue obſerued, becauſe hee hath ſinned more then they, which ſinne

of his is the cauſe of all maladies in the outward man, Leuit. 26. Deut. 28. Iohn 5.14. So there is not the leaſt ſickneſſe or diſeaſe, but it hath conquered where it hath aſſailed. How many hath the Feuer extinguiſhed, men of fame, Emperours and Kings, as Antonius, Autipater, Ʋeſpaſian, Leo, Go
                              •
                           fred, Tacitus, &c. Antonie and Columbanus Monkes, were forced by it, the one ſort to leaue their Crownes, the other their Cels. As others by other diſeaſes, ſome by the Fluxe, as innumerable common Souldiers in ſeuerall Campes; yea, Traian the Emperour, ſaith Platina: ſome by the Gout, as Septimius Seuerus, and Iuſtin the yonger, &c. Some by vnknowne diſeaſes running betwixt the fleſh and the skin, as Heraclius, Michael Paphlago, &c. Some by Apoplexies, as Paul the ſecond, Pope; Valentinian the Emperour, ſaith Diaconus; Lucius Ami. us verus, ſaith Aurelius; as alſo Francis Petrarke: Some by aches in their bones and ſides, as Craſſus the Orator, Boniface the ninth, as Gregorie the cleauenth, by a paine in the belly: nay, vvhat member is there in man▪ wherein Death rules not by the helpe of diſeaſes▪ in the head, by Apoplexies; in the eares, by Wormes; in the eyes by Inflamations; in the noſe, by Fluxe of bloud; in the mouth, by Cankers and Putrifaction; in the tongue, by Vlcers and Tumours; in the braine, by Frenzies; in the temples, by

Contuſions; in the breſt by Stoppings, and Impoſtumes; in the hands and feete, by the Gout; in the legs, by Swellings; in the belly, by Collickes; in the reynes, by ſtony and grauelly matter; in the armes, by dolour of the Arteries; nay, in the heart it ſelfe, by Feares, Palpitations, Convulſions, Dilatations, and Contractions, by varietie of Paſſions. What ſhall I ſay more?
                     
                        Mille modis lethimiſeros mors vna fatigat.
                     
                     
                        This Tyrant Death by many a fatall dart,
                        Doth wound and wreake each liuing mortall part.
                     
                     A Flye is able to choake vs, as it did Pope Adrian; a Pinne, or a Needle, or a pricke with a Knife to deſtroy v
                           •
                        , the fall from an horſe to cruſh vs, as it did Selenchus the Syrian, Lego the French-man, Earle Fulke, Nipheus, Leucagus, Remulus, Thymetes, Amicus in Virgil, Aeneid. 10. Agenor in Ouid. The ſting of a Serpent is ſufficient to kill vs, as it did Laocoon the Troyan, mad Oreſtes, deſperate Cleopatra, Demetrius Ptolomies Librarie keeper, vvith others. Yea, as our life is but a breath and a vapour, ſo the very ſmoake and vapour is ſufficient to choake vs, as it did Minos of Creet, Luctatius the Orator, Zoe the wife of Nicoſtratus, yea, Thurinus that ſold ſmoake, ſaith Eraſmus in his Adage, periſhed by ſmoake.
                     
                        If I ſhould recite all the caſualties incident vnto this dying life of ours, and amplifie out of Hiſtories, how one hath beene killed vvith the fall of a ſtone vpon his pate, out of the clawes of an Eagle, as Eſchilus the Poet: ſome by the fall of the houſe; others by the fall of their beds, as Eupolis the Poet: ſome by duſt blowne into their throates, as Iohanna vvife to Andrew, Brother to the Sicilian King, and the like accidents. If I ſhould but recite the multitudes that Gods hath ſwept away by the deuouring Plague and deſtroying Peſtilence, which I thinke ſince the beginning of the world, hath killed moe then there be now in the world, or relate the late devaſtations that it hath made in Belgia, Italie, France, England and other places. Or if I ſhould ſet downe how many haue dyed ſodainely, euen in their ſeeming health, as Fabius Maximus, Ʋolcacius the Senator, Alaricus the Emperour; ſome in their iourney, as Alphonſus of Spaine; ſome doing the worke of nature, as Arrius the Heretique▪ and Carbo the Romane; ſome in their ſuperſtitious Orizons and Deuotions, as A. Pompey, and M. Iunencius, vvhen they were ſacrificing; ſome in ſacking the Temples, as Gaudericus the Vandall; ſome in writing Letters, as Cardinall Oreſcence from the Councell of Trent, and Terentius Corax; ſome in the firſt day of their inueſting to Honour,

as Caninius the Conſull; ſome in their mirths; ſome in their meates, as Manlius Torquatus, and Oſilius the Actor; others in their Bathes, as Sauſeius the Scribe; beſides theſe that daily experience addes in this kinde, it would make the ſecureſt Soule meditate of his ineuitable dying, and prepare his ſoule for her ſpeedy departing; eſpecially conſidering that Quid cuiquam contigit, id c
                              •
                           iuis, that which happens to any one, may happen to euery one. All theſe recited examples of abbreuiated life and approching death, being glaſſes for vs now ſuruiuing, wherein to ſee the face of our mortalitie; euery mans graue ſhewing vs this Motto; Hodie mihi, cra
                              •
                            tibi; To day to mee; to morrow to thee: Death being pictured on euery Tombe to be ſeene with an vnderſtanding eye, in forme of an Archer, now ſhooting ouer vs, at our enemies; now ſhort of vs, at our acquaintance; now on the right hand, at our friends and bloud; now on the left hand, on our Seruants and attendants, with his bow bent, and his arrowes drawne, and his ayme taken at our owne hearts; onely ſtaying till GOD bid him ſhoote; which how ſoone it will be GOD knowes,

                           Quis ſcit an adijciant, &c.
                        
                        
                           Who of vs all the ſonnes of ſorrow,
                           Knowes that his life ſhall laſt to morrow.
                        
                        
                        Nonne fragiliores ſumus, quam ſi v
                              •
                           trei eſſem
                              •
                           s? Are wee not more brittle then glaſſe, ſaith Seneca? nay, 
                           Ʋitrum etſi fragile, tamen ſeruatum diu durat, Epiſt. 
                        
                           •
                        3. Glaſſe if it be ſafely kept continues long; but all the dyet and keeping in the world, though wee ſhould eate Pearles with Cleopatra, bathe daily in new milke with Poppea, fare daily deliciouſly with the rich Churle; conſult with a Phyſitian in euery act wee did; yet wee could not long continue. All the meanes wee can vſe will hardly draw out our life to that length that Birds and Beaſts liue; for Ouſels, Eagles, Harts, &c. that fulfill their hundreds, occaſioned Theophraſtus to complaine of Nature as a ſtep-dam to man, whoſe limits as Dauid notes, are threeſcore yeeres and tenne (for the reſt of his life is eyther a death or diſeaſe,Ipſe ſenectu
                              •
                            morbus in his decrepit dayes.) The Patriarkes liued their nine hundreds and aboue,The long liues of the Patriackes. as Adam and ſo Eue, their nine hundred and thirtie, Seth nine hundred & twelue, Enos nine hundred and fiue, Caynan his ſonne nine hundred and tenne, Malalehel nine hundred ſixtie and two, Iayred nine hundred ſixtie and fiue, Methuſalem nine hundred ſixtie and nine, Noah nine hundred and fiue, &c. but wee hardly attaine to our nintie: but if a man liue paſt nintie, to nintie and ſeauen, or nintie and eight, with Liuia and Perpenna; or to nintie and nine, with Statilia; if hee paſſe his Climactericall

of ſixtie and three, wee count him an old man; but if hee attaine to his hundred (as did Valerius Coruinus, and Metellus, Abbot Paconius, and Titus Pauls Scholler) wee account him very aged: but if hee exceede his hundred, as Heroditus writes of ſome of the Aegyptians, and ſome of Maſiniſſa the Numedian King, to an hundred and foure, as did Hipocrates; or an hundred and fiue, with Xen
                              •
                           
                           philus; or an hundred and ſeauen, with Terentia; or an hundred and eight with Homer; or an hundred and tenne, with Guarinus, and Helias the Abbot; or an hundred and twelue, vvith Cyrus a Biſhop; but chiefely to an hundred and twentie, with Romualdus the Hermite, we admire and wonder at him, as much as former times wondred at their Hermites.The ſhortnes of our preſent dayes demonſtrated. And vvell wee may, ſince our life ſeemes to be but the Epitome and Comp
                              •
                           ndium of former yeeres: ſo ſhort, ſo momentanie, that as the Scripture compares it, to a flower, to graſſe, to ſmoake, to clay, to duſt and chaffe which the vvinde ſcatters, to a bubble, a blaſt, a breath, a vapour, a dreame, a ſhadow, a Weauers ſhittle, and ſuch fading things: ſo Antiquitie hath called it a winged woman, fruitfull of ſinnes, yet ſwift. Ambroſe ſaith it is like the glory of the world,In Lucam. which the Tempter ſhewed CHRIST in the twinckling of an eye; like the Viſion which Eſdras ſaw, vaniſhing in a moment,

                        Eſdras 1.8. like Ieruſalems Temple, that was ſoone deſtroyed: for as one ſtone was not left vpon another in that materiall Temple: ſo ſhortly, one bone will not be left vpon another, in the temple of the beſt compacted body liuing, which (ſaith Inchinus) is nothing elſe but Carne
                              •
                           -glacies, fleſhie Ice, or Icie fleſh, ſoone thawed and diſſolued; a clayie frame (ſaith Pontanus) ſtanding on the pillers of a little breath, ready euery day, it is ſo ruinous, to fall in manus Domini, into the Lords hands, of whom wee haue it as tennants at will. The largeſt limits of our Leaſe being but a day, for ſo Dauid and Moſes, when they play the holy Geometricians and Arithmetitians, in meaſuring and numbring their time, goe not by yeeres and moneths, but by dayes: yea, and to ſome it is but a ſhort Winters day; to the longeſt that liued,Ariſtot. de hiſt. animalium. a Summers day; in which hee that hath the moſt proſperous Sunſhine may be compared to thoſe Flyes that breede in the Sunne neare the Riuer Hipanis, which appeare in the Morne, are in their full ſtrength at Noone,Homo Ephimeron. and dye at Night. Whence came the Prouerbe, Hominem eſſe Ephimeron, that man is a continuer for a day, beyond which determined day hee cannot here abide.Foure cauſes of the long continuation of things.
                     
                     Other things are continued long by extrinſecall meanes, or intrinſecall qualities vvithin themſelues: ſome by their extreame cold, as

all ſorts of Mettals; ſome by their exceeding heate, as Pepper, Ginger, and the like; ſome by motion, as Water and Wine, that by motion are kept from putrifaction; ſome by continuation of the parts with the whole, as the Sea that corrupts not in the whole but in the parts, as may be ſeene and felt in the creekes in Eſſex that come from the Sea; but man being made mortall, and ſo hauing that Epithite more fitly appropriated to him then any other creature, neither by his naturall compoſition can, nor in the wiſe Gods diſpoſition muſt continue long vpon the earth, neyther can any Phyſicall meanes preſerue him vnleſſe a Metaphyſicall power doe vphold him, and cauſe him▪ to hold out to his old yeeres as Simeon here did.
                     Is Death ſo certaine, and Life ſo ſhort?Vſe. 4. Of Inſtruction. then let vs learne to beſtow it well, ſo long as God lends it. Abſolon after a long time knew not how to pacifie and appeaſe his Father, we haue but a ſhort time allotted to pacifie and appeaſe our diſpleaſed GOD, therefore let vs ſpeedily labour our reconciliation; let vs worke out our ſaluation with feare and trembling. As Abigall ſpeedily met Dauid and appeaſed his wrath, 1 Sam. 25. and as Dauid ſpeedily met the Lord by repentance after his numbring the people, 2 Sam. 24.10. and as Peter went out preſently, and wept bitterly, after the denying

his Maſter, Mat. 26. So let vs who in the whole courſe of our life haue as much diſpleaſed as wee haue diſhonoured our GOD, inſtantly haue recourſe to the throne of grace, that the Lord may ſmell the ſweet ſacrifice of our broken hearts, ere wrath goe from the Almightie to our deſtruction▪ Oh our dayes are few, and our ſinnes many, wee haue beene barren in good, fruitfull in euill, plentifull in ſinning,Our many ſins are to be mourned for, and why. penurious in ſorrowing. If Dauids ſinnes were moe then the hayres of his head, ours are moe then the ſands in the Sea▪ and if hee waſht his couch vvith teares, vvee had neede waſh our ſoules with flouds of vvaters, turning (like Niobe) into fountaines, and like that old conuert Pelagia, be Pelagus lachrymarum, a Sea of ſorrow, as wee haue beene vncleane ſinckes of ſinne; nay, if wee ſhould now for euer ſhake hands with ſinne, and haue no more commerce with the fleſh and the world, but liue retyredly, mortifiedly, piouſly, and penitently, as the old Hermites pretended; and if we ſhould liue Noahs and N
                              •
                           ſtors yeeres, and euery day weepe as much as Mary Magdalene did at her ſpirituall marriage vvith Chriſt, as much for our ſelues as the Daughters of Ieruſalem did for Chriſt: nay, if we ſhould weepe out our eyes, like ſome penitents that Caſſianus mentions, remembring with Ezekias our former vanities in the bitterneſſe of our ſoules,

it were not a ſufficient recompence for our fore-paſt rebellions, nor a ſatisfactorie ſacrifice for our former ſinnes.
                     But what ſhall wee ſay to thoſe that in this ſhort life make a long and a continuated cuſtome of ſinne, neuer redeeming the time,Vſe 5. Of Redargution. or thinking of their few and euill dayes, or of the reckoning they muſt make when they are expired but paſſing their time in iollitie, ſinging to the Tabret and the Harpe; letting the reynes looſe to all licentiouſnes, making their bellies their God, planting here their Turkiſh Heauen of Wine and Women, wallowing like Swine in all luſts, like Sardanapalus amongſt his wantons, ſeruing no other God then Mammon, or Goddeſſes then Venus; making Dogs and Horſes, or ſuch baſe Creatures, their beloued Idols? They thinke no more of death then the ſtiffe-necked Iewes, that made a league with the graue, and a Couenant vvith Hell (ſuch as ſome lazy Paſtors make vvith their people,) that if theſe will neuer trouble them, they would neuer thinke of theſe.
                     What is the eſtate of theſe that liue merrily as they ſay, like Pope Iohn, in corporeall and ſpirituall pollutions, like Pope Ioahn: theſe muſt trie experimentally, vvhat that curſed Pope once ieaſted at Atheiſtically, that there are long paines in another life for theſe that miſſpend their golden dayes in graceleſſe impurities

and impieties in this ſhort life:The profane mans practiſe. theſe they both make this their ſhort life ſhorter by their ſinnes: both as euery ſinne waſtes the body as it wounds the ſoule, as alſo in that they prouoke God to cut them off ſhort, eyther by his owne hand, as hee did Abſolon, Er, Onan, and the Sonnes of Heli, or elſe by the ſword of the Magiſtrate. And they haſten and prolong their plagues and paines perpetuall; They leade their liues in ioy (ſaith Iob, Ch. 20.) and ſodainly they goe downe to Hell: Oh they goe like theeues laughing to the Gallowes, and like traytors dancing to execution. Oh how ſodainely is their candle put out!
                     
                        Exhortat▪
                        Let me ſpeake to ſuch in the concluſion of this Vſe: in Gods feare let them conſider that this life is called a valley of teares; here therefore they muſt ſow in teares, if they will reape in ioy; they muſt haue a wet Seede-time, if they expect a bleſſed Harueſt. Let them ponder what Chriſt ſaith, Bleſſed are they that mourne, Mat. 5. As alſo, Woe be to you that laugh: let them thinke what Chriſt did; wept oft, laught neuer, his Prophets and Apoſtles ſeldome or neuer. Let them know further, that God cals to weeping and mourning, and baldneſſe, and ſack-cloath, Eſay 22. which call they haue not yet anſwered: for behold, Ioy and exultation, vpbrayding God, and brauing his command, euen to his face, with their helliſh Prouerbes,

as, Hang ſorrow; Caſt away care; As long liues the merry man as the ſory; Let vs be merry, wee know not how long wee haue to liue; like the ſcoffing Atheiſts amongſt the Iewes, Let vs eate and drinke, to morrow wee ſhall dye: Oh thou knoweſt not how long thou haſt to liue; therefore retort that temptation backe againe to Sathan thus:Hovv vvee muſt ſovve in teares in this ſhort ſeede-
                              ••
                           me of life. Therefore I will be ſorie for my former ſinnes; I will be (if at all) ſoberly and mortifiedly merry; therefore I will ſet my ſoule in order, and the houſe of my heart in order, like Ezekias, otherwayes I ſhall be worſe then Achitophel that ſet his houſe in order ere hoe hanged himſelfe; To morrow it may be I ſhall dye, therefore I will not eate and drinke inordinately, leaſt I be taken away to hell, as was the rich Churle and Baltaſſer
                        ▪ in the midſt of my curſed cates and drunken cups; I will not any more ſerue the Diuell and my belly in chambering and wantonneſſe, in ſurfetting and drunkenneſſe, but I will put on the Lord Ieſus Chriſt. It is now time that I ſhould awake from the ſleepe of ſinne, ere I ſleepe in death; I will ariſe vp that Chriſt may giue mee light. Oh alas, what fruit haue I had in the vnfruitfull workes of darkneſſe, whereof I am now aſhamed.
                     Laſtly, thinke with thy ſelfe how ſmall cauſe thou haſt of this thy irreligious profanenes, & carnall ſecuritie, and beſotting ſenſualitie. Hath

a Traueller any cauſe to be merry when hee is farre out of his way, hath few friends, nothing to ſpend, ſtormy weather aboue his head, Pyrates lying in waite to rob him, night approaching, and vncertaine whether euer he get to his iournyes end? Thou art in this world a pilgrime and a ſtranger: Heauen is thy country, (from thence came thy ſoule) thou art out of the way that leades thither, thou art in the broad way to hell; thou haſt few friends, God, Angels, Diuels, Man, and the Creatures are againſt thee: thou haſt little to ſpend, thy good Tallents▪ and ſtocke of Grace is already gone and ſpent, like the Prodigoes, on thy luſts, Luk
                              •
                           
                         15. thou haſt no moe meanes to helpe thy ſelfe, then the wounded man that trauelled to Ierico, that had not two-pence: there is a ſtorme ouer thy head, Gods wrath hangs ouer thee in a cloud of vengeance: Pirates, the infernall Spirits, lye in waite for thy ſoule: the night of thy death is neare: and thou art vncertaine of ſaluation; nay, the word excludes thee and ſuch as thou from apprehenſion of any comfort from that, ſince thou walkeſt in the ſhadow of death, in the way to damnation.
                     Conſider againe what occaſion of ſports and merriments and ſenſuall ſollaces a man can haue in priſon, in colde irons. Did Manlius and R
                              •
                           gulus, and Muſius Scae
                              •
                           ol
                              •
                           
                         take delight

in their, priſons and preſſures? Now here thou art as it were in priſon, like Ioſeph in the ſtockes, like Manaſſes in fetters, and in tribulation: the world it ſelfe is but a priſon in reſpect of Heauens pallace, and thou in this priſon liuing in ſecuritie, like the old Worldlings, art enthralled to thine owne luſts, and ſo a ſlaue to Sathan who plots thy deſtruction, as Achitophel did Dauids.
                        What vſe we are to make of our ſhort time. Therefore heare counſell and receiue inſtruction, ſince thou art here in a ſtrange Land, like Iſrael in Babel, ſit downe by the Riuers of water and weepe, hang vp thy Harpes and Inſtruments; vſe not carnall company that cauſe thy careleſſe ſecuritie and thy forgetfulneſſe of God and thine owne ſoule: remember whence thou art, where thou art, and whither thou art going; make that vſe of thy time that Ioſeph did of the ſeauen yeeres of plentie; prouide againſt famine; agree with thine aduerſary whilſt thou art in the way▪ ere thou come before the Iudge, as Cat
                              •
                           
                         counſels to doe ſomething in youth worth thy relation and remembrance in age: and as trauellers vſe to performe ſome exploit in their trauels worthy their thoughts and diſcourſe when they come at home, ſo treaſure vp thoſe graces in life which may ſtand thee in ſtead after life; prouide againſt a rainy day; gather now honie from the flowers of vertuous actions, into the Hiue of grace; worke whilſt it is

day, ere the night come; doe good to all whilſt thou haſt time, Gal. 6. waite at all times with Iob, vntill thy changing come, euen as thou waiteſt for the times and ſeaſons, in Winter for the Spring, in the Spring for Summer, in Summer for Autumne: thou canſt not enioy thy ſinnes long, thou muſt leaue them, or they thee violently; therefore breake them off (as Daniel counſelled Nabuchadnezzar) voluntarily by Repentance and Almeſ-deedes; get a certaintie to thy ſoule; conclude ſomething, like Ambaſſadours that goe to forraine Courts, and haue but a ſhort abode allotted, that may make for thy eternall peace hereafter, when thou commeſt before thy Prince; make ſomething certaine here ere thou goeſt hence; in euery thing thou vndertakeſt thou loueſt a certaintie; if thou iourney, thou wouldeſt rather goe by Land then Sea, becauſe more certaine; doſt thou purchaſe, thou wouldeſt make ſure worke of Lands or Tenements? doſt thou walke on Ice, thou poyſeſt euery foot-ſtep ere thou ſet thy foote, ere thou venter thy body? ſo in euery thing thou wouldeſt be ſure. Oh make ſure worke for thy ſoule, that as Ezekias prayed for peace and righteouſneſſe all his dayes, ſo there may be peace to thy ſoule after thy dayes. Oh make vſe of that precious time that is allotted thee; take it by the fore-top, it is bald behinde.
                     
                        Goe to the Piſmire thou ſluggard: learne of the Beaſts; the Ant ſees it will not alway be Summer, the Crane and Storke thinke it will be another ſeaſon, the Birds take the Spring prime to build their neſts; ſtore thou vp faith, with her fruits, chiefely Repentance from dead workes. Now beginne, Ars longa, vita breuis, Life is ſhort, but the Art of well liuing and well dying, which is the Art of Arts (euen that vvhich the beſt Maſter taught in the beſt Chaire, Chriſt vpon the Croſſe,) that is long: therefore Nulla dies ſine linea, Euery day learne ſome line; take out ſome leſſon in this Art: ſing not out thy time here with the fooliſh Graſhopper; loyter not with the idle men of Belial, leaſt thou incurre Chriſts checke; play not the fat bellyed Monke; and Epicuriſh Abbey-lubber, leaſt thou ſmart for it (as the When the Abbies were viſited in king Henrie the 8. time.Cloyſterers once did in this Land) in the day of the Lords viſitation. Learne to liue the life of grace, that thy death may be gracious and precious in the ſight of GOD, as one of his Saints, that ſo thou maiſt dye not onely naturally, like a man, as thou muſt, but Chriſtianly, like a Chriſtian man, as thou oughteſt: which that thou maiſt the better doe, as in other things thou contriueſt how to doe well, that which thou purpoſeſt to doe; (as thou forecaſts thy building, ere thou build; thy iourney, ere thou trauell,) So, oft remember how thou

maiſt dye well, ſince thou muſt die; and that is by liuing well, whileſt thou here runneſt the ſhort race of thy life.
                     A good man like a good Tree, brings forth fruit tempore ſuo, in his due time and ſeaſon: this Life time is, tempus tuum, thy time; Death is tempus ſuum, Gods time: therefore begin to mend the ſhip of thy ſoule in the hauen, in thy health, not in the tempeſt of ſickeneſſe, not in the Sea of death. I end my counſell as I begun; this life is as ſhort as ſinfull, therefore ſpend it well.
                     
                        
                           Point. 2 Secondly, in that Simeon here deſires his departing the nature of the word ſignifying a looſing,Life is laborious & Miſerable. or an vnyoaking, being a Metaphor taken from Oxen looſed out of the yoke, after labour; or from Priſoners ſet at libertie; may well and warrantably adminiſter vnto vs the conſideration of the nature of that life which wee leade, to be as miſerable as mortall, as laborious to the body as dolorous to the minde; as alſo it may open our eyes to ſee ſomething more clearely into the nature of death, vvith his bounties and benefits, in that it is not onely a curber of Sinne, but a curer of Croſſes, an vnlooſer from labours.
                     For the firſt, that whether you call it a curſe or a command, which was impoſed on the firſt man, that in the ſweate of his browes hee ſhould eate his bread, till hee returned to

his earth, from whence hee came, Gen. 3.19. all mans ſeede ſince, in their ſeuerall generations, haue beene expoſed to. Doe wee not feele yet the ſmart of the forbidden fruit? Are not our teeth ſet on edge by it? Are not all things vnder the Sunne full of labour? Are not the workes of Grace, the workes of Nature painefull? the actions of the body, the actions of the minde, the operations of the ſoule and ſpirit laborious? Is it not a paine to pray, a paine to repent, a paine to ſtudy, to contemplate, to diſcuſſe, to diſcourſe, to number, to diuide? Is it not painefull to write, to indite, to preach, to counſell, to exhort, to perſwade, diſſwade, vrge, moue? Let euery knowing man and experienced ſpirit ſpeake.
                     Are not workes manuall and mechanicall painefull? (euen as the Arts liberall are?) Is it not paine to plow, delue, digge, ſow, mow, to work in Goale works, & Mettall-mines, in brick and clay, is an Aegyptian bondage? Nay, is there not onus; as well as hono
                              •
                           
                        ; a labour, as well as an honour in euery Calling? Are not Princes, and ſuperiour Magiſtrates, Gouernours in houſes, Colledges, and Corporations, (like the heauenly Bodies) as much in motion and labour, as in veneration? Vertues, vices, pleaſures, profits, riches, pouertie, vvanton youth, couetous old age, all haue their burthens? What callings without their croſſes,

from the Scepter to the Sheepe-hooke? what ſexe without his ſorrow?
                     
                        No place is priuiledged from foure things.Whither ſhall a man flye, 1. from Sathan tempting; 2. from the vanitie of his owne heart; 3. from the bitings of venemous tongues; 4. and from the croſſes of the world? I haue oft thought, if there were any place in the foure parts of the world, to auoid theſe foure, thither to flye: but there it no Aſilum, or Sanctuarie from them, or any of them, vnder the Cope of Heauen. Theſe alwayes follow, as the ſhadow the body; and (like proud T
                              •
                           rquin in Rome) challenge a perpetuall Dictatorſhip in the whole life of man. What day ſets ouer our head without his euill, eyther of Sinne or Puniſhment? Adam muſt eate his bread in his browes ſweate; Cunctis diebus, all his dayes, in heat and ſweat, toyling and moyling; man muſt wearie his body and weaken his ſpirits, till hee keepe his eternall Sabbath in Heauen.
                     Bring me the man that hath not yet drunke of the common cup of humane calamities incident to life, and I ſhall more admire him, then the Graecians did Achilles that could not be wounded. I neuer read of any but Policrates, who was thought to be without the Gunſhotte of Fortune, by the deluded Heathens; yet his death was as dolorous as his life proſperous. I am ſure, mitred Popes, crowned

Kings, inueſted Emperours, tryumphant Conquerours haue ſeene the turning of Seſoſtris wheele, and haue experienced ſo many miſeries that they haue cryed out, ſome of them, Miſerum eſt fuiſſe foelicem, it is a miſerie to haue beene happy: others, ſolus viues, Vacia; that the priuate life of Vacia the Romane was farre ſafer then their publique, guilded, guilefull pompe: others, with Cyrus and Auguſtus, haue thought the Regall Crowne not vvorth ſtooping for: others, haue left voluntarily their Courts and Palaces for ſecure and penitent Cels.
                     If wee had no moe examples of the miſeries of greatneſſe, eyther by birth, bloud,Examples of humane calamities. command, or deſart, then in Nabuchadnezzers deiection amongſt Beaſts, being one of the greateſt of men; in Manaſſes his impriſonment; in Sampſons grinding in the Mill; in Agag hewed in peices; in Adonizebecks eating crummes, like a Dogge, vnder his enemies Table; in Alexander poyſoned, and left vnburied; in Caeſar ſtabbed by his pretended friends; in Bellizarius, a blinde Beggar, after his Conqueſts; in Baiazets Iron Cage; in Socrates and Seneca's poyſoning; in Cleopatra's, Iezabel's, Agrippina's, and other infamouſly famous Queenes and Queanes, periſhing, to omit all the reſt in this kinde, it might verifie the Paradoxe, that Humana vita non eſt vita, ſed calamitas, Mans

life is no life: Vita vix vitalis, an imaginarie life, and a reall calamitie; in which ann
                              •
                            paues, aeru
                              ••
                           nae multae, the yeeres are few, the griefes many: yea, ſo many, ſo manifold, ſo conſtant, ſo continuated by ſucceſſiue croſſes, which follow one another (like the waues of the ſea) like the Meſſengers that came one after another, to Iob and Dauid, to bring ill newes of the death of their Children, euery day hauing ſuam & malitiam, & militiam, his wrath and his warre-fare; that euen the very childe entring the liſts into this militarie world, as ſoone as it comes from the mother, cryes and weeps: the firſt note it ſings is Lachrymae, taught onely by prouident Nature. The Males (ſaith a wittie Popiſh Poſtiller) from Adam cry a; and the Females from Eue cry e, e; which put together make a Note of ſorrow. Nondum loquitur, at tamen prophetat, (Auguſtine) Before it ſpeakes, it propheſies, as though at the birth it had that prognoſticating ſpirit, which Carden ſaith ſome men haue at their death, as though it did ſee ſome euill preſent, fore-ſee and feare moe to come.
                     I might goe along (with Innocentius) in this ſubiect, and ſhew the ſeuerall maladies and miſeries incident to euery ſeuerall age, from Infancie to Decrepit old age: how like ſeuerall Beaſts wee carry our ſelues, till Death bring vs to the Shambles: how pittifully Childe-hood

wallowes like a little Pigge, in dirtie places; and like Duckes and Geeſe, ſwattles and dabbles in wet and filth? How Youth is a laſciuious Goat; Adoleſcencie, an vntaimed Heiffer; Man-hood, a ſterne Lyon; Old age a ſluggiſh Aſſe, that onely beares a more precious thing then Iſis, euen that which beares it, an immortall ſoule.
                     I might anatomize man further in all his parts and weakened powers, ſhewing the ſeuerall diſeaſes that ceaſe vpon euery member, where they challenge their ſeates and thrones. I might inlarge the croſſes incident to euery Function and Vocation: but referring you to the Fathers, chiefely Bernard and Fulgentius,
                        De conditione vitae humanae. De contemptu mundi. and to zealous Papiſts, chiefly Innocentius and Stella, beſides him that in Engliſh hath vvrit the miſeries of mans life, leauing you to their vintage, I onely reſt with the taſte of theſe Cluſters, vvhich we now further preſſe forth by vſe.
                     Is it ſo that this life which wee liue is ſo laborious (as the world wherein wee liue is wicked?Vſe 1. Of Inſtruction.) then the leſſe good that wee finde in the life naturall, wee muſt labour to counterpoyſe it, by purchaſing the life ſpirituall: the more diſcontent wee finde in the life of Nature, the more comfort and content wee muſt ſeeke and ſearch for, in the life of Grace, which like Eliſhaes ſalt caſt into Iordan, ſeaſons

all the maladies of life. Now, if thou wouldeſt liue the life of Grace, and haue peace and ioy, euen by a drie paſſage as it were in the red Sea of this World, then doe thoſe things that concerne thy peace.
                     
                        Twelue meanes of true peace.Firſt, abſtaine from ſinne: for where it raignes there is no life of Grace. Sin quencheth Grace, as water fire: Sinne vvill kindle a fire vvithin thy ſoule, to burne vvith ſecret flames; for, the wicked are like the raging Sea.
                     Secondly, as one of Chriſts true Diſciples, ſubiect thy will and ſoule to Chriſt: it is his promiſe, thou ſhalt haue peace in him, and he will ſend thee the Comforter.
                     Thirdly, frequently confeſſe thy ſinnes to God, more balme of inward ioy, thou ſhalt haue from the chiefe Phyſitian, the more thou doſt lay open the vlcers of thy ſicke and wounded ſoule.
                     Fourthly, vſe frequent and feruent prayer, ſhut thy Chamber-dore, play not the Phariſaicall hypocrite, and Chriſt ſhall enter in and ſay Peace be to thee, as hee did to the Diſciples.
                     Fiftly, keepe the Lords day ſtrictly, neyther doing thine owne works and will, nor Sathans, nor ſpeaking thine owne wordes nor his, but Gods word and will in publique and priuate duties: this brings much familiaritie vvith

God, and hath the anſwere of many hidden ioyes from his Spirit: It is a ſpirituall reſt to euery Chriſtian, as it was promiſed a reſt to the Iſraelites.
                     Sixtly, reade and meditate in 
                           •
                        he Word of GOD: They ſhall haue much peace that delight in thy Law, ſaith the Pſalmiſt.
                     Seauenthly, ſuffer iniuries patiently; ſuſtaine and abſtaine, and thou ſhalt feele within thine owne heart God taking thy part: for, Qui patitur eſt victor, &c. He that ſuffers ouercomes himſelfe, the world, his enemies, and is Chriſts friend.
                     Eightly, contemne earthly vanities, they deuide and diſtract the heart.
                     Ninthly, be imployed in a Calling: the idle are toſſed with a multitude of fooliſh fancies and fond deſires.
                     Tenthly, be meeke, ſo ſhalt thou enioy the earth with ioy. Mat. 5.
                     Eleauenthly, get an humbled and a contrite heart, that is the ſeate of Grace, and throne of God. Eſay 57.15.
                     Twelfthly, doe righteouſneſſe, the fruit whereof is peace and ioy. Theſe things belong to thy peace, which if thou practiſe, thy light ſhall ſhine to the darke world, and thou ſhalt haue a lightſome Goſhen in the life of Grace, euen in the darkeſome Aegypt of this wretched world.
                     
                        
                        Vſe 2. Of Redargution.Secondly, is life ſo laborious? are our dayes ſo dolorous? Then theſe come within the compaſſe of a iuſt Redargution, that are ſo drenched and drowned in the things of this life, ſo beſotted and bewitched with the painted beauties of this earthly Iezabel, the World, that they can neyther ſpirare nor ſp
                              •
                           nare coeleſtia, that they haue as ſmall hopes as they vſe ſmall helps for Heauen in a better life, but ſetting vp here their reſts, & ſtinting their aimes at earth, they deſire (as Peter vpon the Mount) to build tabernacles here in this vaile below, neuer caring for that building not made with hands, eternall in the Heauens 2 Cor. 5.1. Alas, let ſuch know that in their aerie hopes they feede but on the winde, with the Camelion: they imbrace but a cloud, with Ixion, in ſtead of Iuno: they touch Sodomes Apples, and are deluded vvith beautifull-duſt: they imbrace ſhadowes for ſubſtances, and place their deſires vpon ſuch obiects
                           •
                         as are vnworthy of an immortall ſoule and a heauenly inſpired ſpirit.
                     
                        The vanitie of life with all the things in life truly diſcouered.For, I pray you; what is life it ſelfe, yea, long life, which they ſo doate vpon and long after, but a moſt irkeſome and tedious pilgrimage, enuironed with infinite perils, and vpon moſt light occaſions loſt? or what is any thing in life worthy our liking and affections? What is the body it ſelfe which we ſo pamper,

but coagulated duſt, guilded ouer in the out couering with colours, and ſet vp with the props of proportion; the ſlaue of the minde, and priſon of the ſoule: ſperma fetidum, cibus vermium, mans excrement, wormes nutriment? What is the Beautie of the body but a well coloured skinne, farre inferiour to the beauties of the Sunne and Moone, theſe heauenly bodies? Beſides, if we could ſee within, we ſhould ſee a filthy Golgotha, and rotten dung-hill.
                     What is Strength when Sampſon is bound by a woman; ſince the greateſt things and moſt worthy of a man are effected by the ſinewes of wit, not by the ſtrength of ſinewes? are not both Strength and Beautie the flowers of the body, which one blaſt of a Feauer will deface and ſhake all to fitters? What are the Pleaſures of the body but (like the body it ſelfe) ſenſuall, ſinfull, pecudine and vile; Diſeaſes being the Vſury that Pleaſures pay, and perpetuall Sorrow the bond; as the Poets fayne of Iupiter, that hee ioyned Pleaſure and Sorrow together in an Adamantine Chaine, when hee could not agree them in a difference that they brought before him. Beſides, are not theſe corporall Pleaſures inioyed of the Beaſts more then of man, more ſtrongly, vehemently and longer? Are they not the workes of darkeneſſe, and vſed in the darke? is any man ſo impudent that dare vſe them publikely for ſhame?

Are not diſtempers, diſeaſes, diſtractions diſcredit to our good name, loſſe of ſubſtance to our eſtate (when they deuoure their Idolatrous vſers of them, as Acte
                              •
                           n
                              •
                           
                         Dogs did their Maſter) fruitleſſe repentance to the mind, dulneſſe of wit, corrupting of the heart, darkning the vnderſtanding, decaying the Soules Intellectuall powers; Impatiencie of a mans ſelfe, hatred of all vertues, inclination to all vices, their bad fruits and baſe effects? Are not nominie, ignobilitie, impriſonment, deformitie, ſickneſſe, imbecillitie, blockiſhneſſe, and Stupiditie, their Pages and Attendants?
                     For Riches (the vulgars God) what are they but the long expences and prouiſions for a ſhort iourney, oppreſſing the bearers▪ heauy burthens to ſincke the Shippe of the Soule? For, Gold and Siluer▪ the Helena that the world doa
                           •
                        es on, the Lais that moſt are inamoured vpon (as the beaſts vpon the Panthers skinne, for his ſeeming luſter) what are they but red and white duſt, the baſe excrements of the earth, blowne away with the wind of euery caſualtie? Pearles and precious Stones what are they but the ſpoyle of Fiſhes, good onely in the eſtimation of the Lapidarie, and in their owners imagination, no
                           •
                         in their owne nature, nor in any helpfull effects?
                     Nobilitie, what is it but an opinion, or lot of birth, being our Anceſtors not ours, alſo

oft vvrongfully acquired by oppreſſion and crueltie?
                     Glory, what is it but a puffe of winde, the vaine inflation of the earth, vncertaine, momentanie, oft wicked, like his father the multitude, who this day haue Hoſanna for a man; to morrow, Crucifie him: that in one houre will make one more then man, and then a murtherer, as they did Chriſt and Paul?
                     Power, and a Kingdome, are but a ſpatious moleſtation; Pulchrum malum, a beautifull euill, a guilded poyſon, a Crowne adorned with counterfeite Iemmes, a ſea of euils? Honour (if it come not from Vertue) a friuolous and peruerſe conceit? Dignitie, if deſert beget it not, what is it but the baſtard of an vncertaine father, oft acquired by ſuite, craft, fraud, ambition, ſiniſter meanes and vvicked Arts?
                     Laſtly, to draw together the ſailes of our ſpeech; in one word, what is the World, with all her Iezabels paint and Peacockes plumes, with which ſhee deludes her louers? What is Life, and the beſt things in life, with which her Amorettoes and Idolatrous Adorers are ſo delighted? hath not Salomon by a diuinely inſpired ſpirit, giuen in his vnpartiall and infallible verdict, as one that knew moſt in this kinde of all meere men, Vanitie of vanities, and all is but vanitie, ſaith the Preacher. And as

there is little good in life to be loued, ſo there is nothing but euill in this life;Maelum culpae, malum p
                              •
                           n
                              •
                           . eyther in it owne nature, as is the euill of ſinne; or penall, the fruit of ſinne: eyther croſſes, ſuch as the godly trye; or curſes, ſuch as the wicked feele. The due meditation whereof hath cauſed many zealous ſpirits, Auguſtine, Ambroſe, Chryſoſtome; Bernard, Fulgentius, as alſo Pontanus and Stella, with many moe, to write ſeuerall Tractates, which I thinke (as the Spider drawes her webbe) they drew from themſelues, and from the feeling of their owne hearts, concerning the contempt of the world, and the not louing this life:Vnicui
                              
                                 
                              
                              que
                            ſua cupiditas eſt tempeſtas. ſome comparing it to a Sea, in which euery mans turbulent deſires are a tempeſt: ſome to a darke and dangerous Wood, wherein are many wilde Beaſts, Buls of Baſan, deuouring Wolues, Herodian Foxes, poyſoning Baſiliskes,The world anatomized by ſundry Similies. fiery Dragons: for, the Scripture giues the true morrall of Pithagoras and Ouids fictions in their Tranſmutations, men in ſhape are beaſts in conditions, Tit. 2.12. Eſay 1.4. &c. Some to a Net, that is ſpread for all, but catcheth and retaines onely fooliſh fiſhes. Others ſay it is an vngratefull Hoaſt, that entertaines and retaines, yet pils and ſpoyles all that truſt it, ſtill diſlodging, diſmiſſing, forſaking, forgetting his old Gueſts, to retaine new. Some ſay, it is like the darkeſome Aegypt, wherein is plague vpon plague,

at laſt deuaſtation to all that are not the true Iſraell of GOD. Some compare it to the Firmament in continuall motion. Some to a ſolitarie Deſart, wherein is the roaring Lyon, the Diuell; the Scorpion and Dipſas, the old Serpent, wicked Spirits, Theeues, Thornes of ſinnes, and barrenneſſe of grace. Some vnto the Night: Firſt, becauſe of the blindneſſe and ignorance that is in it: Secondly, the drowſie and ſecure ſleepe of ſinne: thirdly, the wilde beaſts of the night, Heretiques, Schiſmatiques, &c. Bores of the Forreſt, Foxes that ſpoyle the Vines; the night, the time of forraging, in which alſo the enemie ſowes Tares of ſinnes and Hereſies, the one to corrupt the good Wheate of Sanctification in the heart, the other of Illumination of the braine. Others, with holy Iob, make it a place of warrefare and combat, wherein wee are to fight with ſeuerall enemies of ſundry natures, as Dauid did, with a Lyon, with a Beare, and with Goliah: ſome being within vs, craftie Sinons, our owne luſts; ſome without vs, like armed Philiſtines, the luſt of the world; ſome aboue vs, Sathan in the Ayre; ſome on the right hand, ſome on the left, as proſperitie and aduerſitie; ſome before vs, as the forbidden fruit of Sin; ſome behind vs, the barking mouthes and biting tongues of maleuolent men. Some to a priſon, wherein though it feed the body, yet it

fetters the ſoule, like that wherein Ioſeph had fauour, yet hee was kept faſt. Laſtly, Fulgentius compares it to a fayre Amazon Maide, with theſe Mottoes writ vpon her head, I haue wit and policie: vpon her browes, I haue comelineſſe and beautie: vpon her breſt, Here is ſtrength and agilitie: on her right hand, Here are riches and proſperitie: yet vnder her feete, Haec omnia vanitas, All theſe are but vanitie: and ſo let vs account them. Loue not the world▪ much leſſe the luſts of it, concupiſcence of the fleſh, of the eye, and pride of life. Imitate CHRIST thy head, hee deſpiſed the pride and pompe of it, in refuſing a Kingdome, in waſhing his Diſciples feete, Iohn 13. in preaching & practiſing humilitie, Mat. 11. in ſuſtaining temptations and tryals, Mat. 4. in aſſuming our fleſh, in chuſing his fiſhing Diſciples, in dying vpon the Croſſe: hee croſſed the couetouſneſſe of it, by poſſeſſing nothing▪ not ſo much as Foxes and Birds; in commending the godly poore, Mat. 5. in dying naked vpon the Croſſe, hee croſſed the luſts of it, in his innocent and ſpotleſſe chaſtitie, in being borne alſo of a chaſte Virgin: ſo thou▪ if thou be a right Chriſtian after him, if one of his Church, deſpiſe theſe terreſtriall things, ſeeke for celeſtiall, Col. 4.1.2.3. &c. tromple the Moone, theſe momentanie things vnder thy feete: vſe the world as though thou

vſed it not▪ looke at it and the things of it, as at a Lyon in a grate, ſubiect not thy ſelfe to it, be not the ſlaue of it, come not within the reach of it, it will teare thee, and (as the Panther and Hiena deale with Beaſts) by fawning deuoure thee: looke at it therefore, and like it, as a Pilgrime▪ a ſtrange Country, as a Traueller his Inne, onely to lodge in it for a few dayes or nights: alwayes be in readideſſe with old S
                              •
                           meon to depart as the Iſraelites were ready in a trice to depart out of Aegypt: loue this life ſo, that thou wilt willingly lay it downe, as thou putteſt off thy garments when thou goeſt to bed, when GOD cals thee to ſleepe in thy graue.
                     Thirdly, both from theſe premiſſes,3 Vſe. vvee may gather an vſe of Inſtruction; as alſo from the Text, wee may ground a doctrinall obſeruation, concerning the nature of death, comfortable to the godly, to whom all things; yea, death it ſelfe happens for the beſt,
                           Rom. 8. chiefely if they grone vnder the Croſſe: for, if life be ſo burthenſome, death muſt needes be beneficiall that vnlooſeth our yoake, and takes the burthen from our vveakened natures vvearyed ſhoulders.The benefits of death to a Chriſtian vnder the croſſe. Therfore death comes to the good man, to the croſſed Chriſtian, as Moſes to the Iſraelites in Aegypt, to deliuer him: it comes to the godly, as Pharaohs Daughter to M
                              •
                           ſos fluctuate on the waters, as the Arke to Noah,
                        
as Obediah to the perſecuted Prophets, to preſerue them; as the Angell to Lot in Sodome, as Abraham to Lot in captiuitie, as Dauid to his captiue Wiues, to reſcue them; as the Angell to Peter in Priſon to ſet them free; as the Angell to CHRIST in his Agonie; as Ionathan to Dauid, to comfort them in extremitie; as Ioſephs Chariots to old Iacob, to reioyce them; nay, as Gods Chariot to Elias, to carry them into the place of ioy; as the Angels to Lazarus, to carry them into Abrahams boſome. What ſhall I ſay more? as Ionas his Gourd to coole Ionas in his exceſſiue heat; like Saul to thoſe of Mount Gilead, to help them in time of diſtreſſe; like the yeere of Iubilie to the Bond man; like the long lookt for huſband to a louing wife; like newes from a farre Country like meate to the hungry, and drinke to the thirſtie; like a meſſenger from GOD, with this meſſage, Affl
                              •
                           xite, non-affli
                              •
                           am amplius, I haue afflicted thee, I will afflict thee no more, as God ſaid in effect to Abraham, faith Auguſtine:
                        Aug. thou haſt had tentationem fides, the tryall of thy Faith, now receiue benidictionem pro fide, a bleſſing for thy Faith; bleſſing vs, as the Angell did Iacob, after we haue wraſtled with the worlds woes. Therefore the godly dead, as the Latine beares it (as is well obſerued) are not ſo much ſaid to be dead as deliuered, as remoued, as redeemed from the

worlds warfare:Mortui, i
                              •
                            eſt emeriti, quia rude dona
                              •
                           t, & abſoluti à militia. Therefore Plutarch cals death Malorum remedium, & portus humani
                              •
                            calamitatibus, euils relieuer, and calamities calmer: vitae ianua, ſaith Bernard, & perpetuae ſecuritatis ingreſſui, the gate of life, and ingreſſe to a ſempiternall ſecuritie: the onely Phyſitian that askes no fees (not ſo much as thankes) and yet cures all cares inward, all diſeaſes outward, better then Homers Moli, then the Balme of Gilead, or that marueilous Linguiſts Mithridate: yea, it cures all.
                     
                        Dat cunctis legem, recipit cum paupere Regem.De con
                                 •
                              o. ad Apol.
                        
                     
                     
                        It ſpareth none, and yet be friends euen Kings,
                        And cures the cares of poore meane vnderlings;
                     
                     And therefore God oft-times, as our Prouerbe is, takes them away ſooneſt whom hee loues beſt: as many Parents know, that oft-times loſe their Ioſephs, euen that child, whom (by the appearance of graces in them) God and they loue the beſt, the reſt being left them, whom they doe not ſo deſeruedly loue. Hence it is, that when there were but foure in the world, Adam, Eue, Caine, Abel, God tooke away Abel the beſt of them (for hee permitted his death though Caine gaue the ſtroke) and hee ſuffered the worſt of them to liue ſtill (ſaith Ambroſe) as the greateſt bleſſing to the one,Lib. de Cain & Abel. and for a continuated plague

and puniſhment to the other. Yea, Chriſt himſelfe the ſpiritual Abel, whoſe bloud ſpeakes better things for vs then Abels, was cut downe like a flower in the prime of his yeeres, at the age of three and thirtie, in the midſt of his age, which hee might haue liued by nature, though hee was beloued of his Father aboue all creatures, Angels and M
                           •
                        n. Lazarus was not a little loued of Chriſt as the Iewes noted, Iohn 11. in his reſuſcitation, yet hee dyed young; and though hee wept when hee raiſed him vp againe, to ſhew his power, hee wept (ſaith Granatenſit) becauſe hee was reduced and brought backe againe to the miſeries of life.
                     Hence it is not altogether a Fiction in Herodotus (if his Workes as they are By Mr. Stephens in his World of wonders.
                         defended, are no Fables) that when the Father of Leobis and Biton intreated the Gods for the greateſt bleſſing vpon theſe his two Sonnes, in the morning they were found both dead in their beds. The like Boone was graunted to Trophomius and Agamedes, that built the Delphicke Temple to Apollo: the Morrall at leaſt of all which, and ſuch like, is this, that to many a ſpeedy death is better then a prolonged miſerable life:Aug. de ciu. Dei. lib. 14. c. 25 nay, that wee neuer beginne truely to liue till wee dye; Iuſtus non viuit, &c. The iuſt man neuer liues as hee would, till he come to that place where he cannot dye.

Therefore let the Meditation of theſe things comfort vs in death, and encourage vs againſt the terrors and feare of death.
                     I confeſſe (as wee haue already inlarged another poynt) that death is fearefull to all fleſh, both man and beaſt,Exhortat. much more to a wicked man: ſtout ſtomacks haue beene agaſt and turned crauens at his griefly face, euen as all the Troopes of Iſraell were affrighted when they ſaw Pharaoh behinde them, and the red Sea before them, the two Iawes of death, ready to ſwallow them. And ſurely euen a reſolued Chriſtian cannot free his ſoule from reluctation when hee lookes onely at the corruption of the fleſh, the paleneſſe of the face, the diſſolution of the members, the obſcureneſſe of the graue, the lodge with wormes, the ſolitarineſſe of the ſepulcher; and laſtly, the diſſipation and annihilation of euery part: but when hee conſiders againe, Natures courſe, Gods Injunction, his diſpoſing Prouidence, Chriſts Paſſion, the bodyes Reſurrection, the freedome and exemption of the ſoule from her incloſing priſon, the Iubilie of the body from all bondage and ſeruitude: Faith preuails and Feare flyes.
                     Euen as thoſe that come from a Citie to a Country Village, Tradeſmen, or the like,Hom. de Diuite & Lazaro. when their buſineſſe is well diſpatcht (ſaith Chriſoſtome) returne into the Citie with ioy againe:

ſo the Chriſtian ſoule that comes from the new Ieruſalem, the heauenly Citie, to traffique here in the low Countryes of this earth, by the Organs of the body, if it haue well executed the duties of Pietie, Charitie, and Chriſtianitie, to GOD and man, may with ioy returne like a Ship Royall, loaden with precious Marchandize, from whence it came: for, ſuch a man dyes not, but departs.
                     
                        Death is onely a departure out of life, not a finall deſtroyer.From whence we ſlide into the third point, briefely, concerning the Epithite which Simeon here giues to death; hee cals it a Departure. From whence we may ſee partly into the nature of that which wee call Death: it is onely a Departure, a going, or tranſmigration from one place to another. Therefore vvhen Abraham ſpeakes of his barrenneſſe, he vſeth this phraſe, Ego vadā abſ
                              
                                 
                              
                              que
                            liberis, I depart this life,Hom. 36. in Geneſ. or goe away without Children. Chryſoſtome notes his phraſe, and thereupon implies, Ecce iuſtus ille vt philoſophatur, &c. That Abraham doth truely in that word, going away, philoſophize and diſpute of death: which Baſil,
                        Hom. de Martyrio. applying to the auncient Martyres, cals Migratio quaedam ad meliora, &c. A migration to a better habitation: Philoſophy cals it▪ The priuation of all heate;Compar. aquae & 
                              •
                           gnis. ſo Plutarch: or, Priuatio vitae, the priuation of life; ſo Sealiger, Exercit. 307. Sect. 23. All which titles and tearmes may ſtill hearten the Chriſtian to

confront it in the very face couragiouſly, according to Bernards counſell, Volo mortem,
                        Epiſt. 10
                              •
                           . 
                        ſi non effugere, &c. That ſince they cannot flye it, they ſhould not feare it. Iuſtus mortem etſi non caue
                              •
                           , &c. ſince the iuſt man is not cautelous to preuent it, let him not be too timerous to encounter it: nay, rather let him enter the liſts (as the Perſians went to battell) ioyfully, and with a ſhout, ſince it is but a Bugbeare, or a ſhadow without ſubſtance, a Serpent without a ſting, a ſuperficies, no poſitiue thing of it ſelfe, but the corruption of the ſubiect that God and Nature ſubiects vnto it: at the worſt to the worſt, an Executioner of a Rebell;M
                              •
                           rs bona bonis, mal
                              •
                            malis. good to the godly, a rewarder of a faithfull Seruant; Ioſephs Chariot to bring good Iacob from the Land of penurie to the Land of plentie, Et qu
                              •
                            non ad meliora feſtinet? ſaith Cyprian in his Sermon vpon death, Who will not haſten to exchange for the better?
                     Laſtly, me thinkes, here is notably implyed the immortalitie of the Soule; for, what is it which departs but the ſoule out of the body, which flyes out when Death opens the doore that held it in, like a Bird out of the Cage, liuing elſe where, in pleaſure or in paine, in act
                              •
                            ſeperato, in a ſeperated act: as alſo the Reſurrection of the body may not vnfitly be concluded; for, in a departure betwixt man and wife, friend and friend, there is a conſtant hope

of meeting againe: ſo theſe two friends which liue and loue together (like Ionathan and Dauid) the ſoule and body ſhall meete together at the Reſurrection: both which poynts of Chriſtianitie as Simeon beleeued, and taught his Schollers, (being a great Rabbi and a Maſter in Iſrael,) ſo hee ſeemes to mee, to allude here vnto both, and to profeſſe his faith in both.
                     
                        The body departing ſhall returne againe at the Reſurrection.To beginne with the baſer part, the body, that it ſhall riſe againe; howeuer it be a Myſterie ſcoffed at (becauſe vnknowne) of the Iewiſh Saduces, ſcoffing Athenians, Braine-ſicke Philoſophers, ſtupid Stoickes, hoggiſh Epicures, diſputing Peripaticians: howeuer denyed by all the rabblement of theſe Hereticall Valentinians, Simonians, Carpocratians, Cerdonians, Seuerians, Baſilidians, Hierarchites, and all the Libertines: yet it was the faith of all the Patriarkes, Prophets, and Apoſtles, from the firſt houre that by reuelation of the Spirit, or by the Word, it was manifeſted to the Church of God: it was the faith of 
                           Pſal. 17.16 Pſal. 49 15. 
                        Dauid, of 
                           Dan. 12.2.
                        Daniel, of 
                           Ezek. 37.10. of Ezekiel, of 
                           Eſa. 26.19 
                        Eſay, 
                        
                           Iob 19.25.26. 
                        Iob, 
                        
                           Act. 24.15 Acts 17.32 
                        Paul, 
                        
                           Iohn 11. Arguments to proue the Reſurrection of the body. 
                        Martha, Iohn the Diuine, of all the Saints, and ſo of Simeon.
                     
                     Let theſe Arguments confirme thine: firſt, Chriſt thy head is riſen; hee is the firſt fruits of them that ſleepe, and the pawne that thou ſhalt riſe, being a member of his, 1 Cor. 15.20.

where my fleſh and bloud is, there ſhall I be, (ſaith Caſſiodorus) our Ioſeph is in Aegypt before vs.
                     Secondly, the redemption by Chriſt extends to thy body, as to thy ſoule▪ vvhich body muſt riſe againe, elſe Chriſts Paſſion were fruitleſſe and forceleſſe.
                     Thirdly, the body, which (like Simeon and Leui) was brother here in ſinning, vvith the ſoule, muſt in Gods equall remunerating Iuſtice, be raiſed, to ſuffer in an equall meaſure and proportion, as it hath ſinned.
                     Fourthly, Gods promiſes which hee hath ſigned with the finger of his Spirit▪ ſealed with the bloud of the Lambe, to the Elect, of peace and Immortalitie, cannot be of vigour and vertue vnleſſe their bodies riſe.
                     Fiftly, the inſeperable vnion twixt Chriſt and his Church ſhould be diſioyned, if the body riſe not.
                     Sixtly, many abſurdities vvould follow, which Paul addes 1 Cor. 15.14.15.16.17. whither I referre you, as that all preaching, profeſſing, and practiſe of Chriſtianitie vvere elſe in vaine.
                     Seauenthly, if in other caſes witneſſes be to be beleeued, then thoſe fiue hundred Brethren mentioned 1 Cor. 15.5.6.7.8. Cephas and the twelue, Iames and the Apoſtles, Mary Magdalene & Paul, that teſtifie Chriſts reſurrection,

by neceſſary conſequence confirme ours, Rom. 8.13. which depends vpon Chriſts.
                     Eightly, theſe that haue beene brought to life againe after their departure, eyther by the Prophets, as the widdow of Sarepta's Son, by Elias, 1 Kings 17.22. or the Shunamites Childe, by Elizeus, 2 Kings 4.35. And the dead Souldier by touching Eliſha's bones, 2 Kings 13.21. or by the Apoſtles, as Dorcas by Peter, Acts 3.40. Eutichus by Paul, Acts 20.10. or by Chriſt himſelfe, as the widdow of Naims Son Luke 7.15. Iairus Daughter, Mat. 9.29. Lazarus the brother of Martha and Mary, Iohn 11.44. and thoſe which appeared in the holy Citie, when Chriſt roſe, and aſcended vp to heauen with him,Semi. de Paſſione. (as Auguſtine thinkes) are all Praeludia Reſurrectionis, types and figures of our reſurrection.
                     
                        Illuſtrations from nature, that our bodies ſhall riſe.Ninthly, we haue many reſemblances both in the great Booke of Nature, and the little Booke of Grace; in the word, and in the world; Iſaacks ſuruiuing in ſacrificing, whom Abraham receiued in a figure, Heb. 11.19. Aarons dry Rod that budded and bloſſomed, Numb. 17.8. Ezekiels dry bones that came together, bone to bone, & fleſh to fleſh, Ezek. 37.8.9.10. Ionas deliuery out of the Whales belly, are inſtances in the Word. In Nature: the Summer, liuing of Trees, Hearbs, Plants, &c. yea, of Corne it ſelfe,1 Cor. 15.36 37.38. in their ſeeming Winters death,

when their ſap is in the route: theſe beaſts, as ſome Beares, and Mice, &c. which ſleepe all Winter, and ſeeme to reuiue in the Spring: Swallowes, Bats, Flyes, Gnats,Pompon, Mela de ſitu orbis, lib. 3. c. 9. &c. which by the Sunnes heate ſeeme to reuiue out of their cold ſowne: the Arabian Phoenix, which by her ſelfe-burning, preſerues the indiuiduum of her kinde: the Sea-Vrchin, that rejoynes after her rending in pieces, after ſhe taſtes the ſalt water: Serpents that are renued by caſting their old skinnes; the Sea-Lobſters by caſting their old ſhels; the Eagle by caſting her old bill: Mechanicall men that renue many things that are old; Image-makers that make againe their braſſie pictures by marring them; Bell founders that mend their mettall-worke by melting; the Silke-worme,See the Book vvrit of the Silke worme. that liues in the preſeruation of her kinde, by incloſing her ſelfe in her Clue, and dying: nay, man himſelfe, that in his generation receiues life into his fleſh, bones, ſinewes, and vitall powers, from a little liquid ſeede; that in his preſeruation oft liues againe, out of ſownes, and 
                           ••
                        ances, ſeemingly depriued of breath and life; that in his augmentation, eating, and by naturall heate concocting and digeſting the dead fleſh of Goates, Sheepe, and Bullockes, makes them his owne liuing fleſh. All theſe ſpeake vnto my vnderſtanding, and confirme my Faith, that though Death ſwallow vs that are now

liuing (as the Whale did Ionas) binde vs (as the Philiſtines did Sampſon) lay vs in our ſepulchers, and roule a great ſtone vpon vs (as the Iewes did vpon Chriſt) yet we ſhall come to ſhore againe; breake theſe bonds (as the bird the ſnare,) and we ſhall be deliuered, vve ſhall flouriſh like Noahs Oliue tree, after wee haue beene vnder the water: yea, theſe bodyes of ours, ſubiect to diſeaſes, cruſhed, crazed, bruized, diſtempered, payned; the head, with Megrim; the lungs, with ſuffocations; the ioynts, with Gouts; the ſtronger parts themſelues with ſhrinking in of the ſinewes: theſe bodyes which haue borne the burthen of the day,Origen periarct. lib. 3. ſhall once with the Angels ſing Haleluiah; theſe bodies of ours, I ſay, ſhall riſe, beſides theſe mentioned, wee haue many grounds of it: as firſt, the will of God that will haue it ſo, Iohn 6.39.40. Secondly, the oath of God that it muſt needes be ſo, Heb. 6.13. Thirdly, we haue double Hoſtage for it; 1 the ſoules of the Saints lodgers vnder the Altar, Reu. 6.9.10.11. 2. Their bodies lodgers in the graues, as our pledges till all things be reſtored, when they and wee ſhall be perfected together, Heb 11.40. Fourthly, the pawne of the Spirit within vs, Rom. 8.11. All vvhich, are ſo many nayles in the Sanctuary to faſten our hope. Neyther ſhall wee onely riſe but riſe the ſame bodies for ſubſtance, though

altered for qualitie, to our further perfection. Wee ſhall come againe (I ſay) the ſame bodies in which wee haue departed hence: the ſame bones, bloud, arteries, skinne, fleſh, veynes, ſinewes, parts, members, Iob 19.25. Howeuer, I cannot ſay in the ſame age: for, there ſhall be neyther childe nor old man, ſaith the Prophet; that is,
                           Eſa 65.20. neyther weakeneſſe of youth, nor infirmitie of age, but all ſhall be flouriſhing and perfect, like Adam and Eue in their Creation, ſome ſay, from Epheſ. 4 13.
                     The conſideration of our returne after our departure,Vſe Of Conſolalation. and of our reſuſcitation at the generall Reſurrection, for before that time none are, or ſhall be glorified in their bodyes, neyther the Virgin Mary, whoſe Aſſumption is but a fiction, nor Enoch, nor Elias, nor the body of Lazarus, nor of thoſe that roſe vvith CHRIST Mat. 27.52.In his Sermon called The Chriſtians Watch.
                         (as Mr. Leigh proues pithily againſt all Papiſts) It is a matter of ſingular comfort; it is the Anchor of our hope; the life of our Religion (vvherein it differs from Paganiſme and Turciſme;) the hand that holds vp our drooping ſoules in the Agonies of death; Fiducia Chriſtiano
                              •
                           um,
                        The Chriſtians comfort in the Reſurrection. 
                        reſurrectio mortuorum (ſaith Tertullian.) This made the auncient Martyres goe to the ſtake, and burning place, as wee goe to our beds; this is that redemption of our bodies, vvhich Paul mentions, Rom. 8.23. the time of our refreſhing,

which Peter magnifies, Acts 3.19. the time of our Iubilie and reioycing, vyhich Eſay fore-ſees in the Spirit, and exulteth, Eſay 26.19. vvhen the hungry ſhall be ſatisfied, Mat. 5.6. when mourners ſhall be comforted, Mat. 5.4. when there ſhall be no more griefe, nor ſorrow, nor paine, when there ſhall be a yeere of Iubilie, an end of our iourney, an accompliſhing of our warrefare, a ceſſation from labour, a wiping away of teares, Reu. 17. verſe 17. Chap. 21.4. a putting off this mortall, and a putting on of this immortall, 1 Cor. 15.42. A change of our vile bodies, that they may be like his glorious body, Phil. 3.22. Oh be glad of this yee Saints, reioyce and ſing euen as the little Birds are glad when Winter caſts off her rugged mantle, and Summer brings his flowrie Spring; as Beggars vvould be glad to put off their ragges, and be clad with Regall Robes. Let theſe comfort themſelues in hope of this change and renouation, whoſe bodies are ſubiected to infirmities, weakneſſes and maladies:De ciu. dei lib. 22. c. 20 for, then it ſhall caſt away (neuer to reſume) all infirmities, impurities, deformities, tardities, ſaith Auguſtine.
                     
                     
                        Aſa ſhall not be gouty, nor Moſes ſtammer, nor Mephiboſheth lame, &c. let Cripples, Lazars, Beggars, Bedlams, lame Souldiers, Hoſpitall men, Spitlers, and all other impotent, diſtreſſed, diſeaſed perſons, apprehend

this comfort, being conuerted Chriſtians and beleeuers.
                     Let all weake and wearyed wights vſe this Meditation of the Reſurrection, as Iacobs ſtaffe to reſt and relye on, in their paſſage ouer this worlds Iordan; as the clifts of the rockes to the Doues, and the ſtonie rockes to the Conies, to ſhelter them from the feare of death, the hunting Nimrod of the world: for, here is Medicamen
                              •
                           um vulneris, &c. a precious Cordiall in all thy croſſes, whether publique or priuate, of body or minde: nay, Aqua vitae, to reuiue thee, when thou art dead ſicke, or ſicke to death, to know that the minute or the moment of thy afflictions here, ſhall be ſucceeded (nay exceeded) with an eternall waight of glory hereafter, at the reſurrection of the iuſt, 2 Cor. 4.17.18. Thus the godly, Dauid, Iob, nay, Chriſt himſelfe, the afflicted Primitiue Chriſtians, that vnder Antiochus were racked and tormented, ſollaced their ſoules in the midſt of their anxeties, with this melodious Meditation of the Reſurrection, Pſal. 16.9. Iob 19.25. Acts 2.26. Heb. 11.35. Which onely apprehenſion puls off the vizard from Death, pluckes off his Lyon skinne, expoſeth him as an Hobgoblin, or meere ſcarre-Crow, to the godlies diriſiou.
                     Let Atheiſts and Epicures feare him, that haue their portion in this life: let Infidels and

vnbeleeuers feare him, vvhoſe hopes of any better eſtate are languiſhing, and faint, and periſh with their ſoules: let his name be as terrible to careleſſe impenitent worldlings (as the name of Tamberlaine and Ziſca once to Cowards) which like guiltie fellons, feare the face of the Iudge: but let thoſe that haue learned Chriſt better, and know in whom they haue beleeued, entertaine it as Cornelius did Peter, as the Galathians did Paul, as Peter did the Angell that brought him out of Priſon, as that which makes the happieſt exchange of a Manſion terreſtiall for a Citie coeleſtiall, a vaile of teares for mount Sion, a region of death, for the land of the liuing, an earthly tabernacle for an houſe eternall in the Heauens, 2 Cor. 5.1. For, who is ſo improuident or imprudent, that deſires to ſtay in an old ſmoakie decayed Cottage, ready euery day to fall on his head, when the Land-lord offers to reedifie it and to make it better (ſince euen Miſe & Rats by Natures inſtinct, flye from an houſe that is inclining to fall.) Now this clayie Cottage of thy body, which is vpheld by the weake prop of breath and vapour, is euery day declining; bleſſe the prouidence of the Worlds great Architect, that when it fals, by reſuſcitation, will raiſe the frame and the fabricke a thouſand times both fairer and firmer then the firſt.
                     
                        Secondly,Vſe 2. Of Direction. let the thought of the Reſurrection be, as a conſolation to thy heart, ſo a direction to thy life. Muſt body and ſoule meete together, and eyther be bleſſed together, or elſe for euer burne together after their departure? and doth their euerlaſting weale or woe, bliſſe or bane, depend vpon thy good or euill life here? Oh then,Let vs liue holily to riſe ioyfully. ſpinne the ſhort thread of thy abridged life well and worthily, that ſo it may tye a bleſſed peace to thy ſoule: runne thy ſhort race here well, that thou maiſt obtaine an eternall Crowne hereafter: paſſe the time of thy dwelling here with feare: think as once S. Ierome that zealous ſpirit thought; Quoties commedo, &c. as oft as I eate, or drinke, or walke, or talke, or riſe vp, or lye downe, I alwayes heare the Trumpe ſounding▪ 
                        Surgite mortui, &c. Ariſe yee dead, and come to Iudgement. Thinke of dying and liuing againe, of departing and returning, of reuiuing, and ſtrict vnpartiall iudging; which thoughts let them not periſh like abortiue fruit, but fixe them by theſe effects.
                     Firſt, euery day awake out of the ſleepe of ſome ſinne, ere the darke night of death come, now in this lifes light that God lends thee.
                     Secondly, let it be a ſpurre to pricke thee to all good, and gratious actions.
                     Thirdly, a bridle to reſtraine thee from ſin, both in the action and affection.
                     
                        Fourthly, let them be meanes to rouze thee from the bed of ſecuritie, and to ſet thee on thy feete (as the Angell did Elias) in thy iourney toward heauen.
                     Fiftly, as water poured out, to coole the furnace of thy furious affections, euen in thy youthfull and burning bloud.
                     Sixtly, a Diall or watch to direct thee how to ſpend thy time well.
                     Seauenthly, as a Fanne to winnow thee from the chaffe of ſinne.
                     Eightly, as a winde to ſcatter and diſperſe thy inordinate paſſions,
                     Ninthly▪ as paile or Parke to keepe thee within thy limits and bounds.
                     Tenthly, as a Counſeller to redeeme thy time.
                     Laſtly, a holy director (as if was to Paul himſelfe) to cauſe thee in euery thing to endeuour to keepe a good conſcience towards God and man, Acts 24.15.16.
                     
                        The immortall ſoule dyes not but departs.Thus wee haue ſeene that the body muſt returne to take part with the ſoule after the diſſolution: the ſame foundation vvill beare this truth, that the ſoule is diſſolued, it dyes not: for which cauſe Paul cals his death a diſſolution, Phil. 1.23. it departs, it dyes not: therefore Simeon cals death onely a Departing; and in the mouth of theſe two witneſſes it is euicted that the ſoule is immortall: Death

kils not the ſoule, but onely lets▪ it out as Noahs Doue was let out of the Arke, at a man is let out of priſon and fetters: for, Plato cals the body, Ergaſtulum animae, the Priſon of the Soule; as Luther cals it the Aſſe of the Soule;Sómā
                           ▪ i. Sémá. and Eraſmus, Sepulchrum animae, the ſepulcher of the Soule. Now, death onely breakes open this priſon doore, vnties the fetters of the ſenſes, vnlooſeth this Aſſe, roules away the ſtone from this Sepulcher, lets out the ſoule, ſends graue de
                              •
                           rſum, leue ſurſum, the groſſe body downeward, the ſoaring ſoule vpward: the ſoule is put here in ſaccis vilibus, in a baſe ſacke, as Ioſeph put his golden Cup and ſiluer treaſure in Beniamins ſacke. Now, Death (like Ioſephs Steward) opens the ſacke naturally, or rips it vp violently, takes out the treaſure vntoucht; if any thing periſh the ſacke is vnripped, the body deſtroyed; the ſoule is as ſafe as Ioſephs ſiluer: for, it cannot die, being vnmateriall, and a forme abiding in it ſelfe; which forme cannot be taken away (like roundneſſe or ſquareneſſe from a Table) becauſe it ſubſiſts not in the matter, but in it ſelfe.
                     Secondly, the ſoule is impenitrable, inſufferable, it ſuffers not of any externall agent, from the fires heate, or ayres coldneſſe: it receiues no hurt from the frozen Ice of Norway, or the ſcorching Sands of Affricke, therefore receiuing nothing whereby it ſhould

decay, it cannot corrupt, or marre, or dye, ſince nothing in the whole world is contrary to it.
                     Thirdly, man is deſirous of immortalitie: Now, how could hee deſire it, and diſcuſſe of it? how ſhould man ſo labour and ſeeke for immortalitie, ſome by skill and policie, ſome by martiall exploits, as Hercules, Theſus, &c. ſome by Soueraigntie, as Alexander and Caeſar; ſome by Bookes; nay, ſome by villanies, as the burners of Diana's Temple; vnleſſe mans ſoule were immortall? for, Ignoti nulla cupido.
                     
                     Fourthly, God by creation infuſing it, or by infuſing creating it, gaue vnto it in the firſt originall the gift of immortalitie.
                     
                        Reaſons prouing the ſoules immortalitie.Fiftly, the rage of conſcience in the wicked, their ſoules accuſing them of ſecret ſinnes, as Caine, and Nero, and Herod, of their murthers; Iudas of his Treaſon, &c. their inward horrour appearing by their pale faces, trembling ioynts, deiected lookes, as was ſeene in Baltazzar and Felix, Dan. 5.6. Acts 24.25. their conſciences, like Magiſtrates, commanding them to execute themſelues, ſhewes they are more then mortall.
                     Sixtly, the effects of the ſoule, in numbring, diuiding, diſcuſſing, diſcourſing, remembring, affecting knowledge, deſire of bleſſedneſſe, reſpect to glory, &c. ſhew it immortall.
                     
                        Seauenthly, if the Soule were not immortall man ſhould not reſemble GOD, neyther in Creation or Regeneration haue any part or participation of the Image of God, or any reuelations from God, or communications with the Spirit of God and our ſpirit.
                     Eightly, elſe there ſhould be no difference betwixt vs and Beaſts, whoſe ſoules are in their bloud, Gen. 9.4.6.
                     Ninthly, elſe there ſhould be no vſe of Iudgement, of the day of doome, or of Chriſts ſecond comming.
                     Tenthly, elſe were the godly of all men moſt miſerable, if their hope were onely in this life, 1 Cor. 15.19. the Sonnes of Belial whoſe portion is oft greater in this world, then the Lords owne Saints (as Dauid, Iob, Ieremie, in their times haue complained) ſhould elſe be in better caſe then they.
                     But ſince the Sunne of this truth ſhines clearely in the Scriptures, why ſhould I giue any moe Reaſons, which are infinite, both in Philoſophy and Diuinitie: ſo adding light to the Sunne, and water to the Sea.
                     Firſt, is not the argument that our Sauiour Chriſt vſed againſt the Sadduces, from Exod. 3.6. authentique againſt Atheiſme? God is the God of Abraham, Iſaack, and Iacob, therefore the ſoules of Abraham, Iſaack and Iacob are liuing ſtil though they be dead themſelues.
                     
                        Secondly, was not Enoch tranſlated that he ſhould not ſee death? Gen. 5.24. Heb. 11.17. then Enochs ſoule ſtill liues.
                     Thirdly, had not Daniels prayer beene an ignorant and friuolous wiſh, as ſome note, praying for Nabuchadnezzar,
                        
                           D. Willet his Hexapla in Da
                           
                              •
                           i
                              •
                           lem. 
                        Oh King liue for euer, Dan. 2.4. If the life of his ſoule had not beene the obiect of his wiſh?
                     Fourthly, doth not Elias pray that the ſoule of his Hoſteſſe Childe may returne againe into him? therefore it was not dead and extinct: (it is no matter where it was, it is as abſurd to ſay that it was in Limbo puerorum, as Papiſts doe, as that the ſoule of Lazarus and Iairus Daughter was in Purgatorie) ſuppoſe it were in heauen:
                           Mat. 17. it was liuing where euer it was, euen as the ſoules of Moſes and Elias were liuing and gaue motion to their bodies being vpon the Mount with Chriſt.
                     Fiftly, Chriſt promiſeth Paradiſe to the penitent Theefe, Luke 23. the very day of his diſſolution, of which hee had liuery and ſeaſure, and preſent poſſeſſion in his liuing ſoule, for his dead body hung all that day vpon the Croſſe.
                     Sixtly, Lazarus dying was carryed into Abrahams boſome: what was carryed? his Soule, Luke 16.22. as the wicked Angels fetcht the ſoule of the ſecure Churle to Hell, Luke, 12. verſe 20.
                     
                        Seauenthly, Iohn ſaw the ſoules of thoſe vnder the Altar, that were killed for the Word of Chriſt, Reu. 5.6.9.
                     All which, with infinite moe, being ſo many Arrowes ſhot againſt Atheiſme, doe euince that the ſoule is immortall, and that the ſpirits of the iuſt, here with old Simeons, after their departure from the body, returne to God that gaue them, Eccleſ. 12.7. A truth that the very Heathen ſaw by the light of Nature, as appeares by their Writings, by Antiochus his Epiſtle to Liſius, wherein hee thinkes his dead Father tranſlated to the Gods, 2 Mach. 11. ver. 23. Plato in his Timeo. Tully in his Diuinations, and in his Booke of the ſleepe of Saeipio: Pithagoras and the Pithagoreans: Thales Mileſius, Hermes, Euripides in his Tragedies: Plutarch in his Conſolatory Epiſtles: Seneca in his Booke of immature death; yea, the Poets in their fictions of the Elizean fields, and the like, ayme all at this, more like Chriſtians at leaſt Chriſtian Philoſophers and Poets, that the Heauens are aeterna animarū domicilia, the eternall manſions of good ſoules departed.Vſe 5. Of Conſolation. Chriſ. What death is to the godly. lib. 2. de morte.
                     
                     Let vs beleeue this by the light of the Word, which they ſaw by the poore ſparke of Nature; and let the thought of it ſtill encourage thee (which is the Naile that I driue at in all this diſcourſe) to looke Death boldly in the face, ſince to the godly it is but Titulus ſine re,
                        
a bare title without any ſubſiſting; a bare name, a blancke without a Seale: good (ſaith Bernard) to the good in regard of reſt, better in regard of ſecuritie, beſt of all as the way to life and immortalitie, being as Ambroſe cals it, alledged by Pontanus, the birth day of thy eternitie, the repayrer of thy lifes ruines, not aboliſhing but eſtabliſhing thy beſt being. Therefore Summum nec m
                              •
                           t
                              ••
                           as diem, &c. Feare not thy laſt fate▪ rather deſire it with Paul, becauſe it is but thy diſſolution; be thankfull for it with Simeon, becauſe it is but thy departure; waite for it with Iob, becauſe it is thy changing; then feare it, or fret at it, with the naturall and morrall men of the world. For, why ſhould that eyther feare thee or fret thee, that cannot hurt the beſt, the greateſt part of thee? If the gold be ſaued, who regards the loſſe of a rotten purſe? If the Pearles within be preſerued, who cares for the breaking of an old cheſt? If the coſtly Marchandize and loading of the ſhip be ſafe, what Marchant reſpects the ruines of a rotten Barge? If the liuing ſoules be not indangered, nor the beſt of the ſtuffe endammaged, wee care not ſo much for the burning of an old houſe: wee reſpect not the loſſe of the Cradle, if the childe be ſafe: the mangling of the cloaths, if the body be vnwounded. Now, that which the Gold is to the Purſe▪ the Pearles to the Ch
                           •
                        ſt, the Wares to the Ship, the good

Wines to the Caske, the Honie to the Hiue, the Houſholder to the Houſe, the Childe to the Cradle, the Body to the Garments; that is the Soule to the Body as much more eminent and excellent as the thing contained exceedes the continent. If death doe fetter the Body, and free the Soule, where is the loſſe? what is the croſſe?
                     Secondly,Vſe 3. Of Redargution. is the Soule immortall and the Body mortall? then execrable is the folly of the multitude; and lamentable is the dotage of all ſorts from the higheſt to the loweſt, that ſpend & miſſpend their yeeres, dayes, ſtrength, vvit, vvealth, and all their Tallents, in pleaſing, contenting, ſatisfying, and fulfilling the deſires of the fleſh, with the affections and luſts thereof; in decking, adorning, feeding and pampering this ſluggiſh Aſſe, this rotten Carrion, the body, which perhaps ſhall take vp his Inne in the earth to morrow, and be meate for wormes; in the meane ſpace neglecting and not regarding the ſoule, which is to liue for euer.
                     Oh how many millions of men and women to, euen amongſt common Chriſtians, may be arraigned, accuſed and conuicted of this folly and dottage (that in other things are politique Galli
                              •
                           's and plotting Iezabel's) yet in this are witty fooles, in preferring the Purſe before the Gold, the Caske before the Wine, the Hiue before the Hony, the Body before the Soule?
                     
                     
                        〈1 page duplicate〉
                     
                     
                     
                        〈1 page duplicate〉
                     
                     
                        How many ſpend yeeres, and moneths, nay, all their precious time in hawking, hunting, whoring, carding, dicing, &c. in ſcraping and gathering yealow duſt together, in doing workes morrall or ſinfull, their owne workes or the Diuels? how many in doing nothing, or doing euill, or as good as nothing? How many women ſpend many dayes and houres, in tricking and trimming the painted ſepulchers of their ſoules, I meane their bodies, in a Glaſſe, who (neuer conſidering how the glaſſe of their time runnes) ſpend not a moneth in a yeere, a weeke in a moneth, a day in a weeke, an houre in a day, in the publique or priuate worſhip of GOD, in looking into the Glaſſe of Gods word, prayer, meditation? &c. How many Citizens, and Countrimen, of all ſorts, ſpend the vvhole ſixe dayes in catering and purueying for the body, who grudge God his Sabbaths, for the prouiſion of their ſoules? ſuch men, eyther they thinke they haue no ſoules, or that their ſoules ſhal die with their bodies like the beaſts, liuing like Libertines and Epicures: as their faith is like the Saduces, which denied any Spirit or Reſurrection,Ioſephus antiq lib. 8 c. 2. & de bello Iud. lib. 2. c. 7. or ſoules immortalitie, as Ioſephus teſtifies of them. Oh we had need cry to ſuch deluded franticke men, and tell them, that they haue ſoules, and ſoules immortall, to raigne with GOD, or to be plagued with the Diuels, after their departing out of the body.
                  
                  
                     
                     His hoped Pacification. In theſe words, In peace:
                     
                        NOW followes the laſt part of this holy Hymne; Simeons Qulet
                              •
                           s eſt, or his Pacification, God ſuffering him to depart in peace. Caluin and Bucer renders Simeons minde thus; Nunc libenter, ſedato & quieto animo moriar; Lord, now I depart willingly, with an appeaſed heart, and a ſetled ſoule, ſince I haue ſeene thy Chriſt.
                     From whence I gather,Doctrine. that a good man that liues piouſly, alwayes dyes peaceably. It appeares here in Simeon, ſo in the reſt of the Saints; as in Abraham, to whom it was promiſed, Gen. 15.15. that hee ſhould goe vnto his Fathers in peace,
                        Godly men alwayes die in peace. and ſhould be buryed in a good age: which promiſe was plentiouſly performed to Abraham, for he yeelded the ſpirit, dyed in a good age, an old man, and of great yeeres, Gen. 25.8. So Iſaack, the Sonne of Promiſe, gaue vp the ghoſt, and dyed peaceably, being old and full of daies, Gen. 35.29. Neither

was the death of good Iacob, that preuailing Iſrael, diſcrepant to his holy life; for he dyed quietly, making an end of his charge vnto his Sonnes, hee pluckt vp his feete into his bed, and gaue vp the ghoſt, Gen. 49.33. After the like manner was the death of chaſte and mercifull Ioſeph, Gen. 50.26. of penitent and patient Iob, after hee had ſeene his ſonnes and his ſonnes ſonnes, euen foure generations, Iob 42.16. Of zealous and ſincere Dauid, 1 Kings 2. after hee had counſelled and charged his Sonne Salomon to walke in the wayes and Statutes of the Almightie.
                           Deut. 34. Of Moſes the faithfull Seruant of the Lord, who dyed when his eye was not dimme, nor his naturall force abated, though he were an hundred and twentie yeeres old, God himſelfe being preſent at his death and buriall. So Ioſhuah that couragious Leader of Iſrael, Ioſh. 24.29. Aaron the Lords Prieſt, who dyed before the Lord in the Mount Hor, Numb. 20.28. Eleazar Aarons Sonne. Ioſh. 24.33. Samuel the Lords Prophet, 1 Sam. 25.1. with all the reſt of Gods Children, Patriarkes, Prophets, Iudges, Kings, Martyres, Confeſſors, the learned Lights of the Church, ſuch as Ambroſe, Auguſtine, &c. as they haue liued holily, they haue dyed happily: of which in their ſeuerall Hiſtories they haue giuen demonſtrations, moſt of them, if not all, in theſe three particulars.
                     
                        Firſt,Three things demonſtrate that the godly dye in peace. that they were gathered to their Fathers in a mature and full age, full of yeeres; reaped like a Ricke of ripe Corne into the Lords Barne, taken like mellow Apples from the Tree of life: in which full age Abraham, Iſaack▪ Iacob, Ioſhuah, Iob, with the reſt before mentioned: as alſo the Patriarkes before the Floud, which out-liued them, with others of the faithfull, did bleſſedly yeeld their ſpirits, and quietly ſlept in the Lord; which bleſſing of long life being the promiſe annexed to that fift Commandement of Obedience, is peculiarly incident to the godly rather then the wicked, whoſe ſinnes (as the Iuie kils the Oake) ordinarily abbreuiate their dayes: or if any of the faithfull dye young, or in their middle age, before they haue attained to the yeeres of their Fathers, eyther by a naturall diſſolution, as Ioſias; or by a violent death, as the auncient and moderne Martyres; eyther they are taken away from the euill to come, as Auguſtine was immediately before the ſiege of Hippo, by the Gothes and Vandals: or elſe becauſe they are ripened already in grace, and come to that maturitie, which GOD, in his fore-ſeeing wiſedome knowes they would or could attaine to, and ſo are fitted for glory: or elſe they teſtifie the truth here to others confirmation, Gods glory, and their owne conſolation.
                     Secondly, the Elect vſually haue their

wiſhes,The godly oft haue their deſires before, at, and in their deaths. and the fruition of their deſires ere their departure, to the great ſatisfaction of their ſoules; the contentation of their hearts: the corroberation of their faith, and the ſealing pledge of Gods ſpeciall loue vnto them: thus Simeon ere his death, had CHRIST in his armes, which was the deſire and longing of his heart. So Abraham ſaw Chriſts day before his death, in the ſpirit, and reioyced: what did old Iſrael ſo long after in the whole world, (except the ſight of Shiloh, the Meſſias in the fleſh,) as to ſee his darling Ioſeph? which longing of his the Lord ſatisfied at the full ere his death▪ for, his dying eyes did not onely ſee Ioſephs face, but his ſeede, Ephraim and Manaſſes, Gen. 48.11. What did Moſes deſire more then the fruition of Canaan, the promiſed Land? Now, euen before the Lord ſhut his dying eyes, the Lord tooke him vp into a mount, and as a relliſh and a taſte of his fauour, gaue him a ſight of Canaan, Deut. 34. ver. 1.4. In what could Dauids heart be more ſetled, then to ſee his Throne ſetled in Salomon his Sonne; which his deſire was accordingly accompliſhed, for his eyes did ſee what his heart deſired; for which hee bleſſed God 1 Kings 1.48. And the like ordinarily fals out, as many aged Chriſtians at this very day can bring in their experienced probatum eſt (as many that are fallen a-ſleepe before them could

haue teſtified) how the Lord hath heard their requeſts, and granted the deſires of their ſoules, in theſe and theſe particulars before their deaths.
                     Thirdly, the godly expreſſe the hidden ioy,The laſt words of holy men are holy. and inward peace which they finde within their ſoules, by their ſeaſoned and ſanctified words of grace, which they breathe out as a ſweet Perfume, from holy hearts, to the refreſhing of others, vpon their ſicke beds, with which they vſually winde vp the thread of their life: words ſo good, ſo gracious, that they are worthy to be writ in Letters of Gold, and for euer to be remembred, as they are recorded in the ſacred Cannon, and collected by holy men, from the Saints of latter times.
                     For example, vvhat a ſweet gratulatory ſpeech is this of Simeons, in his farewell to the world? Lord, now letteſt thou thy Seruant depart in peace, &c. Euery word hauing his waight and Emphaſis. Ponder the laſt Sermons that Moſes, and Ioſhuah, and Samuel, theſe faithfull Seruants of the Lord made immediately before their deaths, vnto the Iſraelites, Gods choſen people: how zealouſly they perſwade to the ſeruice of the true God, diſſwade from Idolatrie and falſe Gods; enumerate Gods ſpeciall mercies, exhort to obedience, dehort from rebellion againſt God and their Superiours; proclaime the promiſes to

the obedient, pronounce mercies to allure, denounce iudgements to terrifie the diſobedient; bleſſing GOD by gratulatory Songs for his benefits, and bleſſing the people in their Tribes (Deut. 32. & ch. 33. Ioſh. 12. 1 Sam. 12.) and a man ſhall ſee the peace they had in their hearts, by the grace of their lips.
                     The laſt words of Iacob were bleſſings and prophecies. Of Ioſeph, were admonitions and cautions: the one to his Sonnes, the other to his Brethren,See 1 Sam. 22. & 23.1 
                        Gen. 49. Gen. 50. The laſt words of Dauid were his charge to Salomon his Son, concerning Gods worſhip, and the gouernement of his Kingdome, 1 Kings 2. verſ. 3.4.5.6. &c. The laſt words of Steuen, the firſt Martyr after CHRIST, were prayers for his Perſecutors, Lord, lay not this ſinne to their charge, Acts 7.60. Laſt words reuealed of the Theefe on the Croſſe,Gregorie. that bonus Latro, good Theefe, that ſo happily ſtole Paradiſe, were; Lord, remember mee when thou commeſt into thy Kingdome, Luke 23. The ſeauen laſt words that Chriſt ſpoke vpon the Croſſe, to the Daughters of Ieruſalem, to his virgin-Mother, to his beloued Diſciple Iohn, to God his Father,De Paſſione. to the penitent Theefe, as recorded by the Euangeliſts, explained by Ferus Nahumius and Gueuarra: theſe, and all theſe of holy men in the ſacred Cannon,Mons Cal
                           
                              ••
                           riae. and of Chriſt himſelfe (as one ſpeakes of Cyprians Epiſtles)

                        referunt pectus ardore plenum; ſhew their deaths were full of peace as their liues were full of grace.
                     If I ſhould inſtance in all the reſt of this kinde, and ſet downe at large,What ſpeeches the Saints haue vttered in their deaths. the gracious words, like Apples of Gold in Pictures of Siluer, that haue proceeded out of the mouthes of Saints, euen when they lay vpon their ſicke couches, drawing their laſt breath (teſtifying their faith in Chriſt, their hope of Heauen, their zeale for Gods glory, their ſorrow for ſinne, their ſealed pardon.) Or when they were to be martyred, and ſacrificed by fire, as they are collected and recorded by Eccleſiaſticall Authors, Euſebius, Nicephorus,
                        Apotheg. morientium. the tripartite Hiſtory, the Centuries, Mr. Foxe his Martyrologie, Grineus, Mr. Perkins, and others; to whom I referre you; It would eaſily appeare that where the Premiſſes are Grace in Life, the Concluſion will be Peace in Death.
                     Let vs chew the cudde in the Meditation of ſome particulars.How to dye well. Euſeb lib. 3. cap. 30. Idem lib 4 c. 15. The laſt words of Peter in his crucifying death were thus to his wife; O Coniux, memento Domini, Oh Wife remember the Lord Ieſus. Of Polycarpus, were prayſes and prayers. Of Cyprian, Salus mea, virtus mea Chriſtus Dominus, Chriſt the Lord is my ſtrength and my ſaluation. Of Ambroſe, Nec pudet viuere, nec piget mori, &c. I neyther am aſhamed to liue, nor grudge to dye, becauſe I

haue a good Ieſus both in life and death. Of Auguſtine,
                        Paulin. in eius vita. 
                        It is no great matter that wood and ſtones fall and ruine, or that mortall men dye, vſing that ſentence of Dauids Pſalmes; which alſo Mauritius the Emperour vſed,
                           Poſſidon. in eius vita.
                           Oſwaldus M
                                 •
                              conius de Zwingli
                                 •
                              , anno 153
                                 •
                              .
                         when hee was ſlaine by Phocas his Centurion: Iuſt is the Lord, and righteous is his iudgement. Zwinglius thus, when hee was wounded in the wars mortally, Well goe to, they may kill my body, my ſoule they cannot. Eraſmus dying in the houſe of Ierome Strobenius, breathed out his ſoule, crying thus. Chare Deus, &c. Deare God, oh God my mercy, deliuer me; make an end, oh Chriſt, and ſaue mee, Peter Martyr, ſaith Simler and Bullinger that were preſent at his departure, confeſſed his faith, acknowledged Chriſt his Sauiour, expounded and applyed Scriptures, exhorted his Brethren, and in his death was wholy diuine.Obijt anno Chriſti. 1564.
                         So was Oecolampadius that burning Lampe in Gods houſe, who ſupplyed with the oyle of grace, gaue a wondrous light, euen in his death, as appeares by Grineus his Epiſtles to Fabritius Capito, and others. Luthers death reſounds ioyfull prayſes for Gods reuelation of the truth vnto him, and victory ouer the Romiſh Antichriſt. Caluin (as Beza reports that heard him) with Dauids heart dyes, not ſpeaking, but ſighing out Dauids Pſalmes. See a little Book from the Martirologie gathered, called, The deaths of holy Martyres.
                         
                        Ridley, Latimer, Hooper, Saunders: with many moe conſtant Profeſſors, dyed deſirous

of the fire, ſaluting the Stake, profeſſing their Faith, confirming their Brethren, and calling vpon God.
                     If I ſhould aſcend a little higher,How great men haue liued and dyed good men. and looke into the ſicke Couches of Emperours, Kings, Queenes, Dukes, Earles, Nobles; which, like thoſe Bereans, Acts 17. were truely noble indeed, I ſhould occaſion you to magnifie Gods mercies, in calling ſome great ones, vvho by their workes and words, as liuing ſo dying, teſtified that their Graces did equalize their Greatneſſe. I might inſtance in Charles the fift, in Theodoſius the great, in Maximilian the ſecond, in Stephen King of Poland, in Fredericke the third, Prince Elector; in Ferdinand; in Queene Anne Bullen; in Ioahn Gray, the Duke of Suffolks Daughter; with diuers others. To omit the laſt words of Chryſoſtome dying in his exile, of deuout Bernard, of Ignatius the Martyr, of theſe Belgicke Lights, Phillip Melancthon, Tremellius, Muſculus, &c. with mamy moe: ſome whereof thankefully recording the benefits they had receiued from God in life, ſpirituall and temporall; ſome, powring, out their ſoules for the good of the Church; which they haue bequeathed vnto Chriſt; ſome diſcourſing of the vanities of this life of the fruits of ſinne, of the miſeries of man; ſome reioycing in the Spirit, for the mitigation of their paines, the conſolations vvhich

they felt from the Spirit, their vnion vvith Chriſt, their happy paſſage into Paradiſe, their tranſmigration vnto their Sauiour; exulting at the ioyes of Heauen which then they haue ſeene, as Moſes ſaw Canaan, and in part taſted: nay, ſome as it were by a Propheticall Spirit, illuminating them as it did Iacob and Ioſeph, fore ſeeing and fore-telling what ſhould happen after their deaths; as Iohn Huſſe and Ierome of Praige did, concerning the Papacie, haue all of them, here with Simeon, departed in peace.
                     And though ſome amongſt the Heathens, as Cyrus, Caeſar, Auguſtus, Titus, Tratan, Seuerus, Adrian, Pompey; as alſo ſome of their Philoſophers and Poets, as Aratus, Socrates, Ariſtotle, Anacharſis, Antiſthenes, Theophraſtus, with others, haue ſpoke, to admiration, concerning the neceſſitie of dying, the miſeries of life, the exprobration of Tyranny, the ſoules immortalitie, the true God, which they called The thing of things, to whom they haue called and committed their Children; as their Apothegmes and ſpeeches are recorded by Plutarch, Zenophon, Laertius, and others, yet they haue come ſo farre ſhort of Chriſtians, eyther in their ciuill acts and morrall workes liuing, or their words dying, that it is as eaſie to diſcerne betwixt them, the ſtrength of Nature, and the fruits of the Spirit, as betwixt conduit water and Aqua vitae by the taſte.
                     
                        Now the Reaſons why the godly depart in peace are theſe.Reaſons why the godly depart in peace.
                     
                     
                         Firſt, the Promiſe of God, which muſt needes be acccompliſhed, that Peace ſhall come; that they ſhall reſt in their beds euery one that walketh before the Lord, Eſay 57.2. which promiſe as it was verified in Enoch and Elias, that vvalked vvith GOD, ſo it ſhall be in all the faithfull.
                     
                         Secondly, they haue peace with God, with whom they are reconciled by Chriſt, which is their peace; and therefore they muſt needes haue peace in God, going out of the world to God, who haue had peace with God in the world, from whom they haue beene abſent in the body.
                     
                         Thirdly, they haue that peace of God in their owne conſcience, which paſſeth all vnderſtanding, Phil. 4. which ſetteth them in an aſſured perſwaſion of the loue of God to them in his Chriſt, the Lord ſhining in their hearts with the beames of his Spirit, and the memory of all their well done deedes then reflexing vpon their vpright conſciences, fill them euen full of hidden ioy, and inward peace.
                     Theſe Reaſons might be amplified,Cauils remoued that blemiſh the deaths of the Saints. and many moe added, but I haſten to the Vſes, being onely intercepted with ſome Obiections of carnall reaſon, vvhich muſt be remoued.
                     
                        
                        Obiect. 1. The firſt is this; Death is the wages of ſinne, Rom. 6.23. the curſe of the Law, Gal. 3.10. the enemie of Chriſt and his chidren, 1 Cor. 15. How then can it be good?
                     
                        A
                              •
                           ſ. I anſwere, the nature and propertie of death is altered by the death of CHRIST to the godly, to whom it is a ſhort cut to heauen; it is onely a curſe to the reprobates, whom it ſends to hell; euen like the red Sea, that drowned onely the Aegyptians, but gaue a paſſage vnto Gods people into the Land of Promiſe.
                     
                        Obiect. 2. Chriſt, Ezekias and Dauid, prayed againſt death, therefore it brings no peace.
                     
                        Anſw. Wee haue ſhewed the reaſons of Ezekias and Dauids prayer before: the firſt wanting Iſſue to ſucceede him, the ſecond being afflicted with an iſſue of ſinne, which was not healed, which cauſed for the time, both their doubts and feares:
                           Mat. 26.39 for our Sauiour Chriſt, he prayed not againſt death ſimply, for he dyed willingly (elſe his death could not haue merited) hee prayed for the remouall of the cup of his Fathers wrath, being the curſe of death.
                     
                        Obiect. 3. The godly oft dye ſodainely, therefore not peaceably: for, ſodaine death is a Iudgement againſt which we pray.
                     
                        Anſw. Death is not euill becauſe it is ſodaine (for the laſt Iudgement ſhall come ſodainely, and yet not euill) but it is euill to the

vnprepared, as to the wicked Mammoniſt, Luk. 12.20.21. Secondly, it is neuer ſodaine to the Chriſtian in reſpect of preparation, eyther more or leſſe, generall or ſpeciall; which preparation, if it be the ſhorter, God accepts in their intention,
                           Heb. 11.17 as he did Abrahams ſacrificing of Iſaack, as hee did Dauids in building him a Temple: if they haue no more time then with the Theefe on the Croſſe, to implore Chriſt to remember them; with the Publican to giue one knocke on their penitent breſts, with Peter to giue one ſhrike vnto Chriſt, crying, Helpe Master, who dare ſay but with that outcry they awaken Chriſt? If Moſes and the beleeuing Iſraelites had beene cut off ſodainely by Pharaohs Sword, or the ſurging waues, if Peter had ſunke when hee walked on the waters, if the Diſciples had beene loſt when they were toſſed in the tempeſt, if Paul had beene drowned when hee ſuffered ſhipwracke, wee ſhould haue thought their deaths ſodaine in the execution; but who durſt haue cenſured them in reſpect of preparation? no more then we cenſure Mephiboſheth that was ſlaine in his bed, or Bethlems Children, or thoſe that periſhed in the French Pariſian Maſſacre, by the diuels meanes, & the Duke of Guize; or Ionathan that was ſlaine in Battell; or Abner that vvas killed by Ioab. Nay, I know none of iudgement that dare cenſure the foules of Iobs Children,

and of Lots Wife, that were taken away in the act of ſeeming ſinnes:Queſt. ad Dulc. c. 24. I thinke with Auguſtine that God reſpects not, quo modo, after what manner, as quales morimur, what manner of ones wee dye, in Chriſt, or out of Chriſt. We came not together hither, but like the Labourers in the Vineyard, ſome at one houre, ſome at another; ſo muſt wee goe forth, ſome ſooner, ſome later.
                     
                        Obiect. 4. But ſome of the godly raue, rage, blaſpheme, behaue themſelues like frantique men; nay, ſeeme to deſpayre.
                     
                        Anſw. Firſt, theſe are the effects of their Melancholy, or are to be imputed to burning Feauers, the Collique or other violent diſeaſes, the fruits onely of their infirmities, or at the moſt the temptations of Sathan, which the diuell muſt anſwere for, not they, being rather paſſiue in theſe ſins then actiue: and therefore they not arguing any want of loue towards God, any deliberate purpoſe of ſinning, but weakeneſſe of Nature, tenderneſſe of conſcience for ſinnes committed, they hinder not their peace.
                     Secondly, wee ſee ordinarily, and I can ſpeake it by certaine experience, in the viſiting of many, that theſe by Gods mercy recouering againe the vſe of Reaſon, they ſeriouſly repent of theſe infirmities, their faith appearing like the Sun from vnder the darkening cloud.
                     
                        Thirdly, theſe and all other vnknowne ſinnes, are pardoned and buryed in Chriſts death, to theſe that are in Chriſt, Rom. 8.1.
                     Fourthly, in the matter of ſaluation God oft workes by contraries, and by the gates of Hell brings his Seruants to Heauen. Therefore let vs not play the arrogant Crittiques in condemning thoſe that haue liued well, eyther of Impietie or Hypocriſie, by their deaths. Let vs looke into their former courſes of life and conuerſation: let vs iudge charitably and Chriſtianly, as wee would be iudged in the like caſe.
                     
                        Obiect. 5. But Gods Saints are at their deaths moſt of all moleſted, aſſaulted, and tempted by Sathan; ſome in one nature▪ ſome in another, as was the good Mr. Knoxe, and Mris. Katherin Stubbs, and others. How then can they dye in peace?
                     
                        Anſw. Many of the godly (God tying and chaining vp Sathan) dye, as here old Simeon, and others before recited, as a Torch or Firebrand, without ſenſe of paine or tryals, Eſa. 57. verſ. 1.2.
                     Secondly, Exercentur in praelio, vt maiori remunerantur praemio, they are exerciſed in the laſt combat, that they may receiue the more ioyfull Crowne of conqueſt.
                     Thirdly, by Faith, Prayer, and Gods Word they reſiſt Sathan as Chriſt did, Mat. 4.4.7.

and hee, like a Crocodile, purſued, flyes away, Iames 4.7. 1 Pet. 5.9. for, the godly, in that houre laying holde vpon the promiſes, flying vnto Chriſt, hee mannaging their cauſe, the holy Spirit aſſiſting, vvhen Sathan lookes for the greateſt victory, hee receiues the greateſt foyle.
                     
                        Obiect. 6. But ſome that goe in the rancke of the godly, haue dyed of the Plague and Peſtilence,
                           Numb. 25. 2 Sam. 24. which hath beene vſually ſent as a iudgement for the ſinnes of diſobedience, vncleanneſſe, diffidence, &c. vpon the Iſraelites and others, from which the godly are promiſed to be preſerued, Pſal. 9.10. How then die ſuch in peace that die of the plague?
                     
                        Anſw. Firſt, that promiſe of preſeruation from the Plague in the Pſalmiſt, is to be vnderſtood of thoſe Iewes that in Dauids time were vntouched with it.
                     Secondly, then the Plague came by Gods immediate hand, now by meanes.
                     Thirdly, the godly are preſerued from it, as it is a curſe, but not as it is a fatherly correction: for, doe wee not thinke that many Chriſtians in Corinth, died of the Plague, 1 Cor. 11.30.31?
                           Vide pag. 30.38.45.54.92.36. Hinningi Groſij. In theſe great Plagues which Groſius hath mentioned in his Tragicall Hiſtories, which haue ſwept away whole Countries, with theſe that haue raged in particular Cities, as in Venice, in Florence, the yeere of our Lord▪ 400.

in which thirtie thouſand: or in Conſtantinople, when Leo Iſaurus ruled, wherein there dyed three hundred thouſand Citizens (as both Volateran and Aegnatius teſtifie,) ſhall wee ſay that none of theſe dyed the Seruants of God? Shall wee cenſure Alphonſus the eleauenth King of Spaine, that good Ladouicke, with his Sonne Iohn, many zealous Diuines, as Beza and others, for bad men, becauſe they haue dyed of the Plague? Suppoſe it be an accurſed death; did not Chriſt, the penitent Theefe, Peter and Paul which were crucified by Nero, with their heads downewards, dye an accurſed death, euen the death of the Croſſe.
                     Fourthly, beſides, is it not Gods viſitation like other diſeaſes?
                     Fiftly, is it not oft-times ſent,Lib. de Mortalitate. as Cyprian well notes, as well for the ſinnes of thoſe that liue, it of thoſe that dye, as appeares in the Plague ſent vpon Dauids Sheepe, when he the Shepheard ſinned in numbring of them.
                     Sixtly, is it not a diſeaſe, though ſharpe, yet ſhort, and more tollerable then the Stone, Dropſie, Gout, Palſie, or the French diſeaſe?
                     Seauenthly, did not Dauid deſire this kinde of death, rather then eyther Famine or Warre?
                     Eightly nay, haue not Gods Saints, as namely, Iob, for many moneths together beene troubled with a more grieuous maladie?
                     
                        Ninthly, is not God very mercifull to many that dye of the Plague, that haue their ſenſes and memories, till the laſt houre? are not thoſe blew ſpots which appeare, Gods tokens, as they are called, fore-warning them that haue them, as God did Ezekias, to prepare themſelues, for they muſt dye?
                     Laſtly, is their any death, much leſſe this, can hinder the ſoule after her d
                           •
                        arting from Gods preſent and immediate fellowſhip, or the body from a glorious Reſurrection? and, what if none viſit the afflicted in this ſort? the fewer that gaze on them, the fitter they are to looke vp to God. And what if they dye and vvant ſolemne buriall? what preiudice is that to the bodies reſurrection, or ſoules ſaluation?
                     
                        Obiect. 7. But ſome of the godly dye of Famine, as did Lazarus; from which God promiſeth to preſerue them, Pſal. 34.
                     
                        Anſw. Firſt, it is vncertaine whether Lazarus dyed for want of food, or the violence of his diſeaſe.
                     Secondly, this death is rare, and ſeldome fals out, God prouiding for his (as hee did for Iacob and Elias euen in Famine) but if this happen, God armes his with patience, and ſtrengthens them with the aſſured hope of life eternall, as hee did the perſecuted Hebrewes, who were expoſed to nakedneſſe and hunger, Heb. 11.38.
                     
                        Thirdly, the Promiſe is conditionall, as all others are that concerne theſe outward things, which fall alike to all. Eccl
                              •
                           ſ. 9.
                     Fourthly, ſome vnderſtand the place in the Pſalmiſt, concerning the ſoules of Gods Saints, which are fed with the hidden and precious Manna of the Word, to life eternall, Iohn 6. Apoc. 2.17.
                     
                        Obiect. 8. But ſome are ſlaine by their enemies; theſe dye not in peace.
                     
                        Anſ. Yes: for no death can ſeperate Gods Children from his loue, Rom. 8.38.
                     Secondly, though they kill the body, as Cain did Abels, the Philiſtines Ionathans, yet (as Zwinglius ſaid in the like caſe, as you haue heard) they cannot kill the ſoule.
                     Thirdly, it is a priuiledge if they dye in Gods cauſe, and procures them a greater increaſe of glory. Apoc. 14.13. Mat. 5.8.
                     
                        Obiect. 9. Laſtly, it is obiected, that ſome of the godly, as Sampſon and Raſis, haue killed themſelues, others haue done the like in our dayes. How haue theſe dyed in peace?
                     
                        Anſ. For Raſis, it was a weakeneſſe in him,
                           Vide Polani Synt. de inter. Scrip. Lelius de expreſſo dei verb
                              •
                           . if hee were a good man, or a wickedneſſe if he were not. For Sampſon, what hee did was typicall, as he prefigured Chriſts death, that ouercame dying.
                     Secondly, it was by a ſpeciall inſtinct and motion of Gods Spirit inimitable: no more

then Abrahams ſacrificing his Sonne, for thoſe which our experience inſtanceth in. I confeſſe it is a tickliſh point, and the knot is hard to be looſed.
                     I know that Saul, Achit
                              •
                           phel, and Iudas, that killed themſelues, are noted in the Scripture for reprobates. And it ſeemes that thoſe which doe this inhumane deede, doe not for the inſtant thinke of hell torments, yet vvhat then? God neuer forſakes his choſen: Secondly, his mercy is bottomleſſe; from the Ocean of which mercy, hee may diſtill ſome drop of grace at the laſt point of time.
                     Thirdly, this act is done commonly in ſome Frenzie or predominant Melancholy, when they are not themſelues.
                     Fourthly, Sathan is a wilie Serpent, that obſerues his aduantages, and the Lord knowing his malice and wickedneſſe, and mans frailtie and weakeneſſe, puniſheth this ſinne, (as he did the firſt ſinne,
                           Adams ſin in Paradiſe wherein this Serpent vvas chiefe actor) more in Sathan the agent, then in man the patient.
                     Fiftly, many Selfe-murtherers liue after the ſelfe inflicted fatall ſtroke▪ and repent ere they dye. Let vs iudge the beſt of them, and pray to GOD to giue vs grace neuer to yeeld to the like temptations. Amen.
                     
                     And now theſe Doubts diſcuſſed, theſe Obiections remoued, we come to the Vſes.
                     
                        The firſt is this:Vſe 1. Of Inſtruction. is it ſo that the Seruants of the Lord doe dye in peace? wee muſt then if wee meane to dye well, as the Lord ſhall inable vs, learne to liue well.Hee that would die well muſt liue well. If wee will dye in peace, wee muſt liue the life of grace: for, it is not 
                           
                              •
                           am vetus, quam verum, ſo prouerbiall as true; Qualis vita, finis ita, as is the life, ſo is the death. Inſtance in all particulars in the Scripture, from the firſt line in Geneſis, to the laſt Letter of the Reuelation, and wee ſhall neuer ſee otherwayes, excepting one example of the Theefe vpon the Croſſe, which is particular, miraculous, vpon a ſpeciall occaſion, to magnifie the effect of Chriſts bloud, and the power of his Paſſion, to eternize his mercy that gaue life euen at his death; and to ſhew and demonſtrate his Deitie, that at the loweſt ebbe of his crucified Humanitie, was able to ſaue a ſoule, to ſtrengthen the Diſciples, and allure the vnbeleeuing Gentiles: I ſay, excepting him, which is an extraordinary example, and not to be propounded as a preſident by any preſumptuous ſoule; wee ſhall not finde any one that liued ill and dyed well; but that had the Prologue of their euill life ſhut vp with the Tragedie of a damned death.
                           Gen. 4. Looke vpon Cain the murtherer, that deſperate Runne a-gate,
                           Gen. 7. Gen. 4.24: Gen. 38.8.
                              •
                           0. on the licentious Worldlings, on Lamech the ſeauentie time auenged Polygamiſt; on polluted Onan, and wicked Err; on vncleane

Sodome,Thoſe that haue liued wickedly died wretchedly. with her Siſter Gomorrha, Gen. 19 25. on rebelling Iſrael, hard-hearted Pharaoh, obdurate, ſuperſtitious, and irreligious Aegypt, Exod. 6.7.8. & ch. 14. on diſobedient Saul, 1 Sam. 15. on lying, Ieſuitically aequiuocating Gehezi,
                        Examples. 2 Kings 5. on theeuiſh Achan, treacherous Achitophel, traiterous Iudas, adulterous and murtherous Herod, bloudy Ioab, couetous Ahab, perſecuting Iezabel, deluding Ananias, deceiuing Saphira, cruell Antiochus, proud Hamman, vſurping Athalia, rebelling Abſolon, with millions moe: looke at their liues, obſerue their deaths▪ peruſe their Stories, paralell their doings with their ſufferings, and tell mee if they haue not ſealed vp and concluded ſenſuall and ſinfull liues with curſed deaths:
                           Amos 6.2. nay, as the Prophet ſaith, Goe yee to Calneh and ſee, and from thence goe you to Hamath the great; then goe to Gath of the Philiſtines: looke vpon Ioppa, behold Tharſus, wonder at Niniuie the pride of Aſſur,
                        
                           Eſay 13.19 
                        gaze vpon Babilon the beautie of all the Chaldees honour. And as you paſſe by, caſt your eye vpon Ieruſalem, that virgin Daughter Sion. And if you pleaſe reflexe vpon proud Troy, renowned Carthage, famous Conſtantinople, learned Athens, rich Thebes, warrelike Numantia, populous Samaria, ancient Rome, old Antwerpe; and when you haue viewed them all, in the Map of your retyred Meditations, tell theſe renowned

places, theſe wonders of the vvorld, that ſinne hath ſackt them, that pride hath beene their period, that their faults haue cauſed their fals; that they haue beene miſerable becauſe vnmindfull of God and of themſelues; that they with their inhabitants, becauſe they haue wanted grace, haue wanted peace.
                     But if theſe be to generall for thy application, deſcend into particulars;The fearefull ends of Heretiques and Perſecuters, in euery age. runne ouer Hiſtories, read the Tragicke parts that wicked men haue acted vpon the Stage of this world, and marke their ends, when Death hath ſtruck them Non-plus. Leaue all other ſinnes and ſinners; looke on theſe that eyther haue broached errours Heretically, or reſiſted or perſecuted the truth obſtinately and cruelly, and you ſhall ſee them dying horribly:Euſeb. lib. 7. cap▪ 20. Theod. lib. 1. c. 14. you ſhall ſee blaſphemous Cerinthus killed with the ruines of an houſe, as he was ſitting in a Bath at Epheſus. Manes, the Father of the Manichees, expoſed to the teeth of Dogs,Sabellicus lib. 5. c. 4. with his skinne flaine off by the command of a Perſian King. Arius,
                        Euagrius lib. 1. c. 7. that helliſh patrone of the Arians, voyding out his bowels with his excrements. Olimpius, ſtrucke with Thunder, by a three-fold Dart from Heauen, for his blaſphemies againſt the Trinitie.
                           Anno 1553. 
                        Neſtorius periſhed in Aegypt, by the rotting of that tongue of his which denyed Chriſts humanitie. Tandemus,
                        Euſeb lib. 10. c. 8. that Gygantean and profane contemner of

the Word and Sacraments, clouen to the braine by a ſailing Prieſt.Euſ. lib. 3. c. 13. Oroſ lib. 7 c. 11. 
                        Michael Sernetus burned at Geneua. Maximinian the Tyrant, ſmit with a ſodaine plague from GOD, his eyes ſwelling, his whole body burning, ſo dyed. Cruell Domitian, the next perſecuter after Nero, ſlaine by his Wife and Seruants, and buryed like a Dogge.Euſ. lib. 9. 
                        Lucius Ʋerus cut off by an Apoplexie, the eleauenth yeere of his cruell raigne. Maximinus the Thracian, murthered by his Souldiers. Decius drowned in a puddle. 
                           Ʋalerian, King Sapors ſlaue, after his perſecutions, had his skinne pluckt off his rotten carkaſſe. Diocleſian with his Collenge, butchering ſeauenteene thouſand Chriſtians in thirty dayes, conſumed miſerably, in his Frenzie, by a lingring diſeaſe, and his fellow hanged himſelfe.
                           Vide Zonaram. annalium lib 2. Euſ. lib. 8. 
                        Vale
                              •
                           s the Arrian Emperour, burned in his Inne, by his purſuing enemies.
                     What neede I giue Coale-worts twice ſod, and ſet before you againe thoſe diſhes that haue beene cooked by all authent
                           •
                        cke Eccleſiaſticall Authors that are of credit, concerning the miſerable death of Iulian the apoſtate, whoſe bloud his owne hands threw into the ayre:Cent. 1. c. 12. Hiſt. Eccleſ. of Aurelian ſmit with a Thunderbolt: Commodu
                              •
                           
                         ſtrangled: of Paulinus poſſeſſed with a Diuell, after hee had martyred Martinian and Proceſſus: with diuers others, in which the Antichriſtian Popes, as they haue

acted the chiefe parts in filthineſſe, blood-guiltineſſe, and ſuperſtition, ſo if wee obſerue their ends, as they are recorded by Platina, Onuphrius, &c. and their owne Writers, wee ſhall ſee they haue dyed fearefully and deſperately, as they haue liued damnably: as may be inſtanced in Silueſter the ſecond, Alexander the ſixt, Heldibrand, &c. and others: all which inſtances, with all other examples, that Iewes or Gentiles, the Chriſtian or Pagan world afford vnto vs, are nothing elſe but comments vpon that Maxime which S. Auguſtine drawes from his owne experience, when hee ſaith, Nunquam memini male mortuum, &c. I neuer remembred any to haue dyed ill, that haue liued well, and hardly doth hee dye well, that hath liued ill.
                     Therefore to extract another Vſe from theſe premiſſes.Vſe 2. Of Redargution. Is it ſo that onely the Seruants of God, the Lords Simeons dye in peace, and none elſe? then the madneſſe of thoſe men is to be mourned (as Samuel mourned for Saul) and their ignorance or obſtinacie is to be pittied, that flatter their owne ſoules, and ſecure themſelues they ſhall dye happily, when they haue no care nor conſcience to liue holily.
                           Numb. 22. Faine would they, with Balaam, dye the death of the righteous, but they will not liue the life of the righteous: they would act Simeons part in death, but they will not labour for Simeons
                        
Spirit: they would dye like Iude, but liue like Iudas: dye like the Sonnes of God, liue like the ſonnes of Belial: dye like Saints, liue like ſinners: dye like Dauid, but liue like Diues, in chambering and wantonneſſe, in ſurfetting and drunkenneſſe, in delights and dalliance, in pleaſures and pompe: they would be vvith Chriſt on Mount Sion, but they will not follow him to Mount Caluarie; they will not be crucified with him; nay, they will not crucifie one luſt, nor ſacrifice one ſinne, nor mortifie one member, for the loue of Chriſt, for the loue of their owne ſoules: they will not plucke out their right eies, cut off their right hands, throw away thoſe ſinnes that are as deare to them, as eyther eyes or hands; for gaining of God, for purchaſe of Paradiſe, for conqueſt of a crowne: nay, they will rather carrie both their eyes, and both their feete, all their deare and darling ſinnes (whither Iudas carryed his Hypocriſie, and Herod his Luſt) euen to death with them, euen to the graue with them, euen to Iudgement with them; then caſt them off (as the wilde Beaſt hunted, caſts away his ſtones, for which hee is purſued) to ſaue their life by dying; nay, to ſaue their ſoules by dying to ſinne. Doe theſe men beleeue the Scripture, that tels them,
                           Gal. 6.6. as they ſow ſo they ſhall reape? Nay, doe they beleeue Experience, that in euery Garden, Field, and Seede-plat ſhewes it?

Doe they credit the holy Oracles, that if they liue after the fleſh, they ſhall dye; but if they mortifie the deedes of the fleſh by the Spirit, they ſhall liue? Rom. 8.13. And doe they, (nay, dare they) then goe on in ſinne and thinke notwithſtanding to reape ſaluation? Are they but dead men all their life, euen dead in ſinne and treſpaſſes, without the quickning Spirit, Epheſ. 2.1. ver. 5. and doe they thinke to be liuing men in death? Doe men vſe to gather grapes of Thornes, and figs of Thiſtles? they know to the contrary: and thinke they that a good death will grow of a bad life?An ill life is the vſuall Prologue to a Tragicall death. let them neuer hope it. I aske ſuch men as Iezabel asked Iehu, 2 Kings 9.31. Iehu, Iehu, did Zimri proſper, that ſlew his Maſter? I trow no. So I aske euery licentious looſe ſinner; Did euer any ſinner dye well without repenting, that offended God his heauenly Maſter, by treaſonable ſinning?
                     Apply all theſe precedent examples to thine owne ſoule, and make them thy preſidents: read them ouer againe, and remember them; and paralell thy ſelfe with them. Art thou a Theefe? looke how Achan dyed, that was a Theefe, Ioſh. 7. Art thou a Whore-maſter? looke how the Sodomites dyed; how Er and Onan dyed, Hophni and Phinees, that were vncleane. A Whore? looke how whoriſh Iezabel dyed. A Swearer? looke how blaſphemous

                        Rabſakeh and Senacharib dyed, 2 Kings 19. An Idolatrous Papiſt? looke how the Idolatrous Iſraelites dyed. A Drunkard? looke how drunken Nabal dyed, 1 Sam. 25. Art thou addicted to any other ſinne? looke whether thoſe that haue runne in the ſame race, in the ſame ſinne, haue proſpered or periſhed; haue dyed ill or well: if they haue proſpered, follow them; good lucke haue thou in thy iourney: if periſhed (as they haue) then in Gods feare retyre, Faciant ali
                              •
                           na pericula cautum, let their harmings be thy warnings; Praemonitus, praemunitus. Be not more inſenſible then Birds and Beaſts: the Bird will not flye into the Net, or light on the Lime-buſh, or runne into (the Snare, where ſhee ſees another Bird flackering before her. Thy Horſe, as thou art trauelling, will not follow the tract of another horſe that ſtickes faſt before him. Oh be not thou like the Horſe and Mule, without vnderſtandng: thou wouldeſt not follow another into a gulph, a Turne-poole, a pit, a Quag-mire; oh follow not Sinners (as the Beaſt the Droue to the ſlaughter) thorow the iawes of a deſperate death, into the pit of damnation after death, that haue gone the very ſame vvay, in the very path of that ſinne vvherein thou liueſt.The vaine hopes of vvicked men.
                     
                     But thou thinkeſt perhaps to eſcape ſcotfree, or that GOD will be more mercifull to

thee then to them. Nay, that cannot be, hee is the ſame GOD that hee was to iudge, if thou beeſt the ſame ſoule to ſinne. What deſert is there in thee to pleade ſparing more then in them? nay, rather leſſe. Si in Ieruſalem ſcrutinium, quid faciet Babilon? If hee ſpared not Ieruſalems ſinne, he will not ſpare thee, a Sodomite, a Babilonian: if he ſpared not the ſinnes of the Iewes his owne people; nay, of Iudas his owne Diſciple, he will not ſpare thee, a ſinner of the Gentiles, a ſlaue to Sathan: if hee ſpared not Cedars, great Kings, hee vvill cut downe Shrubs, ſuch as thou: nay, thy caſe ſhall be worſe then theſe fore-recited; becauſe thou haſt had more mannuring and watering then they, more Grace offered, more Goſpell preached, now in the day of thy gracious viſitation.
                     But thou hopeſt to recoyle and retyre out of the way of ſinners. Indeed backe againe by repentance is the better way; to vnweaue againe (as once Penelope did) the webbe of thy ſinnes. But when will this retyring be? Thou purpoſeſt in thine olde age. Oh foole! vvho hath giuen thee a Leaſe of thy life till thou beeſt old? The rich Churle ſaith, Soule, take thine eaſe, thou haſt laid vp enough for many yeeres, when hee had not one night to liue: here was a ſhort Epitomie: perhaps the caſes ſtand ſo with thee.
                     
                        

                        Pelles tot Vitulorum quot Boum.
                     
                     
                        To the Market comes to be ſolde
                        As well the young ſheepe as the olde.
                     
                     Goe into a Golgotha, a Church-yard, thou ſhalt ſee as many young ſculs as old; little, as great: obſerue Funerals, and thou ſhalt ſee the Fathers oftner mourning for their dead Children, then Children for their deceaſed Parents. Apply to thy ſelfe what hath beene ſpoke of this point.
                     
                        It is hard to leaue the cuſtome of ſinne.But thy carnall heart ſaith, that thou canſt leaue thy ſinne when thou wilſt, and repent, and that GOD will accept thee. Art thou ſo perſwaded? doſt thou thinke the cuſtome of ſinne is ſo ſoone left? is not Cuſtome another Nature? Can men that haue been accuſtomed, leaue to ſweare by their Faith and their Troth (the Iewels that they pawne to Sathan and the World vpon euery triuiall occaſion?) and canſt thou leaue greater and groſſer, more pleaſing and more profitable ſins when thou wilſt? Canſt thou not leaue ſuch ſinnes, which thou maiſt as well ſpare as the dirt from thy nayles; namely, thy vaine words, thy oathes and blaſphemies? and canſt thou leaue theſe that haue nearer allyance with thee, and ſtand thee in more ſtead? Is an inueterate ſore, a long raigning Diſeaſe ſo ſoone cured? Is that

Diuell that hath taken long poſſeſſion, ſo ſoone caſt out? Can the Aethyopian leaue his blackneſſe, and the Leopard his skinne? then will it be eaſie for thee to doe well that ſtill accuſtomeſt thy ſelfe to doe euill.
                     Beſides, thou thinkeſt thou canſt repent when thou wilſt. Thou maiſt as well imagine that if thou wert dead thou couldſt reuiue and liue againe when thou wilt (for a wicked man is a dead man, liuing in the life naturall, dead in the life ſpirituall) thou maiſt as well thinke to worke a Miracle when thou wilt; for, it is no greater Miracle to raiſe a dead body (as Chriſt did Lazarus) then to raiſe a dead ſoule:None can repent when hee will. to turne ſtones into fleſh, then a ſtony heart into a fleſhie that can repent. Indeed if Repentance were in thine owne power, there were policie in it to deferre this fight with ſinne (as Fabritius lingred to fight with his enemies) and ſtill to taſte the ſweet of ſinne: but it is not in thy power to repent, it is the gift of God. Acts 5. ver. 31. from whom this grace and all other come, Iames 1.17.
                     I, but thou haſt Scripture for thy purpoſe: ſo hath the Diuell his Scriptum eſt: is it not written, ſaith the ignorant Lay-man, or the carnall Cauiller (that remembers no other Text but this, which hee wiſely vrgeth to his owne deſtruction) that, At what time ſoeuer a ſinner repents from the bottome of his heart, the

Lord will be mercifull, &c. It is true, that at what time the ſinner repents, hee ſhall be pardoned, as Mary Magdalene, the Publican, and others were: but the Lord ſaith not, that at what time ſoeuer a ſinner ſinnes, hee will giue him Repentance:Aug. 
                        Qui dat poenitenti veniam, neſcis an dabit peccanti poenitentiam. Repentance is the gift of Grace, it comes not from Nature: a ſtone hath as much power to mount vp to the Church Steeple of it ſelfe, as a wicked man to repent of himſelfe. Therefore dally not with ſin; be not deceiued, God is not mocked. If thou couldſt leaue the traffique and commerce with ſinne when thou wouldeſt, and repent from thy heart, ſinne might vvith greater ſhew be retained, and with leſſe danger: but ſince the longer thou continueſt in it, the more thy heart is hardened; ſince (as the Prophet ſpeakes of Wine and Women,) ſo euery other ſinne takes away the heart, Oſe 11. and makes it incapable of any Chriſtian dutie; let it be thy wiſedome (as Daniel councels Nabuchadnezzar) to breake off thy ſinnes betimes; leaue ſinne ere it leaue thee; beginne at length to liue ere thou dye: for, (as Similis once ſaid of himſelfe) though thou ſeeſt many yeeres, thou liueſt but thoſe that are piouſly and penitently ſpent.
                     Now redeeme the time which thou haſt miſſpent: now is thy Harueſt lead home:

now prouide againſt the rainy day of thy laſt day; now in the calme of life, arme thy ſelfe againſt the tempeſt of death. Oh it will be too late to thinke of leading a good life when life is ended, too late to buy after the Market is done, too late to traffique after the Mart, too late to ſaile when the Tyde is paſt, and the Sea is rough: therefore prepare a medicine before the wound, Sero Medicina paratur. Heare not the voyce of the Serpent, Eritis ſicut Dij, you ſhall be like Gods, to puffe you vp with pride; but feare, and beleeue the voice of God, Moriemini, yee ſhall dye like men: for this death prepare betimes; now is the acceptable time; now is thy time, thy day, thy houre, thy viſitation; now the voyce cals, Chriſt knockes, the Angell moues the waters, Moſes and the Prophets perſwade; the ſhortneſſe of thy life, multitude of thy ſinne, difficultie of repenting, thy Houre-glaſſe running, time ſpending. thy former fruitleſſe liuing, danger of deferring, death approaching, all vrge, moue, pleade, for a conuerted ſoule, a holy heart, a renued life, that thou maiſt dye a bleſſed death, finde a ioyfull reſurrection, and inioy a happy glorification.
                     Laſtly, to conclude this Text, for this time,Doctrine. and ſo this Worke (hauing exceeded my purpoſed and propoſed breuitie) let mee onely offer vnto your conſiderations this meditation,

that there is a direct and a certaine method and rule as of liuing ſo of dying well,There is a way laid downe in the word, to a bleſſed death. ſo plaine, ſo perſpicuous, that ſome haue vvrit vvhole Tractaites of this ſubiect; from whoſe Harueſt I will not be aſhamed to gleane ſomething (as Ruth out of the field of Booz) and inſert their eares into this Garland, borrowing ſome few grounds of him, whom I heard as a Maſter out of Moſes Chaire, liuing Mr. Perkins. Mr. Sutton in his Booke Learne to Dye.
                        , and reuerence dying. If any therefore demaund in this great and maine poynt of all poynts, what courſe hee is to take, that with old Simeon he may die in peace; for Reſolution of this caſe of Conſcience, I ſay that to dye well, there are two things requiſite, A preparation before death, and A right diſpoſition in death. This Preparation is two-folde; generall and ſpeciall: generall, is that whereby a man prepares himſelfe to dye throughout the whole courſe of his life: to this the Scripture continually exhorts, when it inioynes vs ſtraitly to watch and pray, to awake from ſleepe, to prepare to meete the Bridegroome, to be in a readineſſe, euery day (like Souldiers that expect their Generall) againſt the ſecond comming of CHRIST to Iudgement: not to haue our hearts oppreſſed with ſurfetting and drunkenneſſe, and the cares of the world, leaſt that day come vpon vs vnprouided, as the theefe vpon the careleſſe houſholder; as the ſnare vpon the Bird,

as the Floud vpon the old world, as fire vpon Sodome, as deſolation vpon Ieruſalem: A thing that ſtands vs all much vpon, as a dutie not to be omitted. Firſt,Death is certaine, yet vncertaine. becauſe of that vncertaine certaintie that is in death, certaine for the matter, (as before we haue proued) vncertaine both in reſpect of the Time when, which none knowes, whither morning, euening, midnight, or Cocke crow: in Winter, Summer, Spring, or Autumne. Secondly, in reſpect of Place; for none knowes where, whether at home or abroad, by Sea or by Land, in his bed, or in the field. Dauid dyed in his bed, Ionathan in the field; the deceiued Prophet, and Amaſa, in the high-way; Abner at the Court; Icarus, Helle, Aegaeus, by Sea (from whom the Aegean, and Icarian Sea, and Helleſpont were named:) three Popes, Iohn the firſt, Iohn the foureteenth, and Caeleſtine the fift, dyed in priſon: nay, ſome haue dyed in the very Priuies, as Arius, and Lampridrus. 
                        Heliogabalus, two Monſters, and there had Saul dyed had not Dauid ſpared. Therefore Mors omni loco te expectat,
                        Seneca. 
                        tu expecta eam, ſince Death expects thee in euery place, expect thou it. Thirdly, for the Manner, no man knowes how hee ſhall dye, whether of a naturall or violent death: Ioſias was ſhot by the Archers and dyed, Eglon was thruſt in at the fift rib, ſo was Abner, ſo was the late French King: ſome ſodainely, as Fabius the

Romane, Gandericus the Vandall: ſome of a lingring diſeaſe, ſome of a burning Feauer, ſome of a colde Collique, ſome this way, ſome that, according to the phraſe: 
                           Vt moriar ſcio, neſcio vbi, quomodo, quando.
                        
                        
                           I am aſſur'd to die, yet doe not know
                           The way that leads to death, when, where or how.
                        
                     
                     Therefore wee are ſpeedily to prepare for this iourney of death, ſince it muſt be gone, and wee know not how ſoone we ſhall be inforced to trauell: in other matters morrall, the Axiome may beſeeme the moſt politique, Deliberandum eſt diu, quod perficiendum ſemel, that wee ſhould determine that deede with deliberation, which wee purpoſe to put in execution: but in this weightie worke, the leſſe wee are in demurring, and the more in action and doing, the better it is: to learne to dye is Ars Artium, an Art of Arts, which all the Schooles of the Gentiles could not teach without Theologie; great Rabbies in humanitie, are meere Ideots in this heauenly Science. It ſtands vs in hand then euery day (as the Pythagoreans in Philoſophy) to be proficients in this Myſterie: for therefore is the laſt day vnknowne, that wee ſhould prepare our ſelues euery day: and the rather, becauſe our laſt day is the inchoation of our perpetuated

ſorrow or ſolace: the day of our Marriage with the Lambe, or of our maſſacring vvith the roaring Lyon; Vt in illo die, Mors inueniet,
                        
                           Heb. 9.27. 
                        Dominus iudicabit, as the Tree fals, ſo it lies, as death at that day ſhall leaues vs, ſo ſhall Iudgement finde vs:The pains of hell are without remiſſion or redemption. Eſay 30. many changes and conuerſions from euill to good, but at that day there is no change no conuerſion, Nulla remiſſio, nulla redemptio, no remiſſion, no redemption: If Death finde vs barren Trees, ſo it cuts vs downe, ſo Hell-fire burnes vs in that Tophet prepared of old. If death ceaze vpon vs impenitent ſinners, as it did on Cain and Iudas, ſo Iudgement findes vs, ſo Hell holds vs, ſo the vncleane Spirits torment vs: there wee ſhall continue more millions of yeeres, then be Atoim or moates in the Sunne, then Bees in Hybla, then there were Locuſts in Aegypt; nay, moe then there be Sands on the Sea-ſhore, pyles of Graſſe on the Ground, or Starres in the Heauens, in ſuch exquiſite torments, that Perillus his Bull, Diomedes his wilde Horſes, Maxentius his tying the liuing to the dead, till they dye with ſtincke and Famine; the French Burning-Chamber, Spaniſh Inquiſition, tearing with Lyons, boyling in Oyle, pinching vvith burning Pincers, and the like, are pleaſing Baths, cooling Harbors, and refreſhing recreations in compariſon: neuer to be relieued, neuer to be releaſed, not to be ranſomed vvith

thouſands of Goates and Rammes, with riuers of Oyles, not with all the Maſſes, Trentals, Dirges, &c. and trumpery of Romiſh Superſtition; nay, not with all the Prayers of the Saints in earth or heauen: nay, if Noah, Dauid and Dani
                              •
                           l ſhould intreate, if the Virgin Mary ſhould mediate, if all the Angels ſhould ſupplicate, eyther the remiſſion of their ſinnes, or intermiſſion of their ſorrowes and plagues, it were bootleſſe and fruitleſſe.
                     Oh then, how much doth this mature and preparatorie repentance concerne euery ſoule, that by it the vnion being made betwixt Chriſt and their ſoules, their ſinnes being waſht away in the bloud of the Lambe, the Lord at that day may freely accept them, and ſeeing no iniquitie in Iacob,
                        
                           Numb. 22. Pſal. 32.1. nor tranſgreſſion in Iſrael, may couer their offences, and not impute their ſinnes to their deſerued condemnation? In omitting or pretermitting of which dutie, wee may iuſtly blame and exclaime againſt wicked and ſecure worldlings, that neuer thinke of this waightie worke,Repentance is not to be deferd till ſickneſſe, or death. till by ſickneſſe they be ſummoned to their diſſolution: then, with the vnrighteous Steward, they beginne to ſhuffle and buſsle a little, to make all ſtraight, in ſome ſuperficiall and hypocriticall Repentance, like Ahab.
                        
                           
                              •
                            
                           Kings. 21. Which preparation of theirs, for their Paſſe-ouer out of this world, is at that time very prepoſterous, becauſe then all the ſenſes

and powers of the body are occupyed about the paines and troubles of the diſeaſe. Beſides, Phyſitians to be conſulted with,Plurimis intenſis minor, ad ſingula ſen
                              •
                           us. Friends to be conferred with, Houſhold affayres to be ſet in order: a Will to be made; order taken how debts muſt be eyther paid or receiued: neighbours comming to viſit; oh how doe they diuide, how diſtract the ſicke party! Is that a fit time of this preparation? When ſo many Irons are in the fire, it is likely this great one will coole: much leſſe is it conuenient to deferre it till the houre of death, as is the practiſe of carnall and careleſſe men, imagining that if they haue but time to ſay, God forgiue me, Lord haue mercy on mee, with the Publican, but eſpecially to runne ouer the Lords Prayer, and the Creede, which they vſe in ignorance and ſuperſtition, as Popiſh Charmes, without any faith, feruencie, and feeling; they holde themſelues cocke-ſure of ſaluation, though their preparation be not ſo good, as the Iewes for their Paſſeouer, as a Chriſtians is or ought to be, for his ordinary hearing the Word, and receiuing the Sacrament. Doe not theſe men preſumptuouſly thinke (like blinde Bayards) that they haue God, and his Grace, and his Mercie at commaund; that they can repent when they liſt: the contrary experience whereof improues their folly, diſcouers their deluſions, and ſhewes that they build on the ſand,

and reſt on a broken ſtaffe;The danger of deferring diſcouered. for, was there not a time when Eſau ſought the bleſſing with teares and found it not? Would not Iudas faine haue repented, as appeares by his hypocriticall confeſſion, Mat. 27.3.4.5. and yet a Halter was all the comfort he got? Would not Anti
                              •
                           chus Epiphanes had mercy, when notwithſtanding his expired life ended in miſerie? Would not the fooliſh Virgins haue entered the Bridegroomes Chamber, when it was paſt time, but were excluded? And doth not the Lord threaten that many ſhall ſeeke to enter in at the ſtraite gate but ſhall not be able? Why ſo? Becauſe they ſeeke too looke, when the time of grace is paſt. And indeede it is iuſt with God to reiect them in aduerſitie, that haue reiected him in proſperitie; not to heare when they call, though they howle on their beds like Wolues, that would not heare when hee called by his Word, and the motions of his Spirit; to forget them in death, that would not remember him in life; to harden thoſe that would not be ſoftned.
                     Conſider with thy ſelfe what reaſon there is to the contrary: is it reaſon that God ſhould accept the Winter of thy life, thy barren and frozen ſoule, when thou haſt offered vp the Spring, Summer, and Autumne of thy yeeres to Sathan? that he ſhould receiue the euening Sacrifice, when Mammon, or Luſt, hath had

the morning? that he ſhould be pleaſed with thy lees and dregs, when thou haſt giuen the beſt wine of thy bloud to the Diuell? will hee pledge Sathan in ſuch a cup? will he take the refuſe, and offals, and leauings of Sinne? It is poſſible hee may, I doe not limit the vnbounded Ocean of his mercy, but it is not probable hee will.
                     Make it thine owne caſe: wouldeſt thou entertaine an old decrepit Seruant, that is able to doe thee little or no ſeruice, and giue him great wages, that hath ſpent his youth and ſtrength in the ſeruice of thine enemie? I trow not. Will any Generall admit of a lame Souldier paſt ſeruice, that hath ſerued all his life againſt him, in his enemies Campe? will God admit thee into his ſeruice, entertaine thee into his Campe, receiue thee into his Houſe, reward thee in his Kingdome, when thou haſt ſpent the prime of thy yeeres in the ſeruice, nay, in the ſeruitude and ſlauery of Sathan? I ſay as Auguſtine ſaid to ſuch a deferrer as thou, Non dico ſaluabitur, non dico damnabitur, I will not ſay thou ſhalt be ſaued, I dare not determine thou ſhalt be damned: I leaue thee in the hands of God, that hath thee as the Potter hath the Clay, as the Smith his Iron, as the Carpenter his Wood, as the Creator his Creature, to harden or ſoften thee; to make thee a veſſell of honour or diſhonour; to glorifie

himſelfe in his Mercy, in thy conuerſion; or in his Iuſtice, in thy confuſion.
                     But thy heart tels thee, and Sathan tels thy heart, that thou maiſt repent at thy laſt houre. Thou maiſt indeed if God will, but (to driue thee from this falſe holde) it is not likely thou ſhalt repent truly and ſincerely. It is ſaid, Iudas repented in his death, ſo the Word is, Mat. 27. verſe 3. hee had a Legall ſorrow in him, yet hee is called a reprobate for all that: it is too true, that Poenitentia ſera, raro vera, late Repentance is ſeldome true Repentance. It is commonly as ſicke and weake as is the partie; it is not voluntarie and free, as that is which brings ſaluation, 2 Cor. 7.10. but vſually conſtrained and extorted, by the feare of hell and other Iudgements of God: for, croſſes and afflictions and ſickneſſe, will cauſe the groſſeſt Hypocrite that euer was, to ſtoope and buckle vnder the hand of God (as did Pharaoh twiſe) and to diſſemble Faith and Repentance, and euery other Grace of God, as did Ahab; as though they had Gods graces, as fully as any of Gods Seruants, whereas they are altogether deſtitute of them, naked and blinde, like the Laodiceans.
                           Reu. 3.18. And that ſuch repenters commonly counterfeite, it appeares by this demonſtration: True Repentance is a turning to God; ſo the Word cals it, Ioel 2.12. an auerſion from ſinne, which is his Terminus à quo:
                        
a conuerſion to God, Terminus ad quem? ſo moſt Diuines hold it. Now where is the turning from ſinne in ſuch repenters? They forſake not ſinne, but ſinne forſakes them: they leaue their euill wayes, becauſe they muſt leaue the world: they leaue ſinne in action, but hugge it ſtill in affection: if they had a new Leaſe of their liues, they would beginne new ſinnes. Nay, Si nunquam morirentur,
                        Gregorie. 
                        nunquam peccare deſinerent; If they ſhould neuer dye, they would neuer deſiſt from ſinne, as appeares in the practiſe of theſe pretended repenters: for, if God doe recouer them from their ſicke-beds, and take his hand off them, doe they goe their wayes and ſinne no more, Iohn 5.14? Nay, doe they not returne to their former bias; Canis ad vomitum, like Dogges to their vomit againe, and Swine to their wallowing? inſomuch that though the world ſay they are mended, yet Chriſtians can ſee no amendement in them, but they keepe their worſt wine vnto the laſt, and their end is worſe then their beginning?
                     Yet for all this which hath beene ſaid, the Theefe on the Croſſe ſtickes much on the ſtomackes of many? Why may not they liue as ill as hee did, and yet deferre their repentance till the laſt, and be ſaued as hee was? I haue vnlooſed this knot before. But to giue ſtill further ſatisfaction.
                     
                        
                        The theefes repentance vpon the Croſſe examined.Firſt, it may be, (nay, it is likely) the Theefe was neuer called before that time, ſo much as outwardly: that, hee neuer heard Chriſts Sermons before then that hee ſaw him; which thou doeſt, or maiſt doe, in this light of the Goſpell: therefore if hee had dyed impenitently, hee ſhould haue beene more excuſed then thou.
                     Secondly, as his example is extraordinarie, ſo it is particular: now, particulars are not to be vrged for a generall practiſe.
                     Thirdly, his example is ſingular, wee haue no moe late repenters ſaued but hee. We haue him indeede (ſaith Auguſtine) that we ſhould not deſpaire, if wee doe deferre; and yet wee haue but onely him, him and no moe in the whole Scripture, that we ſhould not preſume. You know his other fellow-theefe, that liued as hee did, dyed not as hee did, but impenitently, ſcoffingly, and deſperately: ſo haue all other obdurate wicked ones dyed, as we haue proued out of the Word. If then Sathan, and Nature perſwade thee ſtill to liue in ſinne, thou maiſt repent at laſt, with the good Theefe, and ſo be ſaued: thinke that it is more probable thou ſhalt dye impenitently, with the bad Theefe, if thou continue thy courſes, and ſo be damned.
                     Thou knoweſt, amongſt many Traytors, the King pardons ſome; but for one that is

pardoned, an hundred are deſeruedly executed: were it not folly to attempt treaſon vpon hope of pardon, becauſe ſome one is pardoned amongſt many? but it is greater folly to liue impenitently till death, becauſe one Theefe was in that caſe ſaued, when as wee haue inſtanced in Cain, Iudas, Herod, &c. and an hundred moe, that as they liued in iniquitie, dyed in impenitence, and now are damned eternally.
                     Therefore to conclude,Exhortat. let mee heate thy heart a little, and inflame thy affections to prepare ſpeedily for thy diſſolution: to take time before thee, it is bald behinde; to worke whilſt it is day, ere the night of death comes, harden not thy heart any longer, but to day heare his voyce, that cals thee, as it did Samuel and Dauid, to awake and to ſeeke his face: Cry not with the Crow, Cras, Cras, to morrow, to morrow, but this day with Noahs Doue, come into the Arke: yet Ionas cryes in the ſtreetes, Ionas 3.4. yet the Angell ſtayes Sodomes flames, Gen. 19. yet the weather is fayre to build an Arke in, Gen. 7.5. yet the Prophet cryes. Oh Iudah, how ſhall I intreate thee? Hoſ. 6.4. yet the Bridegroome tarries and ſtayes the Virgins leaſures, Mat. 25.7. yet the Apoſtle beſeecheth for Chriſts ſake, that thou wouldeſt be reconciled, 2 Cor. 5.20.
                     Oh therefore prepare oyle betimes, vvith

the wiſe Virgins, enter whileſt the gate is open, ſeeke the Lord whileſt hee may be found, call vpon him whileſt hee is nigh, waite for thy Maſters comming with the good Seruant, build the Arke ere the Floud come, prepare thy ſoule ere Death come: this is thy time, thy day, tempus tuum: Death is Gods day, tempus ſuum, and his time. Now is the time to repaire the Ship of thy ſoule in the Hauen, but the tempeſtuous Sea of Death is no fit time: the breach is to be made vp in the time of peace, not in time of warre. Now make peace, in the day of peace, with the God of peace, that with old Simeon thou maiſt dye and reſt in peace, and remaine in glory. Thus much for preparation.
                     Now the manner of this Preparation conſiſts in ſome particulars, which wee meane to proſecute.
                     
                        Meditation of death is a principall part of preparation to die in peaceThe firſt whereof is Meditation: Memento mori, muſt be euery mans Motto: a point that as the Scripture in
                           •
                        oynes, ſo the Saints haue practiſed, and the Heathens haue approued this principle, that To
                              •
                           a hominis vita, mortis meditatio, the whole life of a man ought to be the meditation of death: the beſt Schollers that euer were in the Schoole of Chriſtianitie, haue beene taken vp in this thought. Adam was no ſooner created, but God his Schoolemaſter catechizeth him in this point of death:

hee cals him Adam, rubra terra, red earth; hee caſts him into a ſleepe, the Image (nay, as the Cynicke cals it) the Brother of death: hee tels him, if hee ſinne, hee ſhall dye the death. When hee had ſinned, he fore-warnes him that hee ſhall returne to his duſt from which hee came: hee makes him garments of Beaſts skinnes, that had dyed for ſacrifice, to ſhew him that hee was mortall, like thoſe Beaſts whoſe skinnes hee wo
                           •
                        e: hee ſets him to dig and tyll the Earth, to put him in minde both of the duſtie matter whereof hee vvas made, and into which hee and all his poſteritie muſt be diſſolued. Adam, it ſeemes, tooke out theſe Leſſons, and taught them his Children; for though hee called his eldeſt Sonne Poſſeſſion, yet hee called his Brother Abel, Ʋanitie, when hee had more experience of the vanities of life, and life it ſelfe.
                     In this Meditation the Patriarkes were wonderouſly taken vp, the very forme and fabricke of their Manſions, not dwelling in ſeiled houſes, as wee doe (though they were both greater men and of greater meanes) but in Tents and Tabernacles, ſuch as they vſe in the warres, ready vpon all occaſions to be remoued (euen like the Boothes in Sturbbiſh-Faire) ſhew, that they did conſtantly ponder of their owne remouals; nay, their tongues expreſſed the abundant thoughts of their hearts in this

kinde, Abraham confeſt himſelfe but duſt and aſhes, Gen. 18.17. Iacob acknowledgeth his life a Pilgrimage. Ioſeph giues order for the buriall of his bones, Gen. 50. The greateſt purchaſes which wee reade the Patriarkes made, or that euer they ſpoke of, was onely a place to bury their dead in. Moſes ſo thought of his mortalitie, that hee makes a Pſalme wherein he both acknowledgeth mans frailtie, and inferres this Petition pathetically, that the Lord would teach him,
                           Pſal. 90.12. and the Iſraelites, to number their dayes: which Pſalme the auncient Fathers vſed in forme of a Prayer. Iob waites till his changing come, Iob 10.14. Dauid makes no other reckoning of himſelfe then of a Pilgrime, Pſal. 120.3. and Peter accounts his continuance here, but his abode in a tabernacle; 2 Pet. 1.3.
                     Oh that ſuch thoughts did poſſeſſe vs! they would make vs more familiar with Death, and it more welcome vnto vs; for, Iacula praeuiſa, minus faeriunt, Darts fore-ſeene doe the leſſe harme. Oh, how many ſinnes would they cut off, (as Hercules did the heads of Hydra,) which are the onely weakeners of our Faith, wounders of our ſoules, workers of our vvoes, and diſturbers of our dying peace. Therefore ſaith the Wiſe-man, Remember thy end, and thou ſhalt neuer doe amiſſe. For, as the Bird directs her ſelfe by her taile flying, and the

ſhip it directed by her ſtearne, ſayling, to auoid the Rockes: ſo is a Chriſtian conformed and confirmed in an happy courſe, preſerued from the Soule-ſplitting Rockes of ſinne, by the thought of death.
                     Firſt, it mortifies from the world:Effects of deaths meditation. hee eaſily contemnes all, that thinkes hee muſt dye, (ſaith an olde Hermite) for, what cares a condemned malefactor, that fits himſelfe for his euery houres expected execution, for thouſands of Gold and Siluer.
                     Secondly, it curbes the pompe and glory of the world: for what cares old Berzillas for all the pleaſures of Dauids Court, when the keepers of his houſe, his hands, tremble;
                           Eccl. 12.3▪
                           
                              •
                           
                         his legs, theſe ſtrong men bowe themſelues; when his eyes, the windowes of his body, waxe darke; when his eares, the daughters of Muſicke, are abated; when the Graſhoppers, or bended ſhoulders, are a burthen; and his teeth, the Grinders, ceaſe? hee thinkes rather of returning to Gilead, and dying in his owne Country, then of Ieruſalems Court, 2 Sam. 19.
                     Thirdly, it curbes pride: Quid ſuperbis puluis & cinis? ſaith Bernard; Oh, how can duſt and aſhes be proud? meditatio mortis, &c.
                        Auguſtine. the meditation of death is the nayle of the fleſh, which fixeth all the proud luſts thereof to the wood of the Croſſe. What Peacocke can be proud when hee lookes at his blacke

feete, the earth from whence he is, and whither hee tends. Therefore euen amongſt the Heathens, ſaith Caelius Rodiginus, when their Emperours were crowned, as a counter-poyſon againſt pride, they were carryed vnto the Sepulchers of dead men, and there it was demanded of them, what one ſhould be made for them. So Climachus reports of that good Baſil, that the very day wherein with great ioy and applauſe he was propounded Doctor and Paſtor to the people, as an Antidote againſt pride, hee made one to tell him thus; Pater, ſepulchrum tuum nondum eſt perfectum; Father, thy ſepulcher is not yet finiſhed. The like thoughts, amongſt others, Auguſtine vſed, when hee found himſelfe tickled with ſecret pride, with the applauſes of the people, for his exquiſite Sermons.
                     Fourthly, it is a meanes of temperancie, and a reſtrainer of intemperancie, and a curber of Carnalitie and Epicuriſme. Hence it was that the auncient Aegyptians,Lib. 3. as Heroditus reports, in their Gemalia and Feaſts of great and Noble-men, there was the portraiture of a dead man, in wood, which was round, like a Globe, had to euery gueſt to behold, with this Motto writ on it, In hanc intuens, pota & oblectate, talis poſt mortem futurus.
                     
                     
                        Beholding this vſe merry glee,
                        For as this is, ſo thou ſhalt bee.
                     
                     
                        Hence it is that Auguſtine, as hee would haue a man alwayes to thinke vpon theſe quatuor nouiſſima, foure laſt things, Death, Iudgement, Heauen, Hell; ſo chiefely in their Feſtiuals and meetings, wherein Sathan chiefely beguiles men, as hee did Adam and Eue by eating. And ſure, amongſt other things, this made that Cinicke Philoſopher ſo abſtinent, becauſe hee was continually amongſt tombes and Sepulchers: but ſure the meditation of their Tombes and Sepulchers,De orig. Monich. cauſed Paul
                              •
                           s Symplex, Macariu▪ Pambo, and other Hermites in Hoſpinian, to be ſo abſtenuous, euen to a maruell, if not to a miracle. I wiſh the Tricongij, Biberij, and Heliogabuli, I meane the Epicures and Belly-gods, that eate and drinke till there be as little Grace in their Soules, and Wit in their Pates, as their be Wines in their Pots, that they would drinke out of an earthen veſſell, with Agathocles; or looking vpon a Deaths-head, as is the faſhion in ſome Countryes; or that a dead mans skull were preſented vnto them the firſt diſh at their Table, as it is in the Court of Preſter-Iohn: or at leaſt, that if the picture of Death which I haue ſeene in the bottome of ſome cups, will not, yet that the ſight of the dead creatures before them, might call vnto them as Phillips Boy to Phillip, Memento te eſſe mortalem, Oh Epicuriſh Glutton▪ remember thou art mortall: or that they

would ponder the voyce which S. Ierome alwayes imagined, euen when hee was eating and drinking, Ariſe you dead, and come to Iudgement. Perhaps theſe thoughts vvould make them put their kniues to their throates as Salomon ſpeakes, and damme vp the gulph of their inordinate appetites.
                     Fiftly, this thought would worke in vs contentation in euery eſtate, as it did in Iob, who in the midſt of his afflictions, comforts himſelfe with this conſideration, Naked came I out of my mothers wombe, and naked ſhall I returne. The thought of this, that wee ſhall carrie nought away with vs but a Coffin, or a winding ſheete, ſhould keepe vs within compaſſe of too eager purſuite in purchaſing, or impatiencie in parting with this vnrighteous Mammon.
                     Sixtly, this thought of death is a notable meanes and ſpurre to further our Repentance: it will cauſe vs, if any thing, not onely with Ezekias and Achitophel, to ſet our houſes in order, but our hearts to: for, what ſo haſtned the repentance of Niniuie as the beliefe and thought of Ionas his Sermon; it was time for them to beſtirre themſelues, when they had but forty dayes to liue. So when Elias tels Ahab that the Dogges ſhall eate him and Iezabel, hee makes ſome ſuperficiall ſhew of repentance. So the third Companie of fiftie,

with their Captaine, that came by violence to fetch Elias, when they ſaw the two other Captaines with their fifties, conſumed with fire, they ſeeme to relent, and deale with the Prophet by intreatie.
                     If then meditation of death haue ſuch force, both in the godly and wicked, both in Chriſtians and Pagans, to incite to vertue, reſtraine vice, curbe couetouſneſſe, cure pride, bridle luſt, moderate murmuring, keepe in intemperancie, procure repentance, cauſe mortification, and doe euery way ſo correct a vicious life, and ſo direct a happy death: ſince of all other Meditations this ſtrengthens the minde, as of all other meates bread ſtrengthens the body: ſince it is as needfull to a good life as wings for Birds, ſailes for Marriners, tailes for Fiſhes to ſwimme, wheeles for Coaches to runne, as Climachus makes the compariſons: ſince you ſee the holy Patriarkes, Abraham, Iacob, Ioſeph, Iob, Moſes, Dauid; nay, I may adde our Sauiour CHRIST (who was moſt frequent in diſcourſe with his Diſciples of his death, his Paſſion, his houre, his crucifying; nay▪ euen then when hee was transfigured in glory, hauing two dead men with him,
                           Mat. 17. 
                        Moſes and Elias, and talking of his death when hee came from the Mount, (as appeares in the Euangeliſts) did ſo oft thinke of death: ſince the Saints, after Chriſts death, Auguſtine,

Ierome, Baſil, Bernard; the deuout Hermites; nay, euen Ethnicke Kings and Philoſophers, made ſuch good vſe of this Meditation, as we haue proued: then let the thought poſſeſſe vs that are now liuing, of our ineuitable dying▪ that it may worke in vs the ſame effects that it did in them.
                     
                        Exhortat.Oh let vs thinke of it in our proſperitie, in our pleaſures; let vs meditate of it in our Orchards, in our Gardens, as did Ioſeph of Aramathia; who (Iohn 19.41.) had his Sepulcher in his Garden, euen the place of his recreations: let vs thinke of it in our beds (thoſe Embleames of our graues,) in our Cloſets, in our Cloiſters, in our Walkes and Galleries, that ſo remembring it in euery place, expecting it at euery houre, it may not come vpon vs vnprouided, as the ſtorme vpon the Marriner, as the enemie vpon the drowſie Centinel, as Dauids Companie vpon the drunken Amalekites,
                           
                              •
                           nua
                              •
                           un
                              •
                            vrbem ſomtio vino
                              
                                 
                              
                              que
                            ſepultum. as the politique Graecians vpon the ſecure Troyans. Death is like the Baſiliske, it hurts not if it be ſpyed betimes: if Death ſpye vs firſt, it kils vs, as the Baſiliske doth the Traueller; if wee ſpye it firſt, wee kill it, as the Traueller doth the Baſiliske, as Ambroſe makes the Application: and therefore as Ariſtotle writes of two Fountaines, the one whereof if a man drinke, it makes him laugh ſo much till he dye; if of the other, it both hinders

laughter, and preuents death:Et riſum impedit, & mortem. theſe two fountaines are the Remembrance and the Obliuion of death: the laſt is like poyſoned water to kill vs, the firſt like ſtrong diſtillatorie waters to reuiue vs.
                     Yet alas, for all this who thinkes of death?Expoſtulation. there is ſuch a generall cruſt of Securitie growne ouer this Land, that it is to be feared wee are expoſed to the ſame dangers that Ieruſalem was, the cauſe of all whoſe plagues was, ſhee knew not her viſitation, ſhe remembred not her end, Lament. 1.9. Oh how few number their dayes that they may apply their hearts vnto wiſedome? How few thinke of their ends, till ſickneſſe end them, till Death ſay to them as GOD to Ezekias, Thou muſt dye: and as the Prophet to Ahaziah, Thou ſhalt not come downe from thy bed to which thou art gone vp? 2 Kings 1.4. How few looke into hell ere they leape into it? How many Arithmeticians are in the world, that number all things but their dayes; their corne, cattle, ſheepe, ſtocke, money, wares, and the like; that are as wiſe Serpents in euery thing, excepting in fore-ſeeing their death? How many, like careleſſe debters, ſtill runne into the debts and arrerages of former ſinnes with GOD, their patient Creditor, neuer thinking of the day of account, the ſtrictneſſe of the Iudge, the cloſeneſſe of the Priſon, the Serieant at

their backes, Death ready to arreſt them? How many ſleepe out their time, like Salomons ſluggard? How many cry, Soule take thine eaſe, eate, drinke and be merry, ſinging to the Tabret and the Harpe, ſtretching themſelues vpon their Iuory Couches, ſaying (like theſe Epicures, which Tertullian blames in his Bookes of the Soule) Oh Death, what haue we to doe with thee? trouble not thou vs, and wee ſhall not trouble thee: yea, though wee haue ſo many Monitors, euery day, in all the things of Nature: the Sunne ſetting ouer vs, the graues vnder vs,Monumentum, quaſi monens mentem. though wee ſee many Tombes euen in our Churches and Monuments (as the word ſignifies) to admoniſh vs; Croſſes and Sickneſſes, Deaths ſummons, that tell vs Death is approching, vellicat haec aures, at
                              
                                 
                              
                              que
                            ait en venio; yet neuertheleſſe, as the ſight of one obiect or colour takes away the eye from beholding another: the thought of the world, and the luſts thereof, takes away the thought of death. And as Abſolon carryed on his Mule, whileſt hee hung by the haire of the head, was thruſt through three times by Ioab; ſo our ſoules being carryed here vpon our fleſh, (vvhich Auguſtine, Hugo, and Luther, call the Aſſe of the ſoule) whilſt our thoughts are climing, and fixt vpon the high Tree of Honour, Pleaſure, Preferment, Death, like Ioab, comes and kils vs with a triple Dart that wee ſee not, Time

paſt, preſent, and to come: neuer thinking of theſe darts till wee feele them, no more then the fiſh of the hooke till it hold her; yea, though wee ſee daily, wiſer, wealthier, holier, healthfuller, and younger then our ſelues, goe to their graues, yet this thought ſtill raignes in vs, that we ſhall not dye till we be old, as Seneca notes, Non patemus ad mortem, &c. yea,Ad Mart. euen ſuch as thinke they ſhall be happy after death, thinke little of the day of death;Lib. de gratia noui Teſt. 
                        Tantum vim habet carnis & animae dulce conſortium, ſaith Auguſtine, ſuch force hath that ſweet conſort betwixt the ſoule and the fleſh. But it is more which Tully notes, that there is no man ſo old, but hee thinkes hee may liue one yeere longer, though hee vſe his third foote when one of his other feete is in the graue already: and this makes euen old ſo encline in their thoughts and deſires vnto the Marriage-bed, who in the courſe of Nature, haue but a few ſteps into their graues; yea, to aſſociate themſelues with ſuch young yoake-fellowes, that if Sophocles were liuing, hee would bluſh once againe for ſhame to ſee them; and Cato ſhould haue more matter to laugh at, then to ſee an Aſſe eate Thiſtles: in which we verifie Chriſts propheſie, that as in the dayes of Noah, wee marry and are marryed, neuer thinking of death till the Floud come. This makes ſuch an invndation of ſinne, as delights

Sathan, who takes as great delight to ſteale away our hearts from the thought of Death, as Abſolon did to ſteale away the hearts of the people from his Father Dauid: for, he knowes full well, that if wee ſhould thinke of Death, wee ſhould not practiſe ſinne: hee knowes that as the Serpent, when ſhee ſtops the one eare with her taile, the other with the earth, ſhee will not harken to the voice of the Charmer; ſo the Lords Doues, that are as wiſe as Serpents, laying their eares to the earth, remembring their mortalitie, will not be deluded with the charmes of his temptations: he knowes that his hooke bayted with riches, will not be bit vpon if a man remember himſelfe, breuis incerti
                              
                                 
                              
                              que
                            huius iteniris, of this his ſhort and vncertaine iourney: hee knowes hee will not ſinne, that knowes after death hee ſhall inherit Serpents and Wormes. For which cauſe when hee would haue vs to ſinne, hee hides the grieſly head of Death, caſting the ſcumme and miſt of ſome deceiuing pleaſure before our eyes, (as they ſay Iuglers doe in their trickes,) ſhewing vs onely ſinnes pleaſure, (as the Panther ſhewes his pleaſing ſpots to the Beaſts) to deceiue, hiding his head, that hee may deuoure vs.
                     Therefore to conclude this Part, as our Sauiour Chriſt ſaid,De paup. amand. 
                        Remember Lots Wife: as Nazianzen ſaith to oppreſſors, Remember Naboths

                           Ʋineyard: ſo I bid thoſe that are terrigenae & Brutigini, the ſonnes of the earth, Remember their earth: nay, God w
                           •
                        iſheth thee to remember thy earth, Oh that they were wiſe (ſaith God, of Iſraell) and woul'd remember the latter things, Deut. 32.29. Oh that wee were wiſe euen in this particular! oh how ſhould vvee auoid many ſnares of Sathan, that preuailes ouer vs, euen by our ſecuritie in this kinde? And therefore Quos viu 
                              •
                           ntes blanditijs decipit, &c. whom hee decei
                           •
                        es by fraud liuing,Greg. in Mor. hee deuoures by force dying. Oh how ſhould wee be prepared for the ſecond comming of CHRIST, if wee had but an eye to the pale Horſe and him that ſits thereon! Apoc. 6.8. Oh that wee had but the wiſedome of the Cocke, that eating his meate, hath euer an eye vpwards, to looke at the Eagle or the Hawke! Oh that wee, as wee looke downewards with the eye of Reaſon, to the things of this life, would with the eye of Faith looke vp for the comming of Chriſt, who as hee roſe like a Lion, is aſcended like an Eagle, and will deſcend againe to iudge vs: then ſhould wee be fitted, with the good Seruant, come when he will come, to entertaine our Maſter with ioy, Mat. 24.23.
                     But alas, woe be to the ſecure world, vvee neither thinke of Iudgement generall nor ſpeciall, after death or in death: ſometimes indeede

deede wee can ſay, wee are all mortall, but (ex vſu magis quam ſenſu) as ſome pray, it is a word rather of cuſtome then feeling: wee ſeeme to be a little more moued when wee follow a Funerall, then wee weepe and waile, and cry out, This is the end of all fleſh: but as ſoone as wee are at home, the moſt we doe is a carnall fruitleſſe mourning for the dead; wee make no ſpirituall vſe of it to dye to any ſinne: in which, as ſome compares vs, wee are like to Swine, who when ſome one in the Heard is bit with a Dogge, all flocke about and gruntle, but preſently it is forgot, they fall againe to wallowing and rooting: or, like little Turkies and Chickens, who if the Kite or Buzzard ſwap and catch one, all the reſt with their dammes, are in an vprore, but inſtantly they fall againe to feeding: ſo when Death that deuouring Dog, that rauening Kite, that preyes vpon all fleſh, ſnatcheth away any of our Friends and Neighbours, wee complaine and exclaime of lifes breuitie, the worlds vanitie, wee mourne and pretend mortification; vvee lament and ſeeme to repent, but within few dayes all is drowned in the Leth of Obliuion: wee forget Death, as Nabuchadnezzar forgot his Dreame; wee fall againe to our former ſinfull ſecuritie, and ſo wee continue till vvee dye, excaecati, inſoporati, impraeparati; excecated, inſoporated, vnprepared. God reforme this,

and teach vs, as Dauid prayes, Pſal. 38. the number of our dayes, and make vs vviſe to ſaluation.
                     Beſides this Meditation, which wee make a part of preparation, to the attaining of this peaceable departure, other duties are to be adioyned: ſome whereof are to be performed in health, ſome in ſickneſſe, ſome in the immediate ſummons of Death it ſelfe: of all which briefely in theſe ſubſequent directions.
                     Firſt, let him that will die in peace,The life of Faith brings peace in Death. liue by Faith, Hab. 2.2. let him not content himſelfe with an Hiſtoricall Faith, ſuch as the Diuels haue, Iames 2.14. nor with a Ciuill Faith, ſuch as mortall men haue, and as the Heathens haue; nor with an Implicite Generall Faith,See D. Moſſe, his Sermon of the Faith of Diuels. which the Papiſts haue, euen the Coblers Faith, to beleeue as the Romiſh Church beleeues: for alas, all theſe kindes of Faith bring no more peace and comfort to the ſoule, in any extremitie, then cold water to a man that is in a ſowne. And therefore many men are deceiued, which thinke they ſhew themſelues exquiſite Chriſtians, and haue enough to ſaluation, if to their Paſtor or others, in their ſickneſſe, they can repeate and render their Faith, according to Gods Word, and the Articles of the Creede; with a renunciation of all points of Poperie, of Hereſies, and Superſtitions: for alas, this generall illumination, this knowing

Faith, which onely ſwimmes in the braine, without a particular applying Iuſtifying Faith, which workes by Loue, and brings forth the fruits of Prayer, Repentance, godly Sorrow for ſinne, Zeale, Sanctification, new Obedience, &c. neuer heates the heart, nor comforts the conſcience, nor hath the anſwere of any ſound peace from God. Oh therefore labour for a Iuſtifying ſauing Faith, for a ſpeciall and an applying Faith; ſuch as Paul preacht to the conuert Iaylor, Acts 16.31. Phillip to the baptized Eunuch, Acts 8.37. ſuch a Faith as is commended in the auncient Patriarkes and Primitiue Worthies, Hebrewes the eleauenth Chapter; ſuch as CHRIST commended in the Centurion, Mat. 8.10. and the Canaanitiſh woman; Mat. 15.28. ſuch as Thomas had after his incredulitie, calling Chriſt his Lord and his God; Iohn 20.28. ſuch as Paul had, when hee profeſt that he liued euen by Faith in Ieſus is Chriſt, Gal. 2.20. ſuch as Simeon here had. Oh get Chriſt into thy heart by Faith, as this good old man had him in his Armes▪ and in his heart, and thy death ſhall be peaceable like his.
                     
                        Repentance the meanes of peace with God.Secondly, if thou wilſt die in peace, repent ſpeedily of thy fore-paſt and preſent ſinnes: for, ſinne hinders all true peace; There is no peace to the wicked, ſaith my God, twiſe for ſureneſſe in expreſſe words, Eſay 48. verſe 22.

ſo Chap. 57.21. Iniquitie makes a diuiſion and ſeperation from God, Eſay 59.2. euen in life, much more in death: for then the ſoules of the wicked goe to Hell, Pſal. 9.16. much more in Iudgement▪ 
                        Mat. 7 23. Where there it plaine and palpable whoredome diſcouered there can be no peace betwixt man and wife: all ſinne is whoredome, and ſinners are called Adulterers and Adultreſſes, Iames 4. verſe 4. they are ſpiritually and corporally polluted by the Fleſh, the World, the Diuell; for which cauſe, rebellious Iſrael and Iudah are compared to Whores and Harlots, Ier. 3. v. 8.9. &c. Now, if any wicked ſoule ſhould aske with a deſire of reſolution, as the two Meſſengers of Iehoram, and as Iehoram himſelfe asked Iehu, Is it peace? Is it peace? 2 King. 9.18.19. Is there peace, or ſhall there be peace betwixt God and my ſoule? I reſolue him roughly from God, as Iehu did Iehoram, verſe 22. What peace? What haſt thou to doe with peace, ſince thou wanteſt Grace, the inſeparable companion of Peace? 2 Tim. 1.2. What haſt thou to doe with peace, whilſt the whoredomes of thy Mother Iezabel, and her witchcrafts are great in number? whilſt the pollutions of that whoriſh Iezabel, thy vncleane ſoule, are daily increaſed? whilſt thy Treaſons and Rebellions againſt thy God (which, as Samuel tels Saul, are like the ſinne of witchcraft, 1 Sam. 15.23.) are with an obdurate

and obſtinate heart continued? Was there any peace to Abſolon, though a Sonne, when hee was a Traytor againſt his Father? Can there be any to thee, not a Sonne of God, but a ſlaue of Sathan, rebelling againſt the Father of Spirits? Had Zimri peace (ſaith Iezabel to Iehu) that ſlew his Maſter? 2 Kings 9.31. Zimri was a Traytor, and ſlew Elah, as hee was drinking till hee was drunke, in the houſe of Arza his Steward (an vſuall end for drunkards) 1 Kings 16.9.10. Iezabel argues well; Can Traitors haue peace? looke to it Iehu; thou art a Traytor againſt Ahab: ſure Traytors ſeldome or neuer dye in peace. Witneſſe, Abſolon, Sheba, Adoniah, our Engliſh Traytors, Romanized Semenaries, treacherous Conſpirators, Lopus, Squire, Titchburne, Babington, Parry, &c. our late Powder-plotting Pioners, the French Rauillack, millions moe, which being like Ioab, men of bloud, haue come to their ends (as is ſaid of Tyrants) cum caede & ſanguine, with bloud and ſlaughter. Oh then, how canſt thou, a worme of the earth, a wretched man, becauſe a vvicked man, liuing in treaſonable ſinnes, with a heart as hard as the neather-Milſtone, rebelling againſt ſo great, ſo glorious, ſo potent, ſo powerfull a God, once hope that euer thy gray haires ſhall come to the graue in peace, or that thy ſoule after her flitting, ſhall reſt in

                        Abrahams boſome the place of peace. Can a man haue peace in Rome, and be oppoſed againſt the Pope, the vſurping Herod (that ſuppoſed earthly God, as his flattering Paraſites call him?) oh then, canſt thou duſt and aſhes, be oppoſed on earth againſt the mightie Iehouah, the God of heauen?
                     Chriſt that opened the eyes of the blinde, open thine eyes to ſee, and thy heart to beleeue, as hee did Lydia's, Acts 16.14. and giue thee, at laſt, a reſolution to breake off thy ſinnes by repentance, Dan. 4.84. the enemies of thy peace, leaſt God breake thee like a Potters veſſell, and teare thee in pieces, whilſt there is none to deliuer thee, Pſal. 50.22. Oh, ſue for pardon for thy ſinnes, ſeeke for peace to him which is the Prince of peace, Eſay 9.6. ſeeke for peace by him and his merits, which was ordained to be thy peace, and to worke thy reconciliation, C
                              •
                           l. 1.20. ſo thou ſhalt ſhut vp the laſt period of thy life vvith inward peace, and goe to keepe an eternall Sabbath, with him, that is the God of peace.
                     Thirdly, that thou maiſt die peaceably, invre thy ſelfe to dye daily; and that after this manner.
                     Firſt, euery day mortifie ſome ſinne, nip ſome Serpent in the head; crucifie euery day ſome corruption, ſet vpon thy leſſer ſinnes,

and ſo get ground of thy greater ſinnes:Three wayes how to dye daily. as in particular, leaue thy dangerous and damnable cuſtome of ſwearing and blaſpheming, by theſe degrees: firſt, breake off thy Ciuill Oathes,Firſt dye to ſinne. as in ſwearing by thy Faith, Troth, Chriſtendome, &c. Secondly, then ſet vpon thy Ridiculous and Childiſh Oathes, as by Fay,How to leaue the damnable cuſtome of Swearing. Fakins, Trokins, Bodikins, Slid, Sounds, Cocke and Pye, with the like; whereby thou ſeekeſt to mocke and deceiue God, who will not be mocked: Gal. 6. Thirdly, then invre thy ſelfe to leaue thy Superſtitious Oathes, as by the Maſſe, Rood, Croſſe, by our Lady, and by Popiſh Saints: &c. Fourthly, ſo proceede againſt thy Heatheniſh and Idolatrous Oathes, in ſwearing by the Creatures, (as Laban and Iezabel by their Idols, Gen. 31.53. 1 Kings 19 verſe 2.) as by men, by S. Peter, and by S. Iohn, &c. by the Heauens, the Earth, by Fire, Sunne, the Light, Meate, Drinke, Money, &c. or by the parts of thy body, as Hands, or the like, or by thy Soule; all condemned, Mat. 5. ver. 34. Iames 5.12. And ſo with a courage ſet vpon thy impious, horrible, fearefull, damnable, blaſphemous Oathes, as by the Lord, by God, the eternall God, by Chriſt, by Ieſus, and ſuch like; or by the parts and adiuncts of Chriſt, by tearing his Humanitie (as the Iewes did his body; by diuiding him, as the Souldiers did his garments, Mat. 27.35.)

in blaſphemie, by his Death, Paſſion, Life, Soule, Bloud, Fleſh, Heart▪ Wounds, Bones▪ Sides, Guts, Armes, Foote, Nayles, &c. of all which I tremble and quake to thinke, write, and ſpeake, though thou makeſt no more ſcruple of ſuch Hell-bred Oathes, then of thy ordinary words: ſo deale with all other ſinnes (of which thy ſoule is as full as a Serpent is full of venome, and a Toade of poyſon) Crucifie them by degrees, and dye to them daily, elſe thou dyeſt for euer if thou dye 
                           〈◊〉
                         in them.
                     By this courſe thou ſhalt take away the ſting of Death, which is Sinne; for, the ſtrength of Death is Sinne, 1 Cor. 15. euen as the ſtrength of Sampſon laid in his hayre, Iudg. 16.17. which ſinne, when it is ſubdued, Death it ſelfe is as eaſily conquered as weakened Sampſon was by the Philiſtines, verſe 21. yea, it can doe thee no more harme, then a Dragon, Viper, or angry Waſpe which haue loſt their ſtings.
                     Secondly, dye daily to the world,Secondly, dye to the world. loue it not, nor the things of it, that ſo thou maiſt more happily dye out of the world, and more hopefully entertaine thoughts of a better world. And in this caſe doe as Runners vſe who oft runne ouer the Race before they runne for the Wager, that ſo they may be better invred and acquainted, when they come to try their abilitie: or, as is ſaid of Belney the

Martyr, that being to ſuffer by fire, many dayes before, he would hold his hand a pretty while in the flame, ſo to prepare himſelfe to ſuſtaine the paines of Martyrdome, which he was to vnder-goe.
                     
                        Thirdly, Beare croſſes patiently.Thirdly, dye daily, by invring thy ſelfe to take Croſſes and Afflictions patiently, as ſickeneſſes in body, troubles in minde, loſſe of goods, of friends, and of good name, &c. which indeede are little deaths, euen pettie deaths, not onely Prologues of death, but Preparatiues to death: for which cauſe GOD ſends them to his children more then to the wicked, euen to weane them from the world, and prepare them for death (as the Nurſe weanes the Childe from the Teate by doing bitter Aloes vpon it) and ſure he that beares Croſſes moſt patiently, is well prepared to dye peaceably, as appeares by S. Paul, 1 Cor. 15.31. who by making good vſe of afflictions, dyed daily: it holding commonly, that Mors poſt crucem minor eſt; Death is leſſe dolorous after the croſſe.
                     
                        Fourthly, Prayer oft preuailes for a peaceable departure.Fourthly, pray ſeriouſly for a peaceable departure: it is confirmed by examples of all ages, and experience of all Gods Seruants, that hee that prayes well ſpeedes well. Iacob and Abrahams Seruant had Gods bleſſings vpon their Iourneyes, as an effect of their Prayers, Gen. 24. Gen. 27. Thou ſhalt finde Gods preſence euen in that houre of the laſt iourneying

of thy ſoule from her earthly Manſion to her heauenly Country, if thou pray for this grace particularly and effectually: therefore as thou oughteſt to pray continually for other 
                           Lu. 18. 1. Eph. 6.18.18 Things to be prayed for, that death may be proſperous. things, ſo euen in health and proſperitie pray frequently and feruently: 1. That God would make this backeward, repugnant, and nilling nature of thine, willing to her diſſolution: 2. Prepare thy vnprepared ſoule: 3. Subdue thy corruptions: 4. Purge out the droſſe of thy ſinnes: 5. Giue the patience to kiſſe his correcting Rod, when hee whips by ſickneſſe or diſeaſes: 6. Succour thee in thy laſt and greateſt conflict: 7. Support thy weaknes: 8. Aide thee againſt Sathans force and fraud: 9. Strengthen thy Faith: 10. Renew thy decayed graces: 11. Giue thee the power and comfort of his owne Spirit: 12. Not to viſit thy ſinnes in Iuſtice but in Mercy: 13. To preſerue thy ſoule from the Hunter, and thy darling from the Lyon: 14. To giue his Angels charge ouer thee in thy extremitie: 15. To keepe thee from 1. Impatiencie, 2. Frenzie, 3. Diſtraction, 4. Idle fancies, 5. Rauing, 6. Raging, 7. Blaſpheming, &c. leaſt thy death be ſcandalous: 16. To touch thy tongue with a coale from the Altar, that thou maiſt ſpeake, 1. to Gods glory, 2. and to Edification: 17. To dye the death of the righteous: 18. Laſtly, to receiue thy ſoule into that new Ieruſalem

which is aboue. Such Prayers we haue vpon record in holy Writ, as of Dauid, Pſal. 39. and Moſes, Pſal. 90. true patternes of our Prayers in this kinde. And ſure, who euer approacheth oft to the throne of Grace, and ſupplicates to a pittifull God, from faith and feeling in theſe and the like petitions, he ſhall be ſure to finde an anſwere from God, euen when hee lyes vpon his ſicke-bed, as the fruit of his form
                           •
                        r deſires. Beſides that his former acquaintance with God, in ſpeaking to him, and talking, as it were, with him oft-times in life, by Prayer, will increaſe in the ſicke Patient, euen a holy boldneſſe, in a filiall feare, to come to that God, (as one friend to another in extremitie) with whom he hath ſo oft conuerſed and conferred with, by the Word and Prayer, in health and proſperitie.
                     Fiftly, that thou maiſt depart in peace, make ſure to thy ſoule the inheritance of life eternall, euen here in this thy life naturall: for as worldlings are ſomething at quiet vvhen they haue made ſure ſuch houſes, lands, leaſes, and purchaſes, as they haue long gaped after; ſo, aſſurance of life eternall is the onely pacification to the ſpirituall man; this is the lot, the portion and inheritance that his ſoule longs after, the eſtate that hee preferres before all the fleſh-pots of Aegypt, or the Iewels of Aegypt. Now for the purchaſe of a fixed

place in the heauenly Canaan, thou muſt prouide theſe treaſures: 1. ſauing Knowledge, 2. Faith, 3. Sanctification; of more price vvith God, then Gold, Pearle, and precious Stones, with men. For the firſt, there is no traffique with God, or purchaſe from heauen vvithout it, Iohn 17.3. This is life eternall, to know God, and whom thou haſt ſent Ieſus Chriſt. For Faith, the Truth affirmes it with aſſeueration; Verily verily, hee that heareth my word, and beleeueth in him that ſent mee, hath eternall life, Iohn 5.24. Iohn 3.16. For Sanctification, whoſoeuer ſubmits their hearts and liues to the regiment of the Spirit of Chriſt, they are the children of God, Rom. 8.14. Now God hath an heauenly inheritance for all his Children: get therefore theſe graces, and ſaluation inſtantly comes to thy heart, as it did to Zacheus houſe. Luke 19.
                     Sixtly, it will make much for thy dying peace, to doe all the good thou canſt in life, to all men in generall, to the Church, the Saints, and houſhold of Faith in ſpecial, by thy 1. Wit, 2. Wealth, 3. Power, 4. Place, 5. Authoritie, 6. Credit with great men, (as Nehemias and Mardocheus did to the Iewes) or by any other meanes whatſoeuer. Therefore hath God put it into thy heart to build an Hoſpitall for the diſtreſſed; to giue ſome annuall contribution to the poore; to mend ſome common wayes

for a publike eaſe; to erect or repayre ſome Grammer-Schoole, for the trayning vp of youth; to found ſome Fellowſhips or Schollerſhips in ſome Colledge, as a furtherance to learning; to plant ſome Library, for a help to good Letters (like that famouſed BODLEY, the Phoenix, in this kinde, of our time;) or to erect and maintaine in ſome barren place, a preaching Miniſterie (the beſt worke of all, becauſe conuerſant about the beſt obiect, the ſauing of ſoules;) or any the like: Oh then ſtrike whilſt the Iron is hot; goe about this worke ſpeedily, euen as ſpeedily as Dauid went about the building of Gods houſe, vvho would not haue giuen any reſt to the temples of his head, till hee had finiſhed what hee intended, had not God ſtaid his reſolution.
                     And here I cannot but take notice of the prepoſterous charitie of ſome, that doe little or no good liuing (vnleſſe to themſelues, and thoſe to whom Nature tyes them) yet after their death they doe ſome good, by their Deputies, and Aſſignes, and Executors (which oft-times ayming at their owne ends, by ſome qui
                           •
                        ques and euaſions, proue executioners of the deſires of the deceaſed, rather then Executors) yet ſuppoſe the Will be Legally performed, what may be cenſured of thine intent, that haſt beene cloſe-handed in life, and now art ſeemingly open-hearted at thy death?

Firſt, that thou giueſt what thou canſt no longer retaine: Secondly, or thou giueſt to good vſes, what thou haſt got by ill meanes: or thirdly, that conſcience accuſing thee, thou wouldeſt ſtop the mouth of it, by this ſop, caſt to that barking Cerberus within thee, as Iudas did, by caſting away his thirtie pieces of ſiluer, the price of bloud, Mat. 27. Fourthly, or elſe from ſome opinion of ſatisfaction for by-paſt ſinnes, or preſent merit, with our blinded Papiſts: but chiefely the cenſorious Criticall world will iudge, that if thou hadſt not parted with the world, thou hadſt not departed with thy bewitching wealth: therefore All that thine hand ſhall finde to doe, doe it with all thy power, Eccleſ. 9.10. For there is neyther worke, nor inuention, nor knowledge in the place whither thou goeſt: to Salomons counſell I ioyne Pauls; Doe good to all whilſt thou haſt time, Gal. 6.10. Doe what ſeruice thou canſt to Gods Church, to the Common-wealth, to euery particular man, chiefely to the poore members of CHRIST.
                     Oh what a comfort will it be to thee, if thou haſt beene bountifull and beneficiall to the diſtreſſed, when thou canſt ſay on thy ſicke Couch, with Nehemias in another caſe; Lord remember mee concerning this good worke, and concerning that good worke, Nehem. 13.22. Oh bleſſed is hee that iudgeth wiſely of the poore, the

Lord ſhall deliuer him in the time of trouble: the Lord will ſtrengthen him 
                              •
                           pon his bed of ſorrow: thou haſt turned all his bed in his ſickneſſe, ſaith the Pſalmiſt, Pſal. 41. ver. 1.3.
                     
                        A good conſcience in life, brings peace in death.Seauenthly, keepe a good conſcience with God and man, that it may be a continuated comforter vnto thee, as in life, ſo in the agonies of death, as it was to Paul in all his preſſures, Acts 24.16. and as it is to the Saints in all their ſorrowes a continuall feaſt, Prou. 15.15. a perpetuall Chriſt-tide, a Iubilee in the iawes of death, a peace paſſing all vnderſtanding, Phil. 2. For, as the want of this is the Racke and Gybbet vnto the wicked, the greateſt heauineſſe and plague, Sirach. 25.15. as the Wiſeman tearmes it; a plague of plagues, an euill which goes beyond all euill that tongue can ſpeake, as euen Seruus in Muſtell. 
                        Plautus and Lib. de moribus. 
                        Seneca haue thought it: the greateſt wound and griefe that can be ſuſtained, as Salomon determines it, Prou. 18.14. nay, the very flaſhes and Prologue to hell, as Iudas Latomus and Hoffmeiſter haue tryed it in their deſpayring deaths: ſo the inioying of a good conſcience is the greateſt ioy; Hugo lib. 2 de anima. cap. 9. 
                        Hugo cals it the Temple of Salomon, the Field of Benediction, the Garden of delight, the treaſurie of the King: the houſe of God, the habitation of the holy Ghoſt; the Booke ſealed, and ſhut, to be opened in the day of Iudgement; the very thing (ſaith

                        Ambroſe
                        Lib. 2. de officijs.,) that makes a bleſſed life, yea, and (I may adde withall) a bleſſed death: for, to vſe the words of Bern. in Serm. 
                        Bernard, as hee prepares a good dwelling for God, whoſe Will hath not beene peruerted, nor Reaſon deceiued, nor Memory defiled, ſo God prepares a dwelling for him that is pure in heart and ſoule, Pſal. 15.1.2. and in whoſe ſpirit there is no guile, Pſal. 32.2. Of which bleſſed manſion they haue ſome taſte euen in death, that keepe a good conſcience in life.
                     Hence is it that the godly take there deaths patiently like ſheepe, ſing ioyfully like the Swanne, as Martyres haue done at the ſtake, and as did our good Simeon: when the wicked dye like Swine repiningly, like the Hiaena ragingly.
                     Naturaliſts Cicero lib. 1. Tuſcul. quaeſt. write, that the warme ſweet bloud recoyling to the heart of the Swanne, tickleth her with ſuch a ſecret delight, that it makes her ſing euen in her death. Contrariwiſe, when the Hiaena is in dying, the blacke and diſtempered bloud gathers to her heart, which makes her ſad and mournefull. This is worth applying: the conſcience of holy actions ſo warmes the hearts of Gods Seruants, with that inward ioy, that they dye ſinging their Hoſanna's, tryumphing and reioycing in ſpirit: but the conſciouſneſſe of wicked wayes and workes of darkneſſe, oathes, vncleanneſſe,

profanenes, &c. like ſtreames of blacke bloud recoyles backe vpon, and clogs the hearts of the Sonnes of Belial, which makes them dye as wofully and curſedly, as they haue liued retchleſly and wickedly: oh therefore good Readers, who euer you are, Miniſters or Laymen, keepe a good conſcience I intreate you, with God and with man, in all your wayes and walkings, in your courſes, callings, functions and tradings; that in your deaths you may ſhew your ſelues the Lords Sheepe, the Lords Swannes, like Simeon; not the Diuels Swine and Hels Hiaena's.
                     Now thou art to be directed in ſome dueties in thy ſickneſſe, the probable ſummoner of thy death: for, though God onely know when death is neareſt, he hauing as the keyes of the heauens, and the keyes of the heart, ſo the keyes of the earth, and of the graue, of life and of death, 1 Sam. 2.6. yet it is probable that life is neareſt expiring, when ſickenes is approaching; as the wals are neareſt ruine, when the Cannon is laid to batter them. Now theſe Directions I referre to theſe three heads. Firſt, reſpect God; ſecondly, thy ſelfe▪ thirdly, others.
                     In reſpect of God: firſt, renue thy former repentance, ſeeke earneſtly to be reconciled to God in CHIRST; get more aſſurance of the Mercy, Fauour, and Loue of God towards

thee; gather together all thy ſpirituall forces; ſtriue and wraſtle couragiouſly againſt Diffidence, Diſtruſt, Infidelitie, and Deſpayre, like an actiue runner, ſhew ſome brunts as it were of inward ſtrength, euen when thou ſeeſt the Goale, and art neareſt the end of thy race. Now, for ſtrengthening thy Faith, and renuing thy Repentance the better, take this courſe.
                     Firſt, when Sickeneſſe or Infirmitie ceazeth on thee, conſider that it ariſeth not from 1. Chance, 2. Fortune, 3. Rawneſſe of Weather, 4. Ill Ayre, 5. Bad Dyet, 6. Catching of cold, or the like (which are eyther no cauſes at all, or elſe onely ſecondarie) but by an immediate prouidence.
                     Secondly, ſearch out the cauſe for which God afflicts thee, and thou ſhalt by the light of the word and of thine owne conſcience, find, that the cauſe is thy ſin: other cauſes there may be, as CHRIST ſhewes in the caſe of the blinde man, who neyther ſinned nor his Parents, Iohn 9.2. As 1. tryall of Faith; 2. of Patience, as in Iobs caſe; 3. exciting to Prayer and Repentance, as in Ezekias caſe, Eſay 38.1. 4. to preuent ſinne, to which Nature and corruption inclines; 5. the Humiliation of pride; 6. manifeſtation of the workes of God oft cauſe the Lord to viſit euen his owne ſonnes with ſickneſſes and diuers diſeaſes, but in Gods reuealed will, ſinne is the ordinary cauſe, as appeares,

                        Deut.
                        Sixe cauſes of ſickenes beſides our ſinnes. 28.21. Leut. 26. &c. Sinne cauſed the Aegyptians Botches, Exod. 9.10. the Philiſtines Emerods, 1 Sam. 5.6. the Widdow of Sarepta's Sonnes ſickeneſſe, 1 King. 17.18. and therefore when CHRIST cured the bodies of his Patients, hee firſt remits the ſinnes of their ſoules, & ſo remoues the cauſe, Mat. 9.2. Iohn 5.14. as in the blinde man, and the ſicke of the Palſie.
                     
                        Fiue duties to be done in ſicknes.Thirdly, when thou haſt felt thine owne pulſe, and laid the finger on the right cauſe, which is ſinne; then by examination of thine owne hart find out what ſpeciall ſin cauſeth thy preſent ſcourge: oh ſearch thy ſelfe thorowly, Zeph. 2.1. examine thy ſoule narrowly, Pſal. 4.4. Play the ſelfe Conſtable, make priuie ſearch in euery roome within the houſe of thy heart, for thy ſecret ſinnes, as for priuie Traytors.
                     Fourthly, when thou haſt found them out confeſſe them, bring them to the ſtrict barre of Gods Iuſtice, arraigne them; nay, be thy ſelfe a Witneſſe againſt them; yea, a Iudge to condemne them, as Paul preſcribes the Corinthians, in the like caſe, 1 Cor. 11.30.31. and as Dauid practiſed in his owne particular, Pſal. 32.5.
                     Fiftly▪ ſupplicate and intreate the ſupreame Iudge of Heauen (that may condemne thee, or repriue thee) to pittie thee, and pardon

thee. Ieremy and Hoſee will direct thee how to put vp thy ſupplications in forma pauperis, as a poore penitent, and what words to vſe, that will plead and preuaile for pardon, Lam. 3.40.41. Hoſee 6.1. Dauid ſets thee an holy Preſident, moſt beſeeming thy imitation, who when hee was ſicke, at leaſt vpon the occaſion of his ſickenes, penned ſpeciall Pſalmes of repentance; as namely, Pſal. 6. the 22. the 38. the 29. which I preſcribe to be read of thee, repeated, and applyed with Dauids heart: alſo, as ſpirituall Phyſicke, 1. to purge the ill humours of thine heart; 2. to quicken thy dulneſſe, 3. to excite thy deadneſſe; 4. to inflame thy deſires; 5. to comfort thy conſcience; 6. to ſtrengthen thy faith. 7. to prepare thee to Prayer:What Scriptures are fitteſt to be read of a ſicke man. reade ſeriouſly the Hiſtory of Chriſts Paſſion, recorded, Luke 22.23. Chap. the 29. Pſalme, the 42. Pſalme, the 51. Pſalme, the 143. Pſalme, the 14. Chapter of Iob, the 11. the 14. the 17. Chapter of Saint Iohn Eccleſiaſtes Chap. 1. Dan. Chap. 9. Romanes Chap 8. the 7. Chap. of the Apocalypſe, 1 Cor. 15. Chap. theſe will giue thee ſome holy heate.
                     Thus thou haſt the true preparatiues in thy ſickeneſſe in reſpect of God: they are the more worthy remembrance becauſe ſo few follow them; for alas, how many that haue liued long in the boſome of the Church; are ſo

farre from renuing their▪ Faith and Repentance, that when they lye ſicke and are drawing to their deaths, they muſt be catechized (as Chriſt did Nicodemus, and Philip the Eunuch) euen in the maine doctrines of Faith and Repentance; like as ſome new conuerted Pagans were in the Primitiue Church. There be few Miniſters acquainted vvith viſiting the ſicke, but they ſhall finde that men that haue beene vnder the meanes, twentie, thirtie, or fortie yeeres; doe, at the end of all, beginne to inquire as the Iewes of Peter, Acts 2. and the Iaylor of Pa
                              •
                           l, Acts 16. what they ſhould doe to be ſaued; not yet knowing the meanes and the way to ſaluation: which argues the great ſecuritie of our age, and contempt of God: oh take thou heede betimes, vſe all good meanes before-hand, that thou maiſt be able in ſickeneſſe, to put in practiſe theſe ſpirituall exerciſes of Repentance and Inuocation.
                     The ſecond branch of the ſicke mans preparation concernes himſelfe; and that eyther his ſoule or his body: for the ſoule.
                     
                        
                           D. Maxeys Sermon on the Agonie of Chriſt. Laboraui in gemitu meo.Firſt, the ſicke partie muſt arme himſelfe againſt the feare of death, and feeling of ſickneſſe. Death is very fearefull to all men, euen to the godly, as one obſerues well in Dauid for all, who though hee were neyther daunted with Sauls malice, nor the Philiſtines hatred, nor Abſolons Treaſon, nor Achitophels treachery,

nor in grapling with a Lyon, nor in fighting with a Beare, nor incountring Goliah, yet when Death beganne to cloſe vvith him, and lay holde on him, then hee cryes out; Oh I am troubled aboue maeſure. Oh ſpare mee a little, Pſal. 6.3. & 39.13. Therefore, thus incourage thy preſent feeling, and greater feare.
                     Firſt, that ſickneſſe, and ſo death, is the rod of a Father, not the whip of a Iudge, the correction, not deſtruction of a Sonne, Heb. 12.6.
                     Secondly, ſince it is the Lord, ſay with Eli, L
                              •
                           t him doe what ſeemes good, 1 Sam. 3.18. His will be done on mee, in mee, and by mee: on me, in ſuffering; in me, by his grace working; by me, in obeying.
                     Thirdly, Chriſt thy high Prieſt and Interceſſor is euen touched with a fellow-feeling of all thine infirmiti
                           •
                        s, Heb. 4.15.
                     Fourthly, againſt deaths feare, 1.Short furnitures againſt the feeling of ſickeneſſe and feare of death. conſider the eſtate of thy life, which life is but a vaniſhing Vapour, Iames 4.14. a Weather-cocke which turnes at euery blaſt, a Waue which ſurgeth at euery ſtorme, a Reede blowne vvith euery winde, a Warfare as doubtfull as dangerous, feare not the vaniſhing of a Vapour, the turning of a Weather-cocke. 2. Conſider thy body as a body of ſinne Rom. 7.24 the ſoules priſon, the mindes iayle, the ſpirits cage: no Bocardo dungeon, ſincke, puddle, pit, is ſo

noyſome to the body, as it ſelfe is to the heauenly inſpired ſoule. Now ſince death is the leauing of this body of ſinne, as Auguſtine cals it Super Iohan.: it is not to be eſchewed, but imbraced, ſaith Chriſoſtome
                        Super Mat. 11. 4. Reaſons why the ſicke man ſhould ſet his ſoule in order.. Other incouragements I leaue to their due places.
                     The ſecond dutie which concernes the ſoule, is this; thou muſt ſet in order thy ſoule, reconciling and recommending vnto God this deſolate darling of thine, after the manner afore ſaid: for, as the ſickeneſſe of the body oft comes from the ſinne of the ſoule; ſo, the curing of the one, oft procures the health of the other: but if thy ſickneſſe be to death, by this courſe: 1. thou ſhalt dye more quietly, 2. more comfortably, 3. giue good example to thy viſitors, 4. leaue a comfort to thy ſuruiuing Friends.
                     Now, for the performance of theſe things the better, others ought to aſſiſt thee, as others brought the ſicke of the Palſie to CHRIST, Marke 2. Iames tels thee that the Elders of the Church muſt be ſent for, Iam. 5.14. which Elders were not onely Apoſtles, but auncient men endued with the ſpirit of Prayer, and gift of Miracles; a gift which not onely many Parents had, but euen Chriſtian Souldiers, ſaith Tertullian, de corona militis, c. 11. In theſe times S. Iames his rule ſtill holds: though then thoſe gifts ceaſe, yet make thou choyſe of ſuch

Chriſtians, as haue the ſpirit of Admonition, Exhortation, Prayer, &c. for to their prayers for thee a bleſſing is promiſed, Iames 5.15. their prayers, if they be feruent, may preuaile for the reſtoring of thy ſpirituall life, or corporall health, as the prayers of 1 King. 17 17 
                        Elias, 
                        2 Kin. 4.31 
                        Elizeus, 
                        
                           Act. 20.10. 
                        Paul, and our 
                           Ioh. 11.14 Sauiour Chriſt, preuailed for whom they prayed; but chiefely, ſend for thy Miniſter, or ſome faithfull Preacher: for, hee will play the part of a ſpirituall Phyſitian; 1. hee can vnrip thy vlcers,10. Reaſons why the ſicke muſt ſend for his Miniſter. ſearch thy ſores better then thou thy ſelfe; 2. ſet before thee thy ſinnes; 3. caſt thee downe by the Law; 4. raiſe thee vp by the Goſpell; 5. comfort, 6. direct, 7. inſtruct thee; 8. ſpeake a word to thee in due ſeaſon from God; 9. be thy mouth to ſpeake, from thee, and for thee, to God; 10. pronounce thy pardon on earth, vvhich ſhall be ratified in heauen, vpon tryall of thy Repentance, Iohn 20.23. The practiſe of the world and worldlings is condemnable in this caſe: for alas, inſtead of ſending for knowing and zealous men, which could comfort them with ſuch conſolations wherewith they themſelues haue beene comforted, 2 Cor. 1.4. and in ſome meaſure reſtore them, Gal. 6.1. they ſend for their carnall friends, entertaine and welcome profane men that come to viſit them; from whom they receiue as much comfort as Iudas did of the Scribes and Phariſies, when

hee was in deſpayre, Mat. 27.3.4. Firſt, eyther they ſay nothing to them (like Iobs friends, that were ſilent ſeauen dayes, Iob 2.13.) and in ſilence looke vpon them (like a Deere at gaze.The ſmall comfort that a ſicke man gets from carnall viſitors.) Secondly, or elſe they ſpeake to little or no purpoſe; ſaying to the ſicke partie, they are ſorry to ſee him in ſuch a caſe, they would haue him take (that which themſelues want) a good heart, and be of good courage and comfort, but wherein and by what meanes, they cannot tell. Others more vainely and profanely, that they doubt not but hee ſhall doe well enough, and recouer, and that they ſhall be merry and drinke and carouſe together, as they haue done before, &c. and they will pray for them if they will, when alas, all their prayers are nothing elſe, but the Apoſtles Creede, or the tenne Commandements, and the Lords Prayer vttered without Faith, Feeling, and Vnderſtanding; and this is the common comfort that ſicke men get of their neighbours and friends, when they come to viſite them: alas, we may ſay (as Iob of his friends) miſerable comforters be they all.
                     Secondly, herein many men are alſo culpable, 1. that they eyther ſend not for a Miniſter at all; 2. or elſe for ſuch a one as is as good as none, a cloud without raine, a dry pit without water; ſuch a one as wants the tongue of the learned, to ſpeake to him, or the heart of

the humble, to pray for him, vnleſſe in ſaying (as they ſay) ſome ſet prayers; which good Sir Iohn is as farre from truely praying, as the ſicke Patient is from profiting by them. Or thirdly, if they ſend for a Miniſter it is prepoſterouſly, when it is too late, in ſome maine exigent, when they ſee no vvay but one;The Miniſter is to be ſent for before the Phyſitian. Oh then ſend for a Preacher, ſend for a Miniſter, as Pharaoh in his deepe diſtreſſes, knowing no meanes of euaſion, ſends for Moſes, and ſends for Aaron, Exod. 9.27. whom in his welfare hee both deſpiſed And deſpited. If Iannes and Iambres, Aſtronomers and Aſtrologers, could haue helpt Pharaoh, Moſes and Aaron ſhould neuer haue beene ſought to, nor God by their meanes. If Phyſitians and Galens Art, Natures Simples (nay, with ſome, if Sorcerers, and white Witches and Sathans power) or the vertues of the waters, or ought elſe, could comfort their ſoules or cure their bodies, the Preacher ſhould be vnſought to, or vnſent for of many, that in their health haue hated him and his doctrine, as much as Ahab hated Michay and his Miniſtery, 1 Kings 22.8.Vbi de
                              •
                           ini
                              •
                           
                           ▪ Theologus, ibi incipi
                              •
                            Medicus. Oh what an vnequall courſe is this, that although till help be had for the ſoule, and ſinne, which is the roote of ſickeneſſe, be cured, Phiſicke to the body ſeldome auailes? (for which cauſe the Phyſitian ſhould beginne where the Diuine ends;) yet vſually the Diuine beginnes

when the Phyſitian makes an end; nay, oft when life is making an end: the Phyſitians are ſent for in the beginning of ſickneſſe, wee in the end of life, when a man is halfe dead; yea, when he lyes drawing on, and gaſping for breath, as though we were able then to worke Miracles, and recouer him.
                     If I knew not theſe things by experience, if I had not beene preſent with ſome, of whoſe ſickeneſſe I neuer heard, till I came to the cloſing vp of their dying eyes; if I had not ſpent much ſpirits with ſome that were no more intelligent what I prayed, or what I ſaid, then ſtockes and ſtones, who for a good ſpace before, in their ſickneſſe, had ſtrength of Memorie and naturall powers, I ſhould not now ſo occaſionedly haue giuen thee a caueat to preuent the like prepoſterous courſe, when God caſts thee on thy ſicke-bed.
                     Now followes ſuch duties as concerne the body of the ſicke man: they are two; 1▪ vſing, 2. right vſing the meanes. The meanes is, good and wholeſome Phyſicke, which we muſt eſteeme as an ordinance of God for our recouery in this caſe. For how euer many (chiefely the vulgar and common people) deſpiſe Phyſicke as a thing needleſſe and vnprofitable, hauing from blindneſſe and ignorance a preiudicate opinion of it, yet the Scriptures approue it, Mat. 9.13. the Saints of God haue

practiſed it. Ezekias by the Prophets preſcription, applyed to his boyle, a lumpe of dry Figges, 2 Kings 10.7. which Figges,Galen lib. 1. de arte curat. c. 6. euen Galen preſcribes as an ordinary medicine to ſoften and ripen tumours in the fleſh: therefore the cure was not altogether miraculous, (as ſome thinke) but in part naturall. Beſides,The lawfull vſe of Phyſicke plainely proued. did not the Samaritane, Luke 10.34. poure into the wounds of him that trauelled from Ieruſalem to Iericho, Wine and Oyle; which Valeſius makes a right Phyſicall practiſe; Wine ſeruing to clenſe the wound and eaſe the paine within; Oyle to ſupple the fleſh, and aſſwage the paine without: to which kinde of curing it ſeemes Eſay hath relation, Eſay 1.6. Beſides, as the phraſe is, as there is no ſore but there is a ſalue for it, ſo God hath giuen vnto ſome men, Art and Skill, how to apply the medicinable vertues that are in Beaſts, Birds, Fiſhes, Hearbes, Plants and Fruits, &c. to the cure of man: which who ſo neglects, neglects the meanes, and ſo directly tempts God; in which reſpect his death can neyther be ſo comfortable, nor conſcionable, as if hee had ſubmitted himſelfe to this ordinance of God. Therefore ſince thou maiſt vſe Phyſicke lawfully and commendably, let it be thy care in the ſecond place, to make choiſe of ſuch a Phyſitian, as is skilfull and conſcionable.
                     I know there are ſome of great Forreſt de vrin. Indicijs lib. 3. Lang. lib. 2 Epiſt. 41. iudgement,

that doe accept againſt the skill of thoſe Phyſitians that adminiſter to their Patients vpon the bare inſpect of their Vrine, without further knowledge of their eſtates; affirming this iudging by the vrine to be very deceitfull, ſince the water of him that hath the Pluriſie, or the Inflamations of the Lungs, or the Squinancie, as alſo of him that hath a quartan, or any intermitting Feauer (chiefely if they haue kept a good dyet from the beginning) lookes, for ſubſtance and colour, as the water of a vvhole man. Others take alſo exception againſt thoſe which will adminiſter no Phyſicke, nor vſe Phlebotomie, without the direction of iudiciall Aſtrologie, a ſuppoſed Art, in which there is much ſuperſtition, little certainetieSee Heidon againſt Iud. 
                                 •
                              ſ
                                 •
                              ro. S
                              •
                            
                           H
                                 •
                              i
                              
                                 •
                              
                            is preſer
                              •
                           atiue againſt the poyſon o
                              •
                            
                           
                              •
                           p
                              •
                           oſed propheſies., whereas it is thought that it is a farre better courſe to conſider the matter of the diſeaſe, with the diſpoſition and ripening of it, as alſo the courſes, and Symptomes, and Criſis of it, then to miniſter Purgations, and let bloud▪ no otherwaies then they are counſelled by the conſtitutions of the Starres. But I meddle not with their Myſteries; I ſee but with others eies in this caſe; I know the Cobler is not to goe beyond his laſt, onely make thou choyſe of a meete Phyſitian for thy health, as thou art carefull of a good Lawyer for thine eſtate, and of a good Diuine for thy ſoule. Meddle not with Emperickes, Quackſaluers, Women
                           •
                        Phyſitians,

and the like, who oft doe more harme then good.
                     Now, in the third place,What to doe in taking Phyſicke. vſe this meanes of Phyſicke conſcionably: 1. Let it be ſanctified vnto thee (as thy meate and thy drinke) by the Word of God and Prayer, 1 Tim. 4.3.5. Rules obſeruable in the vſe of phyſick. Commend it to Gods bleſſing for reſtoring of thy health, if it be the will of God. 2. Humble thy ſoule, that God may heale thy body. 3. Perſwade thy ſelfe that it can neyther preuent olde age nor death, but ſtill prepare thy ſelfe for thy departure. 4. Relie not onely vpon the meanes, but waite Gods leaſure in bleſſing the meanes. 5. If thou recouer, be thankefull to God: a dutie much neglected (as it was of Ezekias, as alſo of the nine clenſed Lepers in the Goſpell) ſo of many in our daies, for which the Lord is angry euen as hee vvas vvith them, 2 Chron. 32.24 25. Luke 17.17. vvherein they are more vnthankefull vnto God then the Epheſians were to Eſculapius, that writ in Tables all the cures done by Phyſicke, and hung it vp in Diana's Temple, where Hipocrates found it.
                     Thus thou haſt the dutie to be performed in ſickeneſſe both in reſpect of thy ſoule and body, for the furtherance of thy peaceable departure.
                     I ſhould now conclude, but that the curſed cuſtome of the world cals mee in conſcience

to condemne the practiſe of thoſe, that contrary to theſe preſcriptions, from the Word, in their ſickneſſe, ſeeke for help from Sathan, (as Ahazia that ſent to Baalzebub the God of Ekron) and that eyther directly, or ſecondarily, when they runne to Coniurers, South-ſayers, Charmers, Inchanters, Witches, Wizards, Wiſe-men, and Wiſe-women, (as the vnwiſe deluded Country-people call them) who are in farre more reſpect with the common people (and ſome great ones too) and more ſought after, then eyther God is ſought to by prayer, or the Phyſitians for Phyſicke: for, if any of theſe ſimple ſoules be in any extremitie, by ſickneſſe or diſeaſes, or their Wiues, Children, &c. euen as they doe alſo (like beaſts) for their beaſts and Cattell: ſuch a Wiſe-man, ſuch a Wiſe-woman, ſuch an old Hag, ſuch a white Witch, ſuch a ſhee-Diuell muſt be ſent to.Earneſt inuectiues againſt ſuch as in extremities ſeek to Witches and Charmers, with diſſwaſiues from ſuch Idolatry. Alas, what is this, but to runne from the God of Iſrael to the God of Ekron, from Samuel in Ramoth, to the Witch at Endor, from the Riuers of Samaria to the Waters of Damaſcus, from the liuing to the dead, from God to the Diuell? What is this but to fall downe and worſhip the Diuell, to ſacrifice to him with the poore Virginians, and the Heatheniſh Sauages? Oh Atheiſticall Sots, is there not a God in Iſrael?
                     Therefore take thou heede of this curſed

courſe, and Satanicall practiſe in thy ſickneſſe: for alas, to runne a whoring afrer ſuch, is not the way to cure thee, but to kill thee; for this haynous ſinne vſually prouokes the Lord to plague the practiſers of it, euen with death it ſelfe, as the Lord himſelfe threatens, that hee vvill purpoſely ſet his face againſt thoſe that worke with Spirits, &c. yea, and that he will cut them off to from amongst his people, Leuit. 20.6▪ So the Lord verified this threat in Ahazia: for, becauſe hee did ſeeke to Baalzebub, and not to the God of Iſraell, in his ſickneſſe, God ſends Elias directly to tell him, that for that cauſe, hee ſhould not come downe from his bed, but ſhould dye the death, as indeede hee did, 1 Kings 1.6. So Saul was ſlaine notwithſtanding that he went to the Witch at Endor, 1 Sam. 31.
                     Oh that our common people would reade and remember this,Againſt ſeeking to Witches & Charmers, in ſicknes. that in ſtead of getting helpe by ſuch Satanicall meanes as thy vſe, they prouoke the Lord (as Paul tels the Corinthians in another caſe, of receiuing the Sacrament vnworthily, 1 Cor. 11.29.30.) to plague them eyther with further diſeaſes, or elſe with death it ſelfe, as hee did Saul and Ahazia.
                     
                     Secondly, ſuppoſe thou ſhouldeſt get help, it is by the Diuels meanes, and who vvould goe to ſuch a filthy Phyſitian?
                     
                        Thirdly, if by this meanes thou be relieued, thy ſoule is a thouſand times more preiudiced; the cure of thy body is the curſe of thy ſoule; thou procures the health of the one by the ſickneſſe of the other; ſo thy ſalue is worſe then thy ſore: therefore when Sathan and his Inſtruments can helpe thy health, ſo much as Superſtition and Idolatrie in ſeeking to them, hinders thy ſaluation, then I ſhall ſay to thee (as Elizeus to Naaman (Goe in peace, euen to the houſe of Rimmon.
                     
                     Others there be that vſe other meanes, which haue no warrant: of which kinde are thoſe that vſe any manner of Charmes or Spels, or that hang about their neckes Characters and Figures, eyther in Paper, Wood, or Waxe, &c. which are all vaine and ſuperſtitious, becauſe neyther by creation, nor by any ordinance in Gods word they haue any power to cure diſeaſes: for, words doe onely ſignifie, Figures can but onely repreſent.
                     Indeede I confeſſe, there are ſome things that haue ſome vertue in them, being hung about the necke, as white Galen. lib. 6. & 10 de ſimpl. Medic. Peonie in this kinde, is good againſt the Falling-ſickeneſſe; and Wolfes-dung, tyed to the body, is good againſt the Collicke; ſo there are many the like, which haue not their operation by Inchantment, but from an inward vertue: but all Amulets and Ligatures, &c. which worke

not by ſome virtuall contract, muſt needes haue their power from the Diuell.
                     The laſt dutie which muſt be done in ſickneſſe, is relatiue, concerning others: of which briefely, euen as wee haue ſpoke of thoſe that concerne God and our ſelues. Others I call eyther our Enemies or our Friends: thoſe without vs, or our owne Families.
                     Firſt, to thy enemie thou muſt be reconciled; forgiue him, and deſire to be forgiuen of him: thou art now about not to offer a Lambe or a Bullocke, as in the Leuiticall law, but thy ſelfe, thy body, thy ſoule a ſacrifice to GOD, Rom. 12.1. Oh then firſt be reconciled to thy God ere thou offer thy gift, Mat. 5.23. Now, if the party whom thou haſt iniured, eyther be abſent, or preſent and vvill not relent; yet thou in ſeeking peace haſt diſcharged thy conſcience, and God will accept thy will for the deede.
                     Secondly, if thou haſt wronged any man by any manner of Iniuſtice whatſoeuer, ſecretly or openly, thou muſt make reſtitution, euill gotten goods muſt be reſtored, be they gotten by Vſury, Oppreſſion, Extortion, keeping the pawne, the pledge, or by any ſiniſter meanes whatſoeuer: the LORD ſtrictly inioynes it, Leuit. 6. verſ. 1.2.3.4. Zacheus practiſed it, Luke 14. The Law of Nations and of Nature approues it, and the

very Law that is writ within vs doth preſſe and vrge it.
                     The practiſe of the world is againſt both theſe rules: for alas, are there not many whoſe malice is (like coales of Iuniper) vnquenchable? The throwing of duſt amongſt buzzing Bees, makes them quiet; but the ſummons to their duſt, cauſeth not ſome to leaue their waſpiſhneſſe: they carry wrath boyling within their breaſts, as in a Furnace, euen to Tophet, the fire and Furnace of Hell; neuer purpoſing to forget nor forgiue; nay, wiſhing that their very ſpirits could torture and torment their enemies after their diſſolution. And for reſtitution, how few be there that once dreame of it,Reconciliation with enemies, & reſtitution in wrongs, in ſickneſſe to be practiſed. much leſſe determine it? in which caſe they come farre ſhort of Iudas, who at his deſperate death would reſtore thoſe thirtie pieces which hee got in life with the price of bloud, Mat. 27.4.5. In which thoſe men doe not onely preiudice their owne ſoules, but their Children alſo and poſteritie, euen in earthly things, in leauing to them riches wrongfully got, which bring deſeruedly the curſe of God vpon all the reſt of that eſtate which they bequeath vnto them; according to the phraſe:

                           De male quaeſitis vix gaudet tertius haeres.
                        
                        
                           Goods euill got, who ere enioy them,
                           Helpe not the third heyres, but annoy them.
                        
                        
like that coale of fire which the rauenous Eagle carryed to her neſt, which ſet all the reſt of the neſt on fire.
                     Thirdly, thou muſt haue a ſpeciall care to prouide for the peace, welfare, and proſperitie of thoſe that are committed to thy charge, that it may goe well with them after thy death.
                     The Magiſtrate, after the example of Moſes,
                        
                           Deut. 31.1. Ioſh▪
                            25. 1 King. 2. 
                        Ioſhua, and Dauid, muſt prouide for the godly and peaceable eſtate of that Towne, Citie, or Common-wealth, ouer which hee is ſet,Magiſtrates, Miniſters and Maſters muſt prouide for the good of their charges, euen after their death. that pure Religion may be maintained, outward Peace eſtabliſhed, ciuill Iuſtice executed, &c.
                     The Miniſter, as much as he can, when he is in dying, muſt caſt to prouide for the continuance of the good eſtate of that Flocke, ouer which the holy Ghoſt hath made him Ouer-ſeer. Thus our Sauiour himſelfe, the chiefe Shepheard, had a care of his Flocke, ere hee left them; hee moderates the mourning of the Daughters of Ieruſalem; giues Commiſſion to his Diſciples to teach all Nations, Mat. 28.
                           •
                        9. comforts them with the promiſed Comforter, Iohn 16.7, Thus Peter endeuoured, that thoſe to whom hee writ and preached, ſhould haue remembrance of what hee taught them, euen after his departure, 1 Peter 1.15. If Peters pretended Succeſſors ſtood not ſo much on their perſonall ſucceſſion, as they ſhould in the right of ſucceſſion,

labouring to imitate the doctrine of Peter, of the Prophets, and Apoſtles; nay, if this care of doctrinall ſucceſſion were in the Miniſters of the reformed Religion, wee ſhould not haue here ſo much blindneſſe and ignorance, where once was light; there ſo many Schiſmes, Errours and Hereſies, where once was an vnitie in veritie; elſe-where ſo many Wolues come into the roomes of faithfull Paſtors, Acts. 20 ver. 29.
                     Thirdly, if thou beeſt a Maſter of a Familie, thou muſt ſet thine houſe in order, as the Prophet from God commands Ezekias, Eſa. 38.1. Now for as much as all Scripture is from God, 2 Tim. 3.16. 2 Pet. 1.20. and all examples are for our learning, Rom. 15.4 what vvas ſaid to Ezekias, is ſaid to euery man, Set thine houſe in ordrr. For, Order (ſaith Nazianzen
                        De moderatione in diſputat. ſer
                              •
                           anda.) is the mother and preſeruer of all things. Now for the procuring this order in thy Familie, doe two things: 1. concernes the temporall: 2. the ſpirituall eſtate of thy Familie.
                     For the firſt, make thy Will and Teſtament, thou ſhouldeſt make it in thy health, as Abraham did
                           Gen. 17., who in his health makes a Will and giues Legacies: but chiefely in thy ſickeneſſe, as did Iſaack
                        
                           Gen 27.; and Iacob in that propheticall Teſtament of his. Gen. 49. So ſome thus ſet downe Chriſts Will on the CroſſeLuke 23.46.52. Ioh. 19.27. Luke 23.43.34.: he giues his Soule to his Father, his louing

Mother, to his beloued Diſciple Iohn, his body to Ioſeph of Aramathia, to the penitent Theefe Paradiſe, to the Iewes his heartieſt deſires, when hee prayes for them, &c. Now,5 Reaſons why a ſick man muſt make his Will. it is not a matter of indifferencie, but a thing that conſcience bindes thee to, euen to make a Will, and to diſtribute thine inheritance, as Siracides counſels, Syr. 33.22. for thus diſcharging a good conſcience, thou maiſt more freely depart in peace, as a man takes his iourney more freely when hee hath ſet his houſe in order.
                     Secondly,
                           Rom. 16.1
                              •
                           
                         ſo thou cutteſt off many contentions, and ſtayeſt many ſuites in Law.
                     Thirdly, thou takeſt away ſcandall and offence, and ſo preuenteſt a woe threatned, Mat. 18.7.
                     Fourthly, thou ſhalt be thought a wiſe man, and not dye like a Nabal and a foole, in ſetting all at ſixe and ſeauen, and ſo ſhalt leaue behinde thee a good name, as a precious Oyntment, Eccleſ. 7.3.
                     Fiftly, thou ſhalt in this imitate God, vvho is the God of order and not of confuſion.
                     Now in the manner of making thy Will, let the Rules be, 1. the Law of GOD, 2. of Nature, 3. of that Nation whereof thou art a member, 4. of common equitie. If thy will be againſt any of theſe rules, it is culpable. Firſt, then it is Gods will to preferre thine owne

bloud, in diſpoſing of thy eſtate, before others; as GOD tels Abraham, that Eliazer, a ſtranger, ſhall not be his heyre, but his owne Sonne,4. Maine rules in making all Wils. 
                        Gen. 15.4. The like, God commaunds the Iſraelites, that if any man dye, his Sonne ſhall be his heyre; if hee haue no Sonne, his Daughter; if no Daughter, his Brethren; ſo deſcending ſtill to the next of kinne, Numb. 27.8.17. It is a fault then for any man to alienate his goods or lands wholy from his bloud and poſteritie, the light of Grace and of Nature to, condemnes it; euen the very Schooles of Lib. 2. de rep. polit. 
                        Plato and Lib 2 c. 8 
                        Ariſtotle.
                     
                     Secondly, thoſe are culpable, that giue all to the eldeſt, and little or nothing to the reſt; or all to Sonnes, nothing to Daughters: for, though it be equall that the eldeſt haue more then the reſt: Firſt, becauſe he is the eldeſt, the Re
                              •
                           ben, and firſt ſtrength of the Father. Secondly, becauſe Stockes and Families are preſerued in their perſons. Thirdly, that they may doe ſpeciall ſeruices to the Common-wealth: yet it is exceeding vnequall to giue ſo much to the eldeſt, as though he ſhould be my young Maſter, and a Gentleman, and the younger borne to beare the wallet; as though he onely were a Son, and the reſt Illegitimate. Fourthly, in the Lawes of equitie, remember him with ſomething, or her, in thy Will, that haue beene truſty and faithfull Seruants to thee: gratifie

in thy death, their loues, labours, and ſtrength ſpent for thee: deale not with them (as the Spaniell with the water) ſhake them not off when thou haſt no more vſe of them. Secondly, allot ſome Legacies to thy friends, as memorials of thy laſting loue. Thirdly, as thou art able remember the Chruch of God, and thoſe that are in it, poore Miniſters, or poore Members. Fourthly, ſuch Societies in the Common-wealth as thou haſt liued in.
                     Now, concerning the ſpirituall eſtate of thy Family, teach, inſtruct, exhort, admoniſh, and pray for euery particular perſon in thy Familie. In this, reade, and imitate the example of Dauid, 1 Kings 2. the whole Chapter. Exhort thy Wife to be the Spouſe of CHRIST; thy Children, Gods Children; thy Friends, Gods Friends; thy Seruants, Gods Seruants: ſo ſhall God, and Gods Spirit, giue that teſtimonie of thee, that hee did of Abraham, Gen. 18.19. euen for inſtructing thy Familie after thee. The practiſe of theſe Precepts concernes thy peace, both in ſickneſſe and in death.
                     Laſtly, when thou feeleſt Death approaching, comming neare to the Agonie and pangs of it; then, vvith the Marriners, ſtearne aright, to get into the Hauen: there is the greateſt danger, and if recouered the greateſt ioy.
                     
                        Now labour, as thou haſt liued, ſo to dye by Faith. Now apply the Promiſe to thy Soule; truſt in it, let it quicken thee, as it did Dauid, Pſal. 119.49. Comfort thy ſelfe (as that perſecuted Patriarke did,A chriſtian carriage preſcribed euen in the houre of death. when Death was before him) euen in the Lord thy God, 1 Sam. 30.6. Now let God be the ſtrength of thy heart, euen vvhen thy fleſh fayles, and thy heart alſo, Pſal. 73.26. Now vvith the Iſraelites, looke to him vvith the eye of Faith, of whom the brazen Serpent was a figure, euen when the Serpent Death imbraceth thee to ſting thee, Iohn 3.14. Now call to minde all the former mercies of thy God, to thy ſoule, and ſuck ſpirituall ſweetneſſe from them. Now, vvith Moſes, cry vnto God, euen when thou ſeeſt the dead Sea, (as hee the red Sea) before thee, Exod. 14. Now pray with all thy powers and ſpirits; loue the Lord vvith all thy heart and affections; reioyce that thou art going to meete thy Bridegroome: now mourne and weepe more then euer, that thou haſt offended ſo good, ſo gracious, and ſo louing a GOD: Now, with Ezekias, remember thy former ſinnes, in the bitterneſſe of thy ſoule, turne thy ſelfe to the wall and weepe in the ſecret ſilence of thy Soule, Eſay 38.3. that ſo thou vvaſhing thy ſoule with penitent teares, thy CHRIST may, at that inſtant, vvaſh

away the pollutions of it vvith his bloud: that ſo it may be preſented ſpotleſſe before the Lords Tribunall, vvhither it is approaching: that ſo (as it is ſaid of the Doue and the Eagle, that when they haue plunged their vvings in the water, they are better fitted for their flight) thou plunging thy ſelfe into the troubled Betheſda poole of thy repentant teares, diſtilling from the Limbecke of a remorcefull heart, thy ſoule may take the wings of a Doue, and flye out of the Cage and Coate of thy body, to her eternall reſt in Abrahams boſome. Now with Simeons heart, ſing Simeons Song: now awaken all thy powers, to praiſe the Lord; ſo (as in ſinging wee aſcend to higher notes,) thy ſoule leauing the earth of thy body, ſhall with the Larke mount ſtill higher and higher; nay, it ſhall be carryed vp on the wings of wayting Angels, till it be tranſcendent amongſt the Quires of thoſe heauenly Hierarchies, that ſing continuall Halleluiah's vnto the once incarnate, now deified Lambe, euen Simeons Lord, that ſits vpon the throne. To whom, with the Father, and the eternall Spiri
                           •
                        
                        ▪ a Trinitie in Vnitie, and Vnitie in Trinitie, as his due, and our duty, from the ground of our hearts and ſoules, be aſcribed all Honour, Glory, Power, Maieſtie, and Mercy, of vs and all Churches▪ now and for euermore. Amen.
                     
                  
               
            
         
         
            
               
                  
                  Neceſſary Incouragements, and Comforts, againſt the grieuances of ſeuerall Croſſes.
                  
                     Becauſe that many are too much deiected, and diſconſolate, at the death of their friends, Parents for Children, Children for Parents, Husbands for Wiues, and Wiues for Husbands, Brother for Brother, and Friend for Friend, mourning (like 
                     
                        Ier. 31.16. Rachel for her Children) and will not be comforted: let theſe Motiues moue thee to take truce with thy teares, and not to ſorrow as did the Heathens without hope.
                  
                  1 KNOW and acknowledge that it is GOD that hath taken away thy friend, the pleaſure of thine eyes, thy Wife, or the like; therefore, as God ſaid to Ezekiel in the like caſe, Mourne not, nor weepe, neyther let thy teares runne downe: ceaſe from ſighing, and make

no mourning for the dead, Ezek. 24.16.17. Murmure not as did the rebellious Iſraelites, when their Brethren were taken away, Numb. 16.41. Kicke not againſt the pricke. Act. 9.5. reſiſt not God with a ſtiffe and vncircumciſed heart; Act. 7.51. but, like an obedient childe, imbrace the ſtroke of thy Father, and kiſſe the rod.
                  2. The Saints of God haue beene patient ſpectators of the deaths of as neare and deare friends, as any thou haſt parted withall; whoſe Patience, in this croſſe, I propound vnto thee to imitate, as Iames propounds Iobs Patience to be imitated in euery croſſe, Iames 5.11. Thus Adam and Eu
                           •
                        
                      ſaw the death of their ſonne Abel, Gen. 4. Noah the deſtruction of the whole world, by the Deluge, Gen. 7. Abraham, of Terah his Father, Gen. 11.32. ſo, of his deare Wife Sarah: Gen. 23.2. L
                           •
                        t, of his Wife: Gen. 19 26. Iſaack, of his Mother, and of Abraham his tender Parents: G
                           •
                        n. 25.8.9. Iacob, of his Father Iſaack, Gen. 35.29. of his beautifull and beloued Rachel. Gen. 35.19. Thus when Aaron ſaw his two ſonnes, Nadab and Abihu, deuoured with fire from the Lord, hee held his peace: Leuit. 10.2.3. Iob bleſſed God as well when his Children were ſlaine, as his goods imbezeled: Iob 1.21.22. for Eli lamented the loſſe of the Arke, rather then the ſlaughter of Hophni and Phinees; for which his

Daughter in-Law alſo was more moued, then for the death of her Husband: 1 Sam. 4. v. 18.19.20.21.22. Dauid more bewayled the ſpirituall death of the ſoules of Ammon and Abſolon then the corporall deaths of their bodies, thy dying in their ſinnes of Inceſt and TreaſonCrimina doluit, non exitis filiorum Amb.
                      2 Sam. 14.14. Laſtly, the Virgin Mary and Iohn the Diſciple, ſtood by the Croſſe of Chriſt in his Paſſion, onely with compaſſionStan
                           •
                        em lego, ſtentem non lego. Ambr. in orat. ſuneb.
                     , without that outward lamentation which Chriſt condemned in the Daughters of Ieruſalem, and in them, immoderate mourning in all; Mat. 27.56. Luke 23.28. which particulars, chiefely the laſt, as Ambroſe applyed them in his Funerall Oration of 
                        Ʋalentinian the Emperour, ſo they muſt be laid to heart in our application and imitation in euery Funerall.
                  
                     
                        Gen. 5.3 If hee dyed in the Faith of Chriſt, hee is tranſlated (like Enoch) from this life to a better; from this vaile of miſery to eternall glory: hee is a Citizen of Heauen, an inheritor of a Kingdome.
                        Luk 12.3
                           •
                        . Sorrow not for his triumph, he is gone to poſſeſſe a Crowne in Glorification, which was granted him in Predeſtination, promiſed him in Vocation.
                  4 Hee is bleſſed, being dead in the Lord, Apoc. 14.
                  5 Hee is returned home to his Fathers houſe; hee is gone to his better friends, euen

to the companie of innumerable Saints and Angels, and to the Spirits of the iuſt, Heb. 12.22.23. Mat. 22.30. Reu. 15.11. Mat. 8.11. 1 Theſ. 4.17.
                  6 Hee is inſeperably vnited vnto GOD, the chiefe and perfect Good: firſt, whom to ſee is Tranquillitie: ſecondly, whom to reſt in is Securitie: thirdly, to enioy is Felicitie. Being incorporated into that Citie; firſt, whoſe King is Veritie: ſecondly, the Lawes Charitie: thirdly, the Dignities Equitie: fourthly, the Life Eternitie;Auguſtine. Proſper. in which hee ſhall be ſempeternally bleſſed, ioying in, and inioying, firſt, a certaine Securitie; ſecondly, a ſecure Tranquillitie; thirdly, a ſafe Iocunditie; fourthly, happy eternitie; fiftly, an eternall felicitie.
                  7 He is now married vnto his Bridegroome CHRIST, to whom his ſoule was contracted in earth, and the Marriage-feaſt is now ſolemnized in Heauen: now, thy mirth, not thy mourning, becomes a Marriage, Hoſ. 2.19. Mat. 22. Phil. 1.23. Iohn 12.26. & 17.24. Luke 33.43.46. Reu. 7.17.
                  8 Conſider that his warre-fare is now at an end: his iourney is finiſhed, and his worke is accompliſhed: if GOD had had any more worke for him to haue done, hee ſhould haue liued longer: for, as God ſweepes away the wicked when they are at the height of ſinne, as hee did Er and Onan, Gen. 38. the Sodomites,

                     Hophni, Phinees and Abſolon; ſo the godly in the height of Grace.
                  9 He was here a Pilgrime and a ſtranger, as were the Patriarkes, Abraham
                     
                        Heb. 11.9 10. Cha. 13.14., Iſaack
                     
                        Gen 47 9., Iacob
                     
                        Pſal. 39.14. 
                     Dauid, and the reſt; now he hath hoyſt vp ſailes, hee is gone home into his owne Country, therefore why ſhouldeſt thou grieue at his happy voyage and ſafe arriuall?
                  10 Thou haſt not loſt himAmici mortui non amiſſi ſed praemiſſi. Bern.
                     , but left him; hee is not dead but departed; nay, (as Chriſt ſaid of Iairus his Daughter, and 
                        Iohn 11.11. 
                     Lazarus,) thy Friend, thy Damz
                        •
                     ll, thy Daughter, be it hee or ſhee, is not dead but ſleepeth; and (as 
                        Verſe 2
                           •
                        . 
                     Martha beleeued) there ſhall be a time when they ſhall waken. Now, what mother grieues that her vnquiet childe ſleepes and takes the reſt? many weepe becauſe their Children will not, or cannot ſleepe, few becauſe they doe ſleepe.
                  11 Hee ſhall be reſtored vnto thee againe at the Reſurrection of the iuſt, euen in his body, Pſal. 17.15. Iob 19.25. Iohn 5.29. as his ſoule is now immediately gone to God, as did the ſoule of Lazarus, Luke 16.22. of Stephen, Acts 7.69. of the penitent Theefe, Luke 23.43. yea, of CHRIST himſelfe, verſe 46. where it remaines in ioy, Mat. 25. v. 21. & 23. ſo the body ſhall be re-vnited to it againe, participating with it in glory 1 Cor. 2.9. vnſpeakeable and 
                        Mat. 25.46. Iohn 3.16.36. 1 Theſ. 4.17 2 Tim. 2.10 2 Cor 4.17. euerlaſting. Therefore mourne not exceſſiuely

for him, like the Gentiles, the Epicures, and Sadduces that haue no hope of the Reſurrection.
                  12 Though hee cannot come to thee, as the dead Diues deſired, Luk 16.24. yet ere long thou ſhalt goe to him, as Dauid ſaid of his deceaſed 2 Sam. 12 23 Childe; yea, thou ſhalt in all probabilitie, know him againe, in thy Glorification, as Adam knew Eue in the Creation 
                        Gen. 2.23, and as Peter knew Moſes and Elias 
                     
                        Mat. 17.4. in Chriſts Transfiguration. Therefore haue patience for his abſence, till you meete againe to your more mutuall comfort, as 
                        Gen. 46.29.30. 
                     Iacob met with Ioſeph in a better place.
                  13 His better part is yet liuing,Mors non interitus ſed introitus, non obitus ſed abitus. his ſoule is immortall, Iohn 11.25.26. onely the Cage of the body is broken, and the ſoule, like a Bird, hath taken vvings, and is at reſt.
                  14 His eſtate is now bettered, and farre more bleſſed then it was: of a Bond-man being made a Free-man. Freed by Death:
                  
                      Firſt, from Sinne, Rom. 6.7. to which here hee was ſolde 
                        Rom. 7.14, as Ioſeph 
                     
                        Gen. 37.28. was ſolde to the Iſhmaelites.
                  
                      Secondly, hee is freed from the miſeries of this life, the puniſhments of Sinne 
                        Rom. 6 23, as from a priſon, by this Goale-deliuery Death: his paines 
                        Gen. 3.16.17.18.19. in this life 
                        Lu. 16.25, concluding in the pleaſures of the next.
                  
                      Thirdly, hee is free from the Gunne-ſhot

of the world, and from thoſe euils which are fore-told in the laſt times, Mat. 24. Luke 21.25.26. 1 Tim. 4.1.2. 2 Tim. 3.1. ad 9. Chap. 4. ver. 3.4. 2 Pet. 2.1.2.3.
                  Fourthly, from the vanitie vnder which all the Creatures groane. Rom. 8.20.21.22.
                  Fiftly, beſides, hee is with Tryumph and honour recalled from exile and baniſhment, as was once Themiſtocles amongſt the Athenians,
                        Iudg. 1.7.8.9. and Iphtah amongſt the Iſraelites, to receiue dignities in his owne Country, from whence his ſoule came. Now, are any Parents ſorie, when their Children, of Bond men, are infranchized; of Prentiſes, are made Freemen? Is any man grieued that his diſtreſſed and diſgraced friend is recalled home from Baniſhment, and that by the King himſelfe? Now, this is thy caſe, if thou take paines to apply it.
                  15 In thy exceeding ſorrow thou laments what could not be preuented: for hee vvas one of the Sonnes of Adam 
                     
                        Gen 3.19. Heb. 9. vlt.
                     , therefore borne to dye Pro. 26.6. Quod generatur corrumpitur. Quod oritur moritur. Seriu
                           •
                         aut citius metam properamus ad vnam.; hee could not eſcape the ſtroke, as the Swallow by flying. For, the God of Nature now confirmes the Principles of Nature; that whatſoeuer hath motion by generation, muſt haue a ceſſation from motion by corruption.
                  16 Thy caſe is not alone, but thou haſt millions and thouſands, both in the Chriſtian

and Heatheniſh world, ſayling, at this inſtant, all along with thee in the Sea of ſorrow, driuen with the windes of their owne ſighes and ſobs, for the like, or greater croſſes then thine, bewayling publike and priuate calamities.Solamen miſoris ſocios habuiſſe doloris. Therefore if companions in griefe (as the phraſe is) mitigate griefe, then let ſocietie aſſwage thy Sorrow.
                  17 Thy impatient ſorrow, 1. hurts thy ſelfe, 2. preiudiceth thy health, 3. conſumes thy moyſture, 4. occaſionedly ſhortens thy life,1 Cor. 7.16. 5. Diſcontents thy friends, 6. diſpleaſeth thy God: therefore eyther moderate it, or leaue it off: or, (which is beſt of all) turne the ſtreame of it, from a naturall to a ſpirituall, from a carnall to a Chriſtian ſorrow for thy ſpeciall ſinnes, which is that godly ſorrow 
                        Ioel 2.12 13. v. 17. commanded of God, 1 Sam 7.6 Eſay 38.3. Mark 9 24 Mat. 26.75 Luke 7. practiſed by the Saints, 2 Cor. 7.10.11. cauſing repentance vnto ſaluation, neuer to be repented of.
                  Thy extreame ſorrow for the dead is as fruitleſſe as faithleſſe, as vnprofitable to the dead, or to the liuing, to others and thy ſelfe, as vnpleaſant: therefore let Dauids conſiderations when his Childe was dead, be thy directions, 2 Sam. 12.22.23.
                  The Lord is ſtill liuing, who is thy Head, thy Husband, thy Father, thy Mother, thy brother, thy ſiſter, all in all vnto thee, if thou heareſt him, belieueſt in him, and obeyeſt 
                        Luke 8.21 him:

therefore, as Dauid in another extreamitie, comfort thy ſelfe in the Lord 1 Sam. 30 6. thy God: happy is hee that is ready to leaue all for Chriſts ſake 
                        Mat. 10 37.38.39.; that can ſay with one of the Auncients, Deus meus & omnia. 
                     My God and all things: my God, my Guide, my Rocke, my Defence, my Saluation 
                        Pſal. 18.1., therefore that loue which thou diddeſt beare to them that are gone, ſequeſtrate it from the dead, and reflexe it vpon God: there is danger in our earthly loue, whether naturall to our Childe, coniugall to our marriage Mate, or morrall to our Friend: in which vvee may ſoone offend, in the defect of too little, or in exceſſe of too much. For which cauſe, God being a 
                        Exod. 20. Iealous God, and not enduring that our hearts 
                        Pro. 4.23 ſhould be ſet on any thing in louing it, too much, ouer, or aboue, or beſides, or equall with himſelfe, oft depriues vs of our loued Idols. Therefore hee hath croſt the loues of his deareſt Saints in this kinde: of two Wiues Iacob
                           •
                         Rachell dyes, which hee loued aboue Leah 
                     
                        Gen. 29.30. Ch. 35. v. 18; of twelue Sonnes, Iacobs Ioſeph is ſolde, his dearling, more then the reſt 
                        Gen. 37.4 v. 23.24. Ch. 39.; of many Children, Dauids Abſ
                           •
                        lon and Adoniah 
                     1 Kin. 1.6, whom hee moſt pampered, ſooneſt periſh; of all Dauids Friends hee ſooneſt ſorrowes for his beſt Friend▪ his halfe-ſoule Ionathan. Thus perhaps it is with thee: thine owne 2 Sam. 12.3. Sheepe from thine owne boſome, thy Turtle-doue, thy louing Hinde, thy Wife, the

fayreſt male-Lambe in thy Folds, thy Heyre and eldeſt Sonne, thy ſtrength, thy Reuben, or thy Friend, thy ſecond ſelfe, is taken from thee; perhaps thy heart was more vpon them then vpon God, therefore God hath taken away the occaſion of thy Idolatry.
                  Then there is danger in earthly loue, but there is no danger in louing, ouer-louing, our louing God. The ſpeech was as ſeaſoned, as the heart was ſanctified, which I once heard of a young Gentlewoman; Lord, thou haſt depriued mee (quoth ſhee) of my deare Huſband, of mine onely Sonne, whom I loued too dearely. I ſee now thou wouldeſt haue my whole loue thy ſelfe: Lord, take it all, thou ſhalt haue it, thou art worthy of it, it is too little for thee.
                  
                  20 Laſtly, thinke with thy ſelfe, that if thoſe whom thou bewayleſt were ſenſible and capable of thy immoderatenes in this kinde (as they are not) they would ſay vnto thee, as God ſaid to 
                        Ier. 31.16. 
                     Rachell, and Chriſt to 
                        Luke 8.59 
                     Iairus, and to the 
                        Luke 7.13. Widdow of Nain, lamenting their Children, Weepe not: nay, as hee ſaid to the bewaylers of his Paſſion, 
                        Luke 23.28. 
                     Weepe not for mee, but weepe for your ſelues: I am well, your caſe is worſe; I haue conquered, you are ſtill fighting; I am in the Hauen, you are fluctuate on the Sea: and therefore as it would be a meanes to reſtraine the Papiſts Idolatrie in praying to Saints and Angels, if they had but eyes to ſee

how they inforce vpon them this Idolatrous worſhip, which themſelues haue 
                        Acts 14. v. 12.13.14.15. Apoc 19.10 Reu. 14.7. Acts 10.25.26. prohibited, and directed vnto God: ſo leaue thy ſorrowing, till thou conſider how little notice they take of it, how little they deſire it, or delight in it, for whom thou ſorroweſt: being to no more purpoſe, then to pray to the dead, or for the dead, which is groſſe Superſtition. This made euen E
                           •
                        nius the Heathen Poet, forbid that any ſhould weepe for him after his death; which, Solon and others ambitiouſly haue deſired.
                  Other Motiues might be vrged, to moue thee to moderation in this point; yet I would not ſo reforme this abuſe in the exceſſe, as though I condemned the meane in mourning: this were to runne from one extreame to another: let this therefore concluſiuely determine for thy judgement, and direct thy practiſe, that it is lawfull to deplore the departure of the dead; as the 
                        Gen 50. v 3. v. 10. Aegyptians lamented Iacob ſeauentie dayes, and his Children ſeauen dayes; as 
                        Gen. 23.2. 
                     Abraham mourned for Sarah, the 
                        Deut. 34.8Iſraelites for Moſes, for 
                        Numb. 20 29. 
                     Aaron, for 2 Chron. 35.24. 
                     Ioſias, for 1 Sam. 25 1. 
                     Samuel, 
                     2 Sam. 
                        
                           •
                        8.33. 
                     Dauid, for Abſolon, for 2 Sam. 1.11.12. 
                     Ionathan, for Abner, the faithfull for Steuen, the women for Dorcas, &c. yea, the very cruell Scythians, Hircamans, Sabeans, the ſauage Indians, Lothopagians, &c. howſoeuer they be not ſo curious in burying

their dead is we: ſome caſting them on dunghils, ſome vnto Dogges, ſome into the Sea, ſome into the fire, &c. yet they ſhew ſome motion and mourning for them. Then, if Iewes and Pagans mourne; why not Chriſtians? And indeede as it is a curſe to the vvicked. as it was to Ieconiah, that none ſhall ſay, alas for them, when they are dead, Ier. 22.18. ſo the godly ought to be lamented: Firſt, becauſe they did much good in their places, Acts 9.39. Secondly, becauſe the world was bettered and bleſſed by them, Prou. 11.11. Thirdly, wee may feare ſome Iudgements after their departure, Eſay 58.2. Fourthly, becauſe the wicked will be more ready to ſinne, and there are fewer left to pray for the vvicked, and to ſtand in the gap, as did Abraham, Moſes and Phinees. Fiftly, becauſe they vvere worthy lights and ornaments in the Church or common-wealth where they liued, Lam. 4.20. as was Ioſias, for which cauſe we may euen weare mourning apparrell to expreſſe our ſorrow. So the wicked to, may be bewailed; becauſe, for ought wee know, they are gone downe into the bottomleſſe pit of perdition, the place for wicked men, Pſal. 9.17. the place whither 
                        Numb. 16 33. 
                     Corah and Dathan, and 
                        Acts 1.25 
                     Iudas, and 2 Sam. 18 33. 
                     Abſolon went vnto, for ought that is to the contrary: yet wee muſt mourne in that meane: Firſt, that wee diſcouer not

our owne ſelfe-loue, becauſe we haue loſt ſome good by them: Secondly, nor hypocriſie, in ſeeming to mourne: Thirdly nor diſtruſt, as though there were no reſurrection: 1 Theſ. 4. Fourthly, nor exceſſe, knowing that they are but gone a iourney, and wee ſhall quickely ouer-take them: no for euer ſent away from vs, but for a time ſent before vs.
                  
                     Comforts againſt the Croſſe of ſickeneſſe and diſeaſes, howeuer intollerable and incurable.
                     BEcauſe Sickeneſſe and Diſeaſes, which diſtreſſe and diſtemper euery part and power of the whole man, are very burthenſome to the fleſh: as, beſides their preſent paines, being the Heraulds and fore-runners of Death, tending to the diſſolution of Nature, let theſe Conſiderations be ſo many Cordials and ſpirituall lenitiues, to mitigate and aſſwage the extremities or permanencie of thy dolours in eyther kinde: For, miſery commeth not out of the duſt, neyther doth affliction ſpring from the Earth. Iob 5.6.
                     1 Conſider that this viſitation is the meſſage of the Almightie God: it comes not by chance or Fortune, colds, ſurfettings, ſweatings, &c. are but the meanes, Gods hand throwes this ſtone at thee, for it was hee that

ſmit 
                           Exod. 7. Exod. 8. 
                        Pharaoh, and the Aegyptians, and the 1 Sam 5.9 Philiſtines, &c. and caſt 
                           Eſay 38. 
                        Ezekias vpon his ſicke couch. Therefore ſtorme not, murmure not, hee hath ſent it, and who hath reſiſted his will? Rom. 9 19.
                     2 Conſider the nature of this God,
                           Eph. 2.4. Exod. 34.6 Ioel 2.13. Ionas 4.2. Heb. 12.7. 1 Cor. 10. vnder whoſe hand thou groaneſt; that hee is rich in mercy, of tender compaſſion, abundant in goodneſſe and truth, and loueth thee in his CHRIST, correcting thee of loue as a Father, not puniſhing thee as a Iudge: for though theſe ſufferings be plagues to the wicked, as were the plagues of Aegypt, of Sodome, and of Moab, yet to thee and all the Elect in Chriſt, they are but fatherly chaſtiſements.
                     3 Conſider Gods gracious ends and purpoſes in theſe thy viſitations.
                     Firſt, to draw thee to the ſight and ſenſe of thy 
                           Ioh. 5.14. ſinnes, the cauſe of this effect; that ſo repenting of them, thy ſoules ſickneſſe may be cured.
                     Secondly, thou art iudged in this kinde, and chaſtened of the Lord, that thou ſhouldeſt not be condemned with the world, 1 Cor. 11.32.
                     Thirdly, to breake and pull downe the pride of thy heart, a ſinne which the Lord abhorres and deteſts, both in the wicked, as hee did in Herod, Acts 12. and in his owne children, as in Ezekias, 2 Chron. 32.25. for which cauſe he brings downe thy heart through this heauineſſe,

becauſe thou haſt rebelled againſt the word of the Lord, Pſal. 107. v. 11.12.
                     Fourthly, to trie thy Faith and Patience, whether thou wilt kiſſe his rod, and cleaue to him in aduerſitie as thou promiſeſt in proſperitie: for, God delights to try his like gold in the fire; as a Maſter tryes the fidelitie of his Seruant, and a Father the obedience of his Childe: and therefore according to the ſinceritie and meaſure of our graces in this life (as wee ſee in Gods proceedings with Abraham, Iob, Dauid, yea CHRIST himſelfe) ſhall our tryals and our afflictions be, both inward and outward.
                     Fiftly, to ſhake off thy carnall ſecuritie: for proſperitie makes thee forget God, as did the Iſraelites, Manaſſes, 
                        
                           Pſal. 30.6. 
                        Dauid, &c. but this viſitation driues thee home by weeping-Croſſe to thy Father, as it did them and the prodigall Childe, Luke 15.
                     4 Remember that thou worthily deſerueſt this Croſſe of ſickeneſſe, as a puniſhment for thy ſinnes, the ſinnes of thy youth and of thy age, omiſſiue and commiſſiue: ſinne being the cauſe and originall of all diſeaſes, Agues, Feauers, Conſumptions, Plague-ſores, Leproſies, and the like, Leuit. 26. v. 14.15.16. Iohn 5.14. Therefore as God from time to time hath viſited the ſinnes of others, both of the righteous and the reprobates, ſo hee hath found

out thee: hee that puniſhed the Iſraelites with diuers and ſundry plagues, for 
                           Numb. 16 49 rebelling againſt Moſes and Aaron, and for 
                           Numb. 24 3.12.murmuring againſt God, hee that plagued Exod. ch 8 Ch. 9. Ch. 10 Ch. 12 & 14
                         
                        Pharaoh with Frogs, Lice, Bloud, Death of the firſt borne, and Drownings, for contempt of God, hardneſſe of heart, and oppreſſion of his people. Hee that ſmit the 1 Sam. 5.9. Philiſtines with Emerods in their ſecret parts, for their abuſe of the Arke: King 2 Chron. 26.19. 
                        
                           Ʋzziah with Leproſie, for abuſing the Prieſts Office: Gehezi, for his 2 Kin. 5.27 Couetouſneſſe: the 1 Sam. 6 19. Bethſhamites with death, for prying into the Arke: the 1 Cor. 11.36. Corinthians with ſickeneſſe and death, for profaning the Lords Supper: 2 Chr. 16.10.11.12. 
                        Aſa with diſeaſes in his feete, for impriſoning the Prophet: Sueton. 
                        Domitian, 
                        Spart. lib. 2. c. 12, 
                        Hadrian, 
                        Euſeb. lib. 7. cap. 3. 
                        Valerian, Diocleſian, Maximinus, Iulian, Aurelian, Arnolphus, Antiochus, Herod, and others, vvith incurable diſeaſes and death it ſelfe, Ruffinus, Niceph. &c. for their pride, blaſphemie, perſecutions of his Children, and the like ſins: Cerinthus, Arrius, and others within the Church, with ſodaine Iudgements for their blaſphemous Hereſies; nay, euen his owne people with the plague of three-ſcore and ten thouſand men, for the miſtruſt of Dauid his Seruant 2 Sam. 24., that God which neuer ſuffered ſinne to goe vnpuniſhed in Iuſtice, if it were not pardoned in Mercy: he that ſees no iniquitie in Iacob 
                        
                           Numb. 23 21., nor no ſinne in Iſraell, in couering

the tranſgreſſions of his Children 
                           Pſ. 32.1.2, and remitting the eternall puniſhment to the penitent in reſpect of their ſoules: yet there are cauſes ſufficient for him, ſome ſecret, ſome reuealed: 1. Both in reſpect of God: 2. of his Church: 3. of the wicked: and 4. of thy ſelfe; that he ſhould exerciſe thee with temporall afflictions here, as he did Dauid 
                        2 Sam. 12.10.11., as with ſickeneſſe, diſeaſes, &c. Therefore, as the Iſraelites found out Achan the Theefe 
                           Ioſh. 7.24, the cauſe of their plague; the Marriners, Ionas 
                        
                           Ion 1.15., the cauſe of their ſtorme, whom they puniſhed condignely: ſo, finde thou out by a diligent ſearch, thy Achan, thy Ionas, thy ſpeciall ſinne, which occaſions this blaſt and ſtorme of ſickeneſſe: put Achan to death, crucifie that ſinne, caſt Ionas into the Sea, drowne it, or waſh it in a floud of teares, as did Peter 
                        
                           Zeph. 2 1., and Ezekias 
                        
                           Mat. 26.
                        ▪ and CHRIST will waſh thy wounds vvith his bloud, he will recouer thy ſoule and reſtore thy ſicke body, if it be good for thee, or renue thy ſtate in a heauenly manſion prouided for thee 
                           Eſay 38.3. Depend vpon God for the iſſue, haue recourſe vnto him by Faith, in the firſt place: looke vpon the brazen Serpent as ſoone as euer thou art wounded 
                           Iohn 14.2.3., and thou ſhalt be healed and helped; eyther thou ſhalt be deliuered from this croſſe, as was Ezekias
                        
                           Mum. 21. Iohn 3.14.15.; or haue patience to indure it, as had Iob; or a happy iſſue in it,
                           Eſa. 38.21 22. as had Dauid: but runne not

in the firſt place to the Phyſitian, vvith Aſa, 1 Chron. 16.12. nor to Charmers, Witches, and Coniurers, as did Ahazia, to Baalzebub the God of Ekron 2 Kings 13. as Saul to the Witch of Endor, leaſt thou periſh as hee did, leaſt thou pay the Diuell thy ſoule, as our ignorant ſuperſtitious common people doe, for curing thy body, the wages that hee requires, leaſt thy medicine be worſe then thy diſeaſe; but Returne vnto the Lord, hee hath ſpoyled thee, and hee will heale thee, hee hath wounded thee, and he will binde thee vp. Hoſ. 6.1.
                     5 God inflicts leſſe vpon thee then thy ſinnes deſerue, though thy paine be great: for as wee are all by nature ſinfull, Pſal. 51.4. Corrupt and abhominable, and gone out of the way, Pſal. 14.3. Pſal. 53. all offending in many things, Iames 2.3. ſo he might condignely pay thee the wages of thy ſinnes, death, damnation, Hell fire, Rom. 6.23. Rom. 21.8. for indeede it is the mercy of God, that wee are not vtterly conſumed, becauſe his compaſſions faile not, Lament. 3.22.23. Hee hath not dealt with thee after thy ſinnes, nor rewarded thee after thine iniquitie, Pſal. 103.10
                     6 God afflicts thee not ſo much as hee might and could: for, as thou haſt ſinned in euery part, in thy tongue, in thy head, thy eyes, thy feete, Rom. 3.13.14.15. as euery member hath beene made a weapon of vnrighteouſnes

to fight againſt God, Rom. 6.13. ſo hee could racke and rent, torture and torment thee in euery member: euen as hee will deale with the reprobates in hell. Doth thy head ake with the Shunamites childe? 2 Kin. 4. ver. 18. hee could make thy heart ake to; he could ſcorch thy tongue like the rich Gluttons, Luk
                              •
                           
                         16 24. burne thee within thy bowels, as hee did A
                              •
                           tiochus, &c. Is one member diſtreſſed? hee could ſmite thee with boyles from the crowne of the head to the ſole of thy foote, as hee did Iob, Iob 2.7. Therefore it is kindneſſe to puniſh one part, when all haue offended.
                     7 The Saints and Seruants of God haue indured greater extremities, then as yet thou waſt euer invred vnto: thou haſt heard as of the patience ſo of the paines of Iob, thou haſt not felt a Flea's biting in reſpect of him, and yet there was peace to him at the laſt, Iob 42. ver. 17. Looke vpon the Patients of Chriſt, that heauenly Phyſitian, in the Goſpell, one good woman troubled with an iſſue of bloud twelue yeeres long,
                           Luk. 8.43.44. which had ſpent all ſhee had vpon the Phyſitians, yet at laſt cured. An other woman vexed with a ſpirit of infirmitie,
                           Luke 13.11.12.13. eight and fiftie yeeres, that was bowed together, and could not lift vp her ſelfe in any wiſe, yet looſed by CHRIST from her diſeaſe.
                           Iohn 5.5.6.7.8. A man that vvas diſeaſed eight and thirtie yeeres,

lying at the poole of Betheſda, yet at the voyce of Chriſt roſe vp, tooke vp his bed, and walked.
                     How long, thinke you, was Lazarus pined with hunger, wanting crummes; payned with vlcers, wanting comforts; reiected of men; his beſt Phyſicke the Dogs tongues, ere hee were carryed by the Angels into Heauen, Luke 16. I might inſtance in the Creeple that was lame from his mothers wombe, that ſate at the gate of Salomons Temple, called Beautifull:
                           Acts 3.2. v. 6. and in that other impotent Creeple at Lyſtra, which were both of them healed and helped: the one by Peter and Iohn;
                           Acts 14. v. 8. the other by Paul and Barnabas, Acts 14.8.9.10. In Aeneas that kept his couch eight yeeres, ſicke of the Palſie, yet in the name of Chriſt made whole,
                           Iohn 9. v. 6.7. 
                        Acts 9.33.34. In him that was blinde from his birth, Iohn 9.2. In thoſe two blinde men that cryed after Chriſt, Mat. 9.27. All which by faith, receiued their ſight from him that is the light of the world. So, in thoſe whoſe Sonnes and Daughters were diſpoſſeſſed of thoſe tormenting Spirits,
                           Mat. 9. 
                              •
                            29. wherewith from their Cradles, they were poſſeſſed, Marke 9.21. verſe 25. Luke 9.42. Mat. 15.22. with all the reſt of the halt, blinde, dumbe, maymed, &c. that were caſt downe at IESVS his feete, and healed, Mat. 15.30.31. If I ſhould ſet before you, in order, Dauids ſuffrings

in this kinde, you would wonder; who though hee were a King, a Prieſt, and a Prophet, a man after Gods owne heart, yet indured dira & dura, hard and harſh preſſures: GOD ſo tempered his cup, that hee occaſionedly cryes out, that by reaſon of his outward and inward ſorrowes, there was no health in his fleſh, no reſt in his bones, his wounds ſtincking through corruptneſſe, his loynes filled vvith ſore diſeaſes, no ſound part in his body, his fleſh trembling within him, and the terrours of death comming about him, his heart panting, his eyes dimmed, his ſtrength failing; euery way ſo perplexed, that his extremities cauſe him not onely to cry and call, and complaine and groane, but euen to roare and bellow out, (like an Oxe pricked,) in the bitterneſſe of his ſoule, Pſal. 55.4.5. Pſal. 38.2.3.4.5.6.7.8. &c. yet for all that ſo freed, ſo comforted after, that his heart was filled with ioy, and his mouth with laughter; that hee broke ſorth into prayſes vnto his God, vvith ioyfull ſongs for his deliuerance. Apply this Mithridate of theſe examples to thine owne ruptures. Did not the LORD loue thoſe whom he ſo viſited as well as hee loueth thee? Did hee releaſe thoſe, and can bee not releaſe and relieue thee? Is the Lords hand ſhortened, that hee cannot helpe? or his care heauy, that hee will not heare? Eſay 59.1. &c.
                     
                        8 Thy dolours are nothing if they be compared with the ſufferings and Paſſion of Chriſt the Meſſias,
                           Pſal 22. Eſay 53. neyther in their vehemencie or continuation; all his whole life, from his Cradle in Bethlem, to his Croſſe in Golgotha, being a dying life, or a liuing death; expoſed to the malice, madneſſe, opprobries, and calumnies of his enemies, Herod, and Herodians, Scribes, Phariſies, Sadduces, Iewes, Iudas; to 1. Pouertie, Hunger, 2. Thirſt, Wearineſſe, &c. which miſerable life was concluded with ſuch a death, ſo ignominious, for the ſhame of it, Phil. 2.8. ſo dolorous, 1. both in reſpect of paines of body, by the Nayles and Thornes, in the ſinewie parts of the body▪ 2. and of griefes of minde, for the ingratitude of the Iewes, the treaſon of Iudas, the faintneſſe of his Diſciples: 3. and of the tortures of ſoule, in the apprehenſion of the wrath of his Father, that in his entrance into it, hee ſweat water and bloud in the Garden; in the vndergoing of it, hee cryed, My God, my God, why haſt thou forſaken mee! All concurring together, make ſuch a confluence of ſorrowes, that thy greateſt paines are but pleaſures and refreſhings: nay, the ſufferings of all the Martyres; 1. Steuen, Iohn Baptiſt, 2. Iames, 3. Peter, Paul, Lawrence, &c. and the reſt doe not poize and paralell it in the leaſt particulars. Now, canſt thou grudge againſt thy God, for afflicting

thee deſeruedly, that art nocent, being his Sonne by Adoption, when hee impoſed ſo much vpon his owne Sonne by Nature, being innocent, onely made ſinne for thee, Rom. 4. verſ. 25.
                     9 By theſe ſufferings thou art made conformable to the Image of Chriſt, Rom. 8.29. who by many tribulations entred into glory, Luke 24.26.Non debent ſub ſpinoſo capite membrae eſſe mollia. It is vnſeemely for the members to goe one way when the head goes another; if thou beeſt a part of Chriſts body, then a head of thornes muſt haue pricked members.
                     10 There is no greife ſo great, but the Lord can, and will in his due time, eaſe and relieue thee, as hee hath promiſed, Pſal. 50. verſ. 15. yea, from thy moſt grieuous diſeaſes, Exod. 15.20. Pſal. 34.18. For, when did any of the Lords Children cry vnto him, but hee heard and holpe them, Pſal. 107.13.14. God is able to helpe, he will helpe, he knowes how to deliuer his out of euery tentation, and will deliuer them, Eſay 5.2. Eſay 59.1. 2 Pet. 2.9.
                     11 Chriſt thy high Prieſt is touched with a fellow-feeling of thine infirmities, hauing had experience of them, in thy owne nature. Heb. 4.15.16.
                     12 This ſickeneſſe of thine is the Herauld and Summoner of thy death, the warning-peece of thy departing: it is needfull that this earthly houſe of thine, thy terreſtriall Tabernacle

be pulled downe piece-meale, by ſickeneſſe, that thou maiſt be cloathed with a better houſe from heauen. 2 Cor. 5.1.
                     13 This thy ſickneſſe is an excellent Tutor to catechize and inſtruct thee in the Schoole of Chriſtianitie, it reades (as it were) a Diuinitie Lecture vnto thee in Chriſts owne Colledge, 1. of the 
                           Gen 3.18.19. fall of Adam; 2. the miſeries of man in life; 3. his mortalitie in death; 4. the deſert of ſinne; 5. thine owne vvretchedneſſe and vnworthineſſe; 6. thy corruptions originall; 7. thy tranſgreſſions actuall; 8. the vileneſſe of man; 9. the Equitie, Iuſtice, Maieſtie, Mercy, Goodneſſe, and Greatneſſe of Almightie GOD: beſides, it fits and prepares thee for a better life.
                     14 Remember how many groſſe and raigning ſinnes this thy ſickeneſſe hath cured, or, at leaſt, curbed in thee, beſides thoſe which it hath reſtrained?Quod medicina corpori, hoc morbus animae. how hath it quenched in thee the fire of Luſt? how hath it pulled downe the head of Pride? how hath it brideled thy Anger? how reſtrayned thy Malice? how dammed vp the ſtreame of inordinate paſſions? of head-ſtrong, luſtfull, luxurious, couetous, and carnall affections? For, to whom ſickeneſſe is ſanctified, it is Phyſicall to the ſoule, as medicines are to the body: thy ſoule is ſicke of the Lethargie of ſinne, ſcorcht with Luſt, inflamed with the burning Feauer of Concupiſcence,

diſtempered vvith the cold palſie of Couetouſneſſe, coldneſſe of Zeale, tympanie of Pride, ſwelling of Aemulation, with a number of ſuch like infirmities. Now, as Phyſicke is vngratefull to the Patient, yet wholeſome; ſo is ſickeneſſe to thy body: but take it patiently, becauſe God thy Phyſitian preſcribes it for goods ends.
                     15 As this thy ſickeneſſe cures many ſins, ſo cauſarily and occaſionedly, it preuents many, to which thy nature is inclined. How many doe liue, and lye, and ſnort in ſinne, ſoyling their ſoules with all manner of pollutions, that it were better for them to be ſicke in their beds? How many profane 
                           Heb. 12. 
                        Eſaw's, 
                        
                           Luke 15. prodigall young men, looſe Libertines, like 
                           Ier. 5.8. Horſes, are neighing after their neighbours Wiues? like 
                           Prou. 7.7. 
                        Salomons Foole, are watching the twilight to ſleepe in the houſe of the ſtrange woman; following 
                           Verſe 22. her (like an Oxe to the ſlaughter,) to the very Chamber of Death? How 
                           Verſe 27. many are drinking daily in Ale-houſes, Hell-houſes, or Tauernes; in their Germaine healths, following the ſinnes of 
                           Ezek. 16. Sodome, Idleneſſe, and fulneſſe of bread, and fulneſſe of drinke to, like Epicures and Belly-gods, till they breake out into all exceſſe of Riot, Blaſphemies, Oathes, Beaſtialities, Swaggerings, Swearings, Raylings, Reuilings▪ 
                        
                           Pro. 23.29 Fightings, and Bloud-ſheds; whoſe ſtates were better to

haue ſober ſoules in ſicke bodies, then to haue defiled and damned ſoules in ſuch pampered bodies, 
                           Eſay 5.11 that are ſtrong to drinke Wine, and to poure in new Wine, till they be inflamed? How many are ſcraping, and ſcrawling, and ſcratching for this earth, in which they wroote and digge, like Moales and Swine, till they open a pit, from which they leape into Hell, ſelling their ſoules for the Mammon of iniquitie like 
                           Mat. 26.15. 
                        Iudas and Domas; whoſe bodies, if they were more ſickely, perhaps their ſoules would be more healthy and holy, and their eſtate more happy? How many Country-men ride and runne, like mad men, vp and downe to the Citie, and in the Citie, for the tearme of life, from the Innes of Court to Weſtminſter, not ſparing the very Sabbath, to effect their couetous or malicious plots againſt their neighbours, who were ſafer at home, ſicke in their beds, then here to imploy their ſtrong bodyes and politique pates in the Diuels Office▪ to be accuſers and tormenters of their Brethren?
                     The Whore that hunts for the precious ſoule of a man; the Theefe, that waytes like a Lyon in his D
                           •
                        nne▪ to catch his prey; the Vſurer, that bites to the bones, and deuoures the fleſh; the 
                           Pro. 21.17 Gameſter, that holds a falſe Plough; the Player and the Pander, and all the reſt of Sathans Factors, that exchange

his ſinnes for ſoules, liuing in vnlawfull callings, vpon the ſinnes of the people; how much better had it beene for them that their Mothers vvombes had beene their perpetuall beds and graues, or that they were all their life time impriſoned in their priuate Chambers, tyed to their couches with the cords of ſickeneſſe, then to runne head-long in ſuch courſes to hell, ſtrong and liuely, where they ſhall be chained and pained eternally in the bottomleſſe pit.
                     Beſides, how many abuſe their outward members and ſenſes in the ſeruice of ſinne and Sathan, whoſe caſe would be eaſier in iudgement, if they had neuer had them, or by diſeaſes were depriued of them? The vnchaſte Eye that luſts after a woman, the window that lets luſts into the ſoule, were it not better pluckt out? Oh that Sampſon, Sichem, Potiphars wife, and Dauid, had beene blinde then when they beheld th
                           •
                        ſe beauties that vvere there banes! Thoſe whoſe feete are ready to ſhed bloud, ſwift to euill (as Hazael) ſpeedy to runne to ſinne; how good were it for them to be lame? thoſe that haue hands to perpetrate miſchiefe, were better their hands vvere withered like I
                              •
                           roboams. Oh what a bleſſing were it to be dumbe, to thoſe whoſe tongues being ſet on fire on hell, are a world of vvickedneſſe, polluting eyther the Name, the

Word, and Workes of GOD, by oathes and blaſphemies, ſo obliging their guilty ſoules to condemnation and ſwift vengeance: 2. or the good name of their neighbours, by ſlanders and calumnies: 3. or their chaſtities, by filthy and rotten ſpeeches?
                     How much better were it for our riotous Libertines and licentious Gentlemen that liue here, like the Athenians, to doe nothing but heare or ſee, or tell new things, to be deafe without eares, then to drinke in daily ſuch deadly infection through that ſenſe, as the Spunge ſuckes water, from ſoule-poyſoning Playes.
                     Now, how mercifull is God to thee, not onely by this croſſe to mortifie ſinne in the inward affection; but to reſtraine and refraine thee from the very outward action.
                     16 This thy ſickeneſſe it glorifies God, it tends to the glory of God: thou art not puniſhed becauſe God hates thee aboue others: for, thoſe vpon whom the Tower of Siloh fell, were no greater ſinners then the reſt, Lu. 13.1.2.3. Neyther did thou or thy Parents (perhaps) ſinne aboue others, as Chriſt ſaid of the blinde man,
                           Iohn 9.3. but that the glory of God might appeare; both the glory of his power & free-will in creating thee ſo, Eſay 45. v. 6. v. 9. Eſd. 4. as alſo the glory of his might and his mercy in curing thee: for, ſo all the miraculous

cures that the Lord wrought in the old or new Teſtament, did tend to his owne glory, both in the thankefull gratulations of his Saints for them, as in their ioyfull promulgations and declarations of them. Thus Dauid, and 
                           Eſay 38.9.10. &c.
                         
                        Ezekias, in their Euchariſticall Hymnes, and Songs of deliuerance, after their ſickneſſe; 2 Kings 5.15. Iohn 9.17. Mat. 8. Luk. 17.16 
                        Naaman his acknowledgement and confeſſion of the true God of Iſraell; the ſicke of the Palſie healed, the blinde man cured, the Centurions ſeruant recouered, the Samaritan cleanſed, confeſſing their ſinnes, proclayming Chriſts mercies, and divulging the Miracles, were inſtruments of Gods glory.
                     17 Theſe thy Maladies are no arguments that God hates thee; for, in this nature, or ſome other, God chaſteneth euery Sonne whom he receiueth. None euer, eyther Patriarkes, Prophets, or Apoſtles went to heauen out of the croſſe way,
                           Mat. 22. by which CHRIST himſelfe went to glory. Therefore as Chriſt to ſhew his loue, pittie, and compaſſion to the diſeaſed and diſtreſſed, inuited the halt, blinde, and lame to his great Supper; and wils others to inuite them to their feaſts, ſo hee himſelfe will accept them in his Kingdome, as he did 8Lazarus.
                     
                  
                  
                     
                     Theſe Cordials may be applyed to euery ordinary viſitation, 
                           •
                        ut if thy paines be permanent, and thy dolours extreame and durable, yet thus reuiue thy fainting ſpirits, and ſtrengthen thy ſelfe by theſe Meditations.
                     18 THat at furtheſt they can but continue this ſhort and tranſitory courſe of this life, they ſhall expire with death: thy dayes flye as faſt as the Bird in the ayre: the Ship in the Sea, the Arrow out of a Bow, or the ſwifteſt things in Nature. Now, thy Diſeaſes are deſigned vvithin the limits of this briefe and brittle life: they haue their date in thy death; at which time they bid thee adiew, neuer to returne, but ioyes to ſucceede.
                     19 Secondly, they are nothing in compariſon of thoſe pure, Coeleſtiall, bleſſed, and eternall ioyes in Heauen, vvhich vvee haue before mentioned, as they are in the Word reuealed; ſo ſweet, ſo great, that all the Arithmeticians in the vvorld cannot number them, nor all the Geometritians meaſure them, nor all the Logitians define them, nor the tongues of Men and Angels deſcribe them; nay, if I were all tongue, as Saint Iohn vvas all voyce, I could not expreſſe them▪ as thou ſhalt experimentally feele them, after thy paynes haue here their period, vvhen thy

vvarfare is accompliſhed: therefore endure this rod for a time, ſince thou art an Heyre for euer.
                     20 Thou art freed ſurely by Faith in CHRIST from eternall death and the paines of hell: which are fearefull in reſpect of the place, horrible in all the diuerſities of puniſhments, painefull in the varietie of plagues, ineffable, invtterable, endleſſe and infinite in the continuation of time: bleſſe God for this exemption, for this redemption.
                  
                  
                     Comforts againſt the vnkindeneſſe of mercileſſe friends.
                     
                        Obiection.
                     
                     OH, but this addes griefe to thy paynes, that thy Friends are vnkinde vnto thee in this thy diſtreſſe; and thou art deſtitute of comforters, none compaſſionates thy extremities.
                     
                        Anſw. 1. This muſt not ſeeme ſtrange vnto thee: thy caſe is not ſingular in this kinde, but vſuall and ordinary. Friends, like Swallowes, ſing and make merry vvith thee, lodge and lye with thee in the Summer of proſperitie: but take their ſodaine and farre flight in the Winter of aduerſitie: it made

the vviſe Heathen exclayme, Oh friends, no friends.
                     
                     2 The Saints haue had this meaſure. Did not good Iob finde his three friends miſerable comforters in his greateſt exigents? Was there any more comfort in them 
                           Iob 5.13.14.15.16.17.26.27., then water in a ſtone, or oyle in a flint: they were as a brooke dried vp. Dauid had ſome experience in this caſe, when by reaſon of Sauls perſecution, euen his Father, his Mother, and Brethren ſo farre forſooke him, his Companion that are meate with him, was ſo treacherous to him, that hee was leſt as deſtitute of true friends, as the naked Bird of feathers: his friends few, his enemies many, Pſal. 69. v. 8. ver. 21. Pſal. 22.12. Pſal. 25.17.18. Pſal. 69.4.
                     3 Chriſt himſelfe was reiected, not onely of Herod and his Courtiers, Luke 23. ver. 11.See Pſal. 22.6.7.8.12.13.14. Pſal. 69.21.22. applyed to Chriſt. of the Scribes and Phariſies, &c. but euen maliced of his owne Brethren, Iohn 7. v. 3.4. yea, forſaken of many of his Diſciples together, Iohn 6.66. of all in his Paſſion, except Iohn, Mat. 14.50. denied of Peter 
                        
                           Luke 22.57.58., betrayed of Iudas, &c. Mat. 26.49.
                     4 There is vſually hatred amongſt the neareſt friends by nature, euen in proſperous eſtate, much more in diſtreſſe: thus Caine hates his Brother Abel, Gen. 4.8. Iſmael perſecutes Iſaack, Gen. 4.29. Eſau, Iacob, Gen. 27. ver. 41. Cham mockes Noah
                        
                           Gen. 9.22, when the old

man was ouer-ſeene in Wine; Michol
                        2 Sam. 6.20. mocks Dauid, ouer-ſpent in zeale; and Iobs breath did ſmell diſtaſtfully, euen to the Wife of his owne boſome.
                     5 Though the arme of fleſh, and thy carnall friends forſake thee, yet GOD, will not reiect 
                           Pſal. 9.10 Pſal. 51.17 thee, hee careth for thy ſoule, his loue is more conſtant and continuall: the Lord vvill neuer deſpiſe thee, nor fayle thee, if thou beeſt of an humble and contrite heart; but Chriſt and his Father vvill come in vnto thee, and dwell with thee, if thou heareſt his voyce: and openeſt the dore of thy heart, to entertaine and retaine them. Ponder theſe places and chew the cud vpon theſe Promiſes, Eſay 66 2. & 57.15. Pſal. 51.17. Reu. 3.
                           •
                        0. Iohn 14 23. yea, hee hath ſworne that hee will neuer fayle thee, nor forſake thee 
                           I
                                 •
                              ſh. 1.5. Heb. 13.6.. Thus when Chriſts friends and fauourites
                           Luke 22.43.46., eyther ſleepe or flye, or faint, an Angell comes to comfort him from heauen: ſo when hee was alone in the Wilderneſſe 
                           Mat. 4.11. This is Dauids comfort, let it be thine, though Father and Mother forſake thee, yet the Lord taketh thee vp, Pſal. 27.10. Hee is thy God and thy ſaluation, Pſal. 18.1. Therefore liue by faith, Hab. 2.4. Heb. 10.38.
                     6 If thy friends haue receiued kindneſſe of thee before time, and now they forget thee, which grieues thee the more.
                     
                        Firſt, examine thine heart, vvhether thou haſt not firſt beene by committing and continuing ſuch and ſuch ſinnes: vnthankefull and vnkinde to thy GOD, after ſo many ſinnes pardoned, ſo many mercies receiued, ſo many comforts renued, ſo many croſſes remoued, &c.
                     Secondly, Gods deareſt ones haue beene more ſtung vvith this viperous generation then euer thou waſt, as Chriſt with Iudas
                        
                           Iohn 18.5, a Diſciple 
                           Act. 1.16 & v. 25., a Diuell, a Viper in his owne boſome
                           Pſal. 41.9 Ioh. 13.18.. Pharaohs Butler was vngratefull and vnmindefull of 
                           Gen. 40.23. 
                        Ioſeph and his affliction, euen after his reſtitution: the Iſraelites of Gideon, killing with Abimelech his ſeauentie ſonnes, Iudg. 9.15.17.18.
                     Thirdly, what euer man doe God, is a faithfull rewarder of all that are his; being not vnmindefull of the fruits of thy Faith, eyther in the workes of Pietie towards him, or of Charitie towards thy Brethren.
                     7 God hath elected thee and choſen thee, before all time, to life and glory, therefore care not though man reiect thee, 1 Iohn. 3.1.
                     8 Though thou canſt not ſee thy friends here with comfort, yet ere long thou ſhalt ſee GOD as hee is, 1 Iohn 3.2.
                  
                  
                     
                     Preparatiues againſt Pouertie.
                     BEcauſe that Pouertie, as it is intollerable to the carnall man, driuing him eyther to deſpayre in God, or to murmure againſt God, or to take ſome baſe and ſiniſter courſes againſt his owne ſoule; ſo, it is burthenſome to the carnall part of a Chriſtian, chiefely concurring with ſickneſſe; when Family-charges growing, ſtrength to labour in his calling fayling, diſeaſes increaſing, friends ſhrinking backe, the meanes of his maintenance fayles: for which cauſe the wiſe Agur prayed againſt it, Prou. 30. v. 9. let theſe conſiderations moue thee yet to take vp this croſſe patiently, and to follow Chriſt.
                     1 Becauſe it is the prouidence of God that thou ſhouldeſt be poore: the Lord hath tempered theſe two eſtates ſo in this life, riches and pouertie, that they may be both to his glory. The rich and the poore meete together▪ the Lord is the maker of them all, Prou. 22.2. Prou. 29.13. He will haue the rich and poore mingled together here, Lazarus and Diues, Luke 16. euen as hee will haue Sheepe and Goates, Corne and Tares, good and bad together (as the Iſraelites and Aegyptians dwelt together 
                           Gen. 47.27) till that great day of ſeperation 
                           Mat. 25.33.34.,

therefore ſubmit thy heart, and ſubiect thy ſoule to the will, the worke, the pleaſure, and the prouidence of God.
                     2 Thy caſe is not ſingular, nor thy croſſe alone: there are thouſands at this day that drinke deeper in this bitter cuppe then thou: how many haſt thou heard of; how many knoweſt thou of Gods deare Children, that haue and are vtterly exhauſt and ſpent? ſome by ſhipwracke or Pyrates by Sea, ſome by Fire, ſome by Theeues and Robbers, ſome by bad Seruants, ſome by bad Debtors and Cuſtomers, ſome by Suertiſhip, ſome by prodigall and vnthriftie Children, ſome this way, ſome that; and ſome by the Surgions and Phyſitians, like the woman in the Goſpell, vvhich perhaps is thy caſe? Now, what euer the meanes be of thy impoueriſhing. God is the Author of it, afflicting thee with it, as a tryall of thy Faith, and to excite thy prayers: or inflicting it as a puniſhment of thy ſinnes. Iob knew well that Sathan could not ſtirre vp the tempeſt to blow downe his houſe, nor the Chaldeans and Sabeans take away his goods, without a commiſſion or permiſſion from God; therefore with him haue thou recourſe vnto God: ſay, The Lord giues, and the Lord takes away, bleſſed be the name of the Lord, Iob 1.21.22.
                     3 Pouertie is no token of Gods diſpleaſure

to thee: for, as it is no argument that the Lord loues a wicked man, becauſe he is rich, ſo it is no argument that God reiects the godly, becauſe they are poore: nay, vvhere wealth and wickedneſſe, pouerty and pietie, concurre, it teſtifies Gods wrath vpon the wickedly wealthy,
                           Pſal 37.3. v. 18.19. ſetting them in ſlippery places, feeding them like Swine, with the maſt of the world, againſt the day of ſlaughter: and giuing them their portion in this life, as was ſeene in Nabal, the two rich Churles in Saint Lukes Goſpell, with diuers others. Beſides, it is Gods loue to his Children to keepe them bare here, to that end he may the better bleſſe them. The Seruant ſometimes hath a greater portion then the Sonne for a time; the ſlaue is better fed and clad then the Heyre, that is kept at hard meate till his inheritance fall, yet the Father loues the Heyre better.Ponder well, Pſal. 49.6.7.8.9.11.12.13.14. & 19.20. reade it all and apply it: ſo Iob chap. 5. The poore Sheepe that the Houſholder meanes to hold and to keepe, goes in a bare paſture, a ſhort common, is ſtraitely folded in the night, kept in obedience by the Shepheard and his Dog, once a yeere coldly waſht and nearely ſhorne; but his Oxe or Bullocke that hee purpoſeth to butcher and kill, hee puts in a fat paſture to feede, hee goes grazing at libertie in Summer, is ſtall-fed and houſed in Winter. Apply this to thine owne particular, if thou beeſt poore, and poore in ſpirit, thou art Gods

Heyre of his inheritance, Gods Sheepe of his paſture. The wicked, though wealthy, are ſlaues and bond-men, 1. to Sathan, 2. to their Luſts, 3. to their Wealth, 4. to the World: they are fat Oxen, fat Buls of Baſan, like the Oxe and the Aſſe that know not their Maſter,
                           Eſay 1.4. like the Horſe and Mule, without vnderſtanding.
                     Now, how much is thy caſe better then theirs Vide Chriſoſt hom. de Diuite & Lazaro, 4 & hom. 13. in 2 Cor.
                        ? thou art crazed in the outward ſcaberd, thy outward man; but they are falſe mettall 
                           Pſal. 37.17 which ſhall be burnt and broken, their ſoules damned when their bodyes dye.
                     4 A little that thou haſt with the feare of God, is better then great riches of the vngodly, ſee Prou. 16.8. Pſal. 37.16.
                     5 All things fall out to the beſt to thoſe that feare GOD; yea, all things 
                        
                           Rom. 8.28, and euery thing, as well pouertie as riches. GOD is thy Phyſitian, thou art his Patient: the Phyſitian knowes better then the Patient what is good for him.
                     6 If the Lord had fore-ſeene that a rich eſtate, and an higher pitch had beene good for thee, thou ſhouldeſt haue had it: but hee knowes what is beſt for thee, how ere thy corrupt deſires incline this way or that way. The Father will not giue the Childe a Sword or Knife, though hee cry for it, he knowes it will hurt him. How knoweſt thou with what heart

thou ſhouldeſt haue vſed,
                           Mat. 25. with what hand thou ſhouldeſt haue imployed thy Tallents of wealth if thou hadſt them? whether in the practiſe of ſinne, and workes of darkneſſe, as dangerouſly to thy ſoule, as a Childe, or a mad man, vſe a ſharpe weapon, to the hurt of their owne or others bodies?
                     7 Pouertie hinders not the acceptance of thy Prayers, Teares, Cryes, and Sacrifices vnto thy God. A wiſe poore man hath not ſo free acceſſe in earthly Courts, to earthly Kings, as ſilken Courtiers; but, The Lord heares the deſires of the poore, hee bends his eare vnto them, Pſal. 10.17. For the ſighes of the poore I will vp (ſaith the Lord) and helpe them, Pſal. 12.5. The Lord turnes vnto the prayers of the deſolate, and deſpiſeth them not, Pſal. 102. verſe 17. Pſal. 145. ver. 18.19. The mighty Iehouah, the King of Heauen, will heare, and helpe, and relieue thee, when the hautie, and high minded, and wealthy, and wicked witty of the world, are with their ſacrifices reiected
                           Eſay 1.13 14 Ier 7.10.11 Prou. 28.9 Pſal. 51.16 vor. 7., like Caines
                        
                           Gen. 4.5.: For, the Lord heales thoſe that are broken in heart, and bindeth vp their ſores: yea, the Lord relieueth the meeke, but abaſeth the wicked to the ground, Pſal. 147. ver. 2. v. 6. Agar 
                        e and her Childe, in their pouertie and diſtreſſe in the Wilderneſſe, after they were caſt out of Abrahams houſe, cryed to the Lord, being like to periſh for want of water: ſo did the

Iſraelites in the extremities of their thirſt
                           E
                                 •
                              od. 17.3.4.5.6., and Moſes for them, complaine vnto the Lord in a Land where no water was: ſo did 
                           Iudg. 15.18.19. 
                        Sampſon call on the Lord, after his conqueſt of the Philiſtines, being ready to faint for drinke, and the Lord heard their diſtreſſe, and granted their deſires: Agars eyes were opened, and ſhe ſaw a fountaine; Moſes ſmit the rocke, and the water guſhed out; Sampſons Iaw-bone of an Aſſe ſent out a ſpring of water: many are the like examples. This poore man cryed vnto the Lord, and hee heard him, ſaith Dauid: ſo did this, and this, and this. Oh then be thou patient, and penitent, and pious, and thou ſhalt ſtill finde God gracious, in the midſt of thy grieuances.
                     8 Conſider, that if thou be poore in thy ſpirit, as in thy outward eſtate, thou art rich in Chriſt (euen as the good Seruant is the Lords Free-man) thou art the Lord of all the Creatures ſublunarie 
                           Pſal. 8.6.7.8., in title and intereſt, how euer the wicked (to whom all things are impure,) as Rebels and Traytors to God, vſurpe them from thee. As thou haſt an intereſt in CHRIST, ſo to all the Creatures. Chriſt is all in all vnto thee 
                           Reuel. 3.17.18.: if thou beeſt naked, hee is the Wedding-garment to thee; if blinde, his Spirit is Eye-ſalue; if hungry, hee is the Manna, 
                           Iohn 6.48 58 the bread of life, the bread of Heauen; if thirſty, hee is the fountaine of water,

of 
                           Iohn 4.14. liuing water; if in want, thou haſt a Kingdome 
                           Luke 12.32; if kept bare for a time, yet thou art an Heyre 
                           Rom. 8.17, and a Coheyre with him; though reiected of men, yet elect of him. 
                           Iam. 2.6. 
                        Hearken my beloued Brethren, hath not God choſen the poore of this world, that they ſhould be rich in faith, and heyres of the Kingdome which hee promiſed to them that loue him, Iames chap. 2.6. Let this be to thee like Sugar vnder the tongue of the Childe; let it not goe, but ſucke comfort from it.
                     
                        Animus eſt, qui bene imperat matrimonio & virginitate. Chryſ.
                        9 Pouertie is no hinderance to thy ſaluation: Lazarus was ſaued, Luke 16. yea, though neyther Pouertie nor Riches ſimply of themſelues, pleaſe God, no more then Marriage or Virginitie; but the ſanctified heart in the right vſe of both: there being rich men in Heauen, Abraham, the Patriarkes, Dauid, Salomon, Iob, &c. who were here rich in grace: and impatient and impenitent poore men in Hell, who were here as deſtitute of goodneſſe, as of goods; of heauenly wiſedome as of wealth; of faith as of friends; yet neuertheleſſe there is more perill in the rich eſtate: 1. both as riches 
                           Oſea 13.6 Prou. 30.8 puffe vp the heart: 2. as they are weapons of tyrannie and oppreſſion, as in Ahab 
                        1 Kin. 2 1.: 3. as they are got with fraudulencie: 4. kept with diffidence and anxietie: 5 meanes of Idolatrie 
                           Eph. 5.5. Col. 3.5. 1 Tim. 6.17: 6. Thornes 
                           Lu. 7 8.14 to choake the ſeede of the Word: 7. Snares of the Diuell,

to fetter the ſoule1 Tim. 6.9: 8. barres out of Gods kingdome
                           Mat. 19.23.24.. Therefore as ſome Philoſophers caſt away their wealth into the water, becauſe it hindered their Philoſophicall ſtudies: ſo, it were good for rich men, according to Chriſts deſire 
                           Ioh. 12.8., commaund, and Injunction, to caſt their wealths on the watry faces of the poore 
                           Eccl. 11.1 Luke 14.12, to make them friends of the vnrighteous Mammon, &c. leaſt they incurre the vvoes denounced, Iames 5.3.2.3. Luke 6.24. But there are no ſuch baites, and ſnares, and traps, in Pouertie; if the rich yong man in Mathewes Goſpell 
                           Mat. 19.21.22., had beene poore, perhaps hee had followed CHRIST, vvith as great facilitie and felicitie, as Peter, Andrew, Iames, and Iohn, thoſe poore Fiſhermen 
                           Mat. 4.20 21.22.23.24.; if his Cable had beene vntwiſted, it had gone thorow the Needles eye. Oh how comfortable may this croſſe be to thee, that it cannot of it ſelfe, croſſe thee of Heauen, nor curſe thee in Hell.
                     10 Beſides, the poorer thou art, the fewer Tallents thou haſt receiued 
                           Mat. 25.14. &c. 29.30. Luk. 19.12 13. &c.
                        : the leſſe that is committed to thy diſpoſing, the eaſier ſhall be thy reckoning and thy accounts, when thou ſhalt be demaunded an account of thy Stewardſhip, and the vſe of thy tallents, at the Lords great Audit, when hee comes to Iudgement, Luke 16.2.
                     11 Euen for the things of this life,

though it appeare not ſo to carnall reaſon, yet the Lord hath a care of thee, and will adminiſter vnto thee things needfull, though not ſuperfluous. For, thy heauenly Father, like an earthly father, may ſee his childe need, but not bleed:
                           Prou. 10.3. for, the Lord will not famiſh the ſoule of the righteous, Prou. 10.3. Though hee ſuffer thee to want for a time, yet hee will helpe in due ſeaſon: hee brings the needy out of the duſt, the poore out of the dung 
                           Pſ. 113.7, and Ioſeph out of priſon 
                           Gen. 41.14.. Dauid neuer ſaw the righteous forſaken, nor their ſeede begging their bread. The Lord will repleniſh the ſoules of the Prieſts with fatneſſe, and his people ſhall be ſatisfied with goodneſſe, Ier. 31.14. Iob 5 16.19.20.21.22. Therefore caſt thy care vpon God, hee careth for thee. How carefull was CHRIST for the two poore marryed couple, in turning their water into wine? Iohn 2.6.7.8. The like care the Lord hath ouer euery poore marryed couple, that haue ſmall meanes, great charge: for▪ 
                        The eyes of the Lord are vpon them that feare him, and that put their truſt in hit mercy, to deliuer their ſoules from death, and to feede them in the time of dearth, Pſal. 33.17.18. Thus hee fed Iacob and his Children, when there was a dearth in Canaan 
                           Gen. 43.1 Chap. 47.11, hee ſent Ioſeph before into Aegypt 
                           Pſal. 105 16 17.18., in his ſpeciall prouidence to prouide for them. So God fed his Iſraell, like Sheepe, in the wilderneſſe, with Angels food 
                           Ver. 39.40,

and water from the Rocke. Thus Chriſt fed his fainting auditors in the Deſart with bread and Fiſhes 
                           Marke 6.35.42., as he did his Diſciples vpon the ſhore with the ſame dyet 
                           Iohn 21.9. Yea, hee ſtill feedes all his, hee feedes euen the wicked; hee giues a ſoppe to Iudas 
                        
                           Ioh. 13.26; nay, hee feedes the Eagles, Crowes, and Rauens, Birds and Beaſts. Nay, hee clothes the Lillies, and will hee not feede and clothes thee and thine, oh thou of little faith?
                     Ponder well Chriſts ſeauen arguments in the ſixt of Mathew, againſt thy diffidence: if thou couldeſt but reſt in him, and relie vpon him by faith, though the Lyons ſhould want and ſuffer hunger, though the Lyons and and Buls of Baſan, the great ones of the world, ſhould be famiſhed, as were ſome in the ſiege of Samaria and Ieruſalem, yet thou ſhouldeſt want nothing that is good. If thou haſt faith but as a graine of Muſtard-ſeede, in truth and ſinceritie, which extends to thy body as well as thy ſoule, ere thou ſhouldeſt periſh the very Heauens ſhould raine Manna, as it did on the Iſraelites
                           Exod. 16 15, the Rocke ſhould giue her water 
                           Exod. 17 6., yea, the law-bones of Beaſts ſhould afford thee moyſture, as to Sampſon 
                        
                           Iudg. 15.19.; the very Rauens, nay, the Angels ſhould feede thee, as they did Elias 
                        1 King. 17 6. Ch. 19.5.6., the very Fiſhes of the Sea ſhould afford thee ſiluer, as they did Peter, Mat. 17.27.
                     
                        12 Mans life doth not conſiſt in abundance of earthly things,
                           Deut. 8.3. 
                        Luke 12.15. Man liues not by bread onely; Mat. 4. God can bleſſe a ſmall pittance and portion vnto thee: hee can multiply a few Loaues and Fiſhes to the feeding of thouſands 
                           Marke 6. Luke 9.13.; hee can increaſe the little Oyle in the Cruize 1 King. 17 14., and the Meale in the Barrell, to the poore widdowes, to the ſuſtentation of their families, and the paying of their Creditors, to whom they are indebted, 2 Kings 4.2.3.
                           Dan. 1.12.13. Hee can make Daniel and his three Companions, proſper, looke and like as vvell with peaſe and pulſe to eate, and water to drinke: nay, to be fayrer and better liking for three yeeres together, then thoſe Children that eate meate of the Kings portion, and dranke of the Kings Wine, Dan. 1.12.13.
                           •
                        4.15. As it is all one for the Lord to ſaue with many or with few, 1 Sam. 14.6. to ouerthrow whole Armies with a few Water-lappers 
                           Iudg. 7.5.6., with a Warriour and his Armour-bearer 1 Sam. 14 13 14., by a Boy, or a Shepheard 1 Sam. 17 50; yea, to ſlay a thouſand with the law of an Aſſe, in the hand of a ſtrong man 
                           Iudg. 15.15, ſo it is all one vvith him to feede and to foſter thee with this portion or that, with courſe meates or cates, to ſuſtaine and maintaine thee and thine vvith great meanes, weake meanes, ſmall meanes, no meanes, or contrarie to all meanes: how many (if we beleeue Hiſtories and experience)

both in ſieges of Cities by land, and in ſtormes and extremities by Sea, haue beene preſerued for a long time, euen with ſuch meates as nice and daintie ſtomackes would lothe and deteſt vnleſſe hunger were the Cooke; as the fleſh of Horſes, milke of Mares, Frogs, Mice, Rats; nay greene Hearbes, Plants, Graſſe, and Leather of ſhooes. What ſmall portion of bread hath glewed and holden the life and ſpirit together, for many dayes together; yea, euen Tobacco it ſelfe, that much vſed, abuſed Plant, I haue wondered to heare Marriners relate?
                     It were much that a Daughter ſhould nouriſh her Father, by opportunities to viſit him in priſon, ſuch a time, by yeelding her onely breaſts to be ſuckt by him, that the expectations of all thoſe that commanded hee ſhould be famiſhed to death, were fruſtrate, (if the Authors may be credited) vnleſſe that Gods helpe were able to bleſſe ſmall meanes aboue humane hopes. Euen the crummes will ſuffice Lazarus; neyther doe I thinke that hee dyed of famine, but eyther naturally, or by the violence of his diſeaſes: I am perſwaded God prouided both crummes and cruſts for him elſe-where (if there were ſuch a Lazarus hiſtorically, as the moſt thinke; and not Parabolically as Salmeron and others diſcuſſe,) ſo will the Lord prouide for thee.
                     
                        13 The beſt of Gods Children haue beene as poore as thou now art; euen Chriſt the Son of God by nature
                           Heb. 1.1., heyre of the earth
                           Verſe 2., and of the nations
                           Pſal. 2.8., whoſe al things are
                           Pſa. 50 10, was here on earth poore. So was Iob, Iob 1.15.16. ſo Elias, 1 Kin. 17.11. begging a piece of bread; the Apoſtle Paul and Peter, and the reſt of the Diſciples, poore Fiſhermen, wanting ſiluer and gold, Acts 3.6. So were there in euery place poore Saints, as in Macedonia, in Ieruſa
                           •
                        em, and elſe-where, in the Apoſtles Miniſterie, 1 Cor. 4.11. So from time to time, the moſt excellent of the Saints, ſuch as wa
                           •
                        ted for the comming of Chriſt, that they might receiue a better reſurrection, vvere without houſe and harbour, meanes and munition,
                           Heb. 10 34 
                        Toſſed to and fro, wandring vp and downe in ſheepe skins and g
                              •
                           ate skins, being deſtitute, afflicted, tormented▪ Heb. 10.24. Heb. 11 35.36.37. To which, beſides theſe before and in the Apoſtles times, wee might adde thoſe and many millions recorded by Euſebius, the Tripartite Hiſtorie, and the Centuries: of ſuch that were in the ſame caſe, in the perſecution, eyther of heatheniſh or hereticall Emperours; chiefely by Ar
                           •
                        ians, amongſt whom were Athaenaſius and Chryſoſtome in their time, as alſo thoſe that were ſpoyled by the Gothes and Vandals. What neede I mention Dauid,
                        1 Sam. 21.3.4. that was almoſt famiſhed, till hee ate the Shew-bread? ſo the ſtocke of Dauid, Ioſeph and Mary, the mother

of Chriſt, whoſe offerings of Turtle-Doues, for want of better ſacrifices, ſhewed they were not rich
                           Luk. 2.24, yet the Lord ſupplied their wants to carry Chriſt into Aegypt, by ſending the Wiſe-men of the Eaſt, with gold vnto them, Mat. 2. euen as the Lord will ſupply thy wants vpon the like occaſions, for his glory and thy good: or if thou liue poorely, or dye in debt, as many of the Lords ſeruants haue done; yet, if thou haue Chriſt and the riches of his mercies by faith, thou art rich enough, liuing and dying.
                     
                        Obiect. But this perhaps troubles thee, that thou haſt beene in a good eſtate, and art now declining, and at the loweſt ebbe.
                     
                        Anſ. Since this is a burthen, it is a miſerie to haue beene happy, yet euen the very Philoſophers, as Seneca and others, beſides Petrarcke, haue preſcribed comforts in this croſſe: but the word hath balme plenty for this ſore; the Saints haue tryed the like, as did Iob whoſe plentie ebd to pouertie, Iob 1. & 2. and did flow againe to plenty, Iob 42. So the Diſciples of Chriſt were indifferent proſperous, till Chriſts death, after which they vvere in ſtormes, Luke 22.35.36. So Ieremy for eighteene yeeres had comforts in his Miniſtry, but, after, whips, impriſonments, and pouertie: thou art not exempted from drinking of theſe cups, neyther needeſt thou feare to pledge the Saints.
                  
                  FINIS.
               
            
         
      
      
         
            
            To the READERS.
            FRiendly Readers theſe Errours, with others, whether in words or ſyllables, in miſſe-quoting or wrong pointing of ſome places, which haue paſt the Preſſe in my abſence, by reaſon of the cloſe writing of my Copie, I pray you cenſure fauourably and correct friendly.
            Alſo I deſire you to take notice, that as I haue added (more then I did preach) ſome Hiſtoricall Amplifications from pag. 273. to 278. as alſo, from pag. 305. to pag. 318. ſo I haue left out the Merginall Quotations as needleſſe for the vnlearned, that neyther read nor regard them: as for the learned I referre them to Zwinger his Theatrum humanae vitae, Lonicer his Theatrum Hiſtoricum, Groſij Hiſtoricae Tragicae, Oſiander his Epitome of the Centuries, Textor his Officina, Diogenes Laertius, Valerius Maximus, Fulgoſus &c. From all whom I haue epitomized theſe Hiſtories, as they from others.
            
               ERRATA.
               PAge 60. line 20 for Bolſerus read Bolſecus. p. 123. l. 23. for diſpertment r. diſportment. p 133. l. 13. for Segor r. S
                     •
                  or. p. 169. l. 17. for renijs r. remis. p. 182. l. 8. for Licinus r. Licinius. p. 283. l. 12. for. Creſſus r. Creſus. p. 314. l. 11. for Gods r. God. ibid. l. 28. for Oreſeence r. Creſcence. p. 456. (in mergine) for Heidou r. Chambers.
               
            
            FINIS.
         
      
   