
      
         
            
            
            The Ieſuits Downefall, THREATNED AGAINST THEM BY THE SECVLAR Prieſts for their wicked liues, accurſed manners, Hereticall doctrine, and more then Matchiavillian Policie.
            TOGETHER WITH THE LIFE OF FATHER PARSONS AN ENGLISH IESVITE.
            Good God, that ſuch a Societie of men, after ſo many ſcandals, and foule deſerts of theirs in France, and elſswhere, for Prince-killing, Sedition, &c. can thus be of credit in England? A. C. to his diſieſuited kinſman, Pag, 72.
            
            AT OXFORD, Printed by Ioſeph Barnes, and are to bee ſold by John Barnes dwelling neere Holborne Conduit. 1612.
         
         
            
            
            TO THE RIGHT VVORTHY OF ALL HONOVR FOR RELIGIon, Pietie and Iuſtice, the Reverend Iudges, and Iuſtices of Peace for the Countie of Oxon.
            
               TRue Religion the only badg of a Chriſtian, hath two marks whereby it is certainely knowne; to wit, Zeale, and Conſtancie. Zeale, for it muſt not be cold, nor luke warm; but fervent and hot: Conſtancie, becauſe it endureth not for a ſeaſon, and continueth but a while, but abideth vnto the end, vnto the death, for ever. This zeale which is ſo neceſſarily required in all men, but more properly in Magiſtrates and Governours
               ▪ hath appeared Right Honourable and Right VVorſhipfull moſt evidently, in your late proceedings againſt Popiſh Recuſants, at, and before the laſt Seſsions, holden for this Countie, at an Aug. 19. vnvſuall time, and with very extraordinary care & proviſion, for the ſearching, finding, fining, and reſtraining of the moſt dangerous perſons of either ſexe.
            
               Of your Conſtancie likewiſe & perſeverance in proſecuting ſo good beginnings, ſmal cauſe haue we to doubt, conſidering the goodnes of the cauſe, and the greatnes of autority, wherewith both your hands and hearts are ſtrengthned from aboue, to the great ioy of all his Maieſties loyall ſubiects, Gods faithfull ſervants. What remaineth now, but that we of the Cleargie for our parts, ſhould ſecond theſe happy beginnings with our vttermoſt indeavors? by adding the word vnto the ſword, perſwaſions & cōferences, vnto thoſe ſharper means & corroſiues which are applied, ſhewing our ſelues ready to offer vp, not only our labors, but our ſelues alſo for the good of ſuch as haue bin ſeduced by the Prieſts, & Ieſuits, but rather by the Ieſuits then by the Priests, for which cauſe knowing the danger, & being moſt willing (if it bee poſſible) to prevent it. I haue taken paines to compile this ſmal Treatiſe, that if God ſhall be pleaſed in mercy to open their eies, they may ſee the wicked liues, accurſed manners, hereticall doctrine, & more then Matchiavillian policy of that Society, which they do ſo devoutly follow, with perill both of ſoule and body.
            
               This worke I hope will finde the better entertainement with them, becauſe it is taken wholly and ſoly from the writings of ſundrie learned Prieſts, who ſpake as they were moved, vpon conſideration of their wicked liues and maners, ſo that theirs are the proofs, mine the collection & method only, as the Quotations in the Margent wil ſufficiētly declare. I admit, that both Priests & Ieſuits are to be feared more and leſſe, as dangerous enimies vnto his Maieſty, & the State: but chiefly the Ieſuits, who hold their diſciples in ſuch ſervitude, or rather ſlavery, that whatſoever they ſay is a law, & that law muſt be obayed, though God & man, reaſon or authoritie, King or Kaiſar ſay to the contrary. Frō ſuch followers, as are once wholly devoted to their company, it wil bee a hard matter for the Magiſtrate (you find it by too lamentable experience) to draw either the Oath of Allegiance, or obedience to the Magiſtrat in things Temporal, much leſſe conference and conformity in matters ſpirituall.Mat. 8.9. For the Ieſuits like the Centurion in the Gospell, haue that command & Iuriſdictiō over their inferiors, that if they bid them goe, they goe, if they bid them doe this, they doe it, without asking

any queſtion whether it be right or wrong, iuſt or vniuſt which is commanded: & the reaſō is plaine, becauſe they relie altogether vpon the Ieſuit, and the Ieſuit vpon the Pope, who is the only vnerring perſon vpon earth.
            A moſt abſurd doctrine, as any is in all Popery, wherewith notwithſtanding, they haue bewitched the ſoules of I knowe not how many men & women, otherwiſe very vertuouſly and religiouſly inclined, and what pittie is it, for vs to conſider, what Cimmerian & more then Egyptian darkneſſe they doe liue in, that are thus taught by their ignorāt teachers, that do vow themſelues blind obedience? VVhen the blinde lead the blind,
               Mat. 15.14. 
               how can it be but that both of thē ſhould fall into the ditch.
            
            Now this which is ſpoken againſt the Ieſuits doth not acquit the Secular Prieſts, nor their followers. For as long as they goe about, to recō
               cile men from their true and naturall Prince vnto the Pope, and to withdraw their mindes, from religion, vnto ſuperſtition, from Gods word, vnto fables, from God himſelfe vnto Mammon: cauſing them that are reconciled, not only to profeſſe all Popiſh points, according

to the doctrine of the Councell of Trent, as vnwritten Traditions, Tranſubstantiation, Purgatory Indulgences, worſhipping of Images, & Reliques, Iuſtification by workes, the truth of ſeaven Sacraments, obedience to one only Pope, &c. but to make them Articles of the Creed, and to take a ſolemne This true Catholique faith, without which no mā can bee ſaved which now I doe willingly profeſſe, and hold, I the ſame N. doe promiſe, vow, and ſweare, to hold & confes moſt conſtātly, by Gods help intire & vncorrupted, even to the laſt end of my life: & to procure as much as ſhall lie in me, that my ſubiects, or thoſe of whō I ſhall haue care in my office, ſhal hold, teach, and preach the ſame. So God help mee and theſe holy Goſpels of God. A Profeſſion of the Catholike faith ſet out, according to the Decree of the Councell of Trent. Or, A manifeſt confeſſion of the Chriſtian Beliefe, which all vpright Catholike people at al times, being demanded to giue a reaſon thereof, are bound to confeſſe.
                
               Oath, that they will continue in the profeſſion of all & every of them vnto the death, and farthermore, perſwade as much as in them lyeth, all others that are vnder thē to doe the like, we haue iuſt cauſe to ſuſpect both their dealings, & to oppoſe our ſelues againſt their proceedings. The which thing you haue begun to doe, Right Honorable and Right VVorſhipfull, to your eternall praiſe & commendation, and to the example and encouragement of others You haue begun well, who ſhalbe able to hinder you, if God be on your ſide?
            Goe forward then, I beſeech you, in Gods name, both cheerefully and couragiouſly, you haue our earneſt prayers, & ſhalbe ſure to haue our beſt endeavors (if need require.) I knowe the readines of many learned and graue Divines, to further this religious ſervice, amongſt

which, my ſelfe being one of the meaneſt in Gods Church, ſcarſe worthy to be called a Divine, doe moſt earneſtly deſire, to contribute my paines and ſervice, & to make knowne vnto the world, the great affection which I beare vnto all ſorts of people, thus by the Ieſuits miſerably ſeduced: whoſe converſion as I haue alwaies ſought by good and faire meanes, ſuch as the moſt wayward & peeviſheſt adverſaries cānot iuſtly except againſt: ſo is it my purpoſe, God willing, ſo to continue vnto my liues end, both by ſpeech & writing, propagating that faith, whereof his Maieſtie of al Princes Chriſtian may truly be ſaid to be the Defendor: and becauſe the Ieſuits are his & our chiefeſt enimies, accept, I beſeech you, theſe few lines, concerning their liues and maners in generall, & one of the chiefeſt of them in particular; the matter was miniſtred vnto me by certaine Secular Priests, the method in diſpoſing and digeſting of it was mine, to God bee aſcribed the glory and benefit thereof, if any ſhall ariſe. And thus beſeeching him to bleſſe you all with continuance of your care, and increaſe of zeale, for the vtter ſuppreſsing of all Poperie and ſuperſtition,

and rooting out of all Prieſts and Ieſuits. I humbly take my leaue▪
            
            
               From the Publique Library in Oxford, 
                  Sept. 16. 1612.
               
               Yours in all religious ſervices to command. THO. JAMES.
               
            
         
         
            
            THE PROPOSITIONS.
            
               
                  1. That the Ieſuits are not indeed of Ieſus but of the Divell.
               
                  2. They are fore-runners of Antichriſt.
               
                  3. Right Puritans in all things.
               
                  4. Worſe then the Turke.
               
                  5. Dangerous men both to Church and Common weale.
               
                  6. 
                  Ʋitious both in life and manners.
               
                  7. Noted of theſe vices following, as of Ambition,
               
                  8. Vaine-glory.
               
                  9. Envy.
               
                  10. Malice.
               
                  11. Vncharitie.
               
                  12. Crueltie.
               
                  13. Murders & Maſſacres
               
                  14. To be ſaucie fellowes.
               
                  15. Impudent.
               
                  16. Iniurious.
               
                  17. Vnhospitall.
               
                  18. Pillers and Pollers of the people.
               
                  19. Cauſers of diſſentions.
               
                  20. Accuſers and diffamers of others.
               
                  21. High conceited of themſelues.
               
                  22. For Learning.
               
                  23. For Religion.
               
                  24. Commended by others.
               
                  25. By themſelues.
               
                  26. Not to be spoken, nor written againſt.
               
                  27. Generally proud.
               
                  28. Especially in apparell.
               
                  29. Flat Cooſeners.
               
                  30. Hypocrits.
               
                  31. Making a vaine ſhew of Religion and good workes.
               
                  32. Doing evill vpon good pretences.
               
                  
                  33. Diſſemblers.
               
                  34. Aequivocators.
               
                  35. Temporizers.
               
                  36. Falſaries.
               
                  37. Polititians and Statiſts.
               
                  38. Enterdealing in ſtate buſineſſe too far.
               
                  39. Hauing and maintaining Intelligences.
               
                  40. Working by great men.
               
                  41. By bribes and promiſes.
               
                  42. By intercepting of Letters.
               
                  43. Iniurious to Prieſts firſt, by debaſing and vilifying them in words.
               
                  44. Suspending them from their faculties.
               
                  45. From the Altar.
               
                  46. From preaching.
               
                  47. From their reſidencies.
               
                  48. From all company.
               
                  49. From Chriſtian burial▪
               
               
                  50. From all Almes.
               
                  51. Getting all the Almes to themſelues.
               
                  52. Starving the poore Prieſts.
               
                  53. Domineering over them.
               
                  54. Making them to yeeld to them.
               
                  55, Diſgracefull both in word and deed to Popes.
               
                  56. To Cardinals.
               
                  57. To Kings.
               
                  58. Plotting forraine invaſions.
               
                  59. Diſpoſing of kingdomes.
               
                  60. Traytors.
               
                  61. King-killers.
               
                  62. In doctrine turning all topſie turvie.
               
                  63. By hereticall poſitions.
               
                  64. Extravagant opinions.
               
                  65. Approving of the stewes.
               
                  66. Abuſe of Confeſſion.
               
                  
                  67. Vſe of fond Revelations and Prophecies.
               
                  68. Becomming Atheiſts.
               
                  69. At ſtrife with others.
               
                  70. Amongſt themſelues,
               
                  71. Againſt Schoole divinitie.
               
                  72. Men that cannot erre as they affirme.
               
                  73. Full of Novelties.
               
                  74. Intemperate writings.
               
                  75. Libellers.
               
                  76. That write much themſelues.
               
                  77. Forbidding others.
               
                  78. Seducers of youth.
               
                  79. Admitting none but rich men into their ſociety
               
                  80. Teaching gratis.
               
                  81. To be irreverent to Parents.
               
                  82. Making their ſchollers worſe and worſe.
               
                  83. Are well followed and favored.
               
                  84. Eſpecially by women.
               
                  85. Doe all for gaine.
               
                  86. Get great ſummes of mony into their hands.
               
                  87. Reſort only to rich men.
               
                  88. Domineere in their houſes.
               
                  89. Build Seminaries.
               
                  90. Take all into their hands.
               
                  91. Enterdealing with the civill Magiſtrate.
               
                  92. Betraying ſome vnto the Enimie.
               
                  93. Bringing others vnto their ends, and afterwards ſlaundering them.
               
                  94. Laying a foule imputation on thoſe that leaue them.
               
                  95. All for a Monarchie.
               
                  96. Hated of all orders.
               
                  97. Their spirituall exerciſe.
               
                  98. Diſcipline in their College.
               
                  99. Feare a viſitation.
               
                  100. Laſtly their fall fore-prophecied & wiſhed for
            
         
      
      
         
            
            THE DOWNEFALL of the Ieſuits.
            
               The 1. Propoſition. That the Ieſuits are not indeed of Ieſus but of the Divell.
               
                  THIS is See the letters of A. C. pag. 23.
                   that Society of Fathers in Gods Church, they beeing no whit Gods ſonnes, of Ib. p. 23.
                   which it muſt be ſaid, that by Gods eſpecial providence it came vp with Luther as a curbe to his, and frō him to all the enſuing hereſies of this age: Ib. p. 57.
                   but this Order is the refuſe of Religion, and therefore worthely the leaſt Religious Order in holie church. Ib. pag. 24.
                   A moſt impoſtural corporation, that Ib. pag. 20.
                   haue cleane forſaken and forfeited the ſpirit of the Catholicke Church. Io. Colletons defenſe, p. 14.
                   Well may they be Dij Titulares, as being ſo tearmed after Ieſus; but ſurely, no way Dij Tutelares in their goſpell, and for to conclude this point, A relation of the faction begun at W
                        ••
                     bich▪ pag. 67.
                   the whole Societie is not indeed of Ieſus, but of the Divell.
               
            
            
               The 2. Propoſition. That the Ieſuits are fore-runners of Antichriſt.
               
                  Watſons Quodlibe
                        •
                     s. Pag. 82.
                   
                  Antichriſt doubted to be come by reaſon of them▪ for they are 
                     Ib 56. forerūners of Antichriſt, & Archinventers of new Puritaniſme, worſe than ever was yet heard of, and all this is A Dialogue betwixt a ſecular Prieſt and a lay gentleman in the Preface. done vnder pretence of Phariſaicall zeale.
            
            
               
               The 3. Propoſition. That the Ieſuits are right Puritans in all things.
               
                  Watſons Quod lib. pag 34.
                   A Ieſuit is nothing els but a Reformed Prieſt, right Puritan in all things. Ib pag. 27.
                   In matters and doctrine, pertaining to manners, government, and order of life, in this reſpect all wholly Puritans: for diſtinctions ſake, we may call thē 
                  Puritan Papiſts, to diſtinguiſh them from the Puritan Proteſtants. Ib. pag. 142.
                   They are iuſt like to the Puritanian, or the Cartwritian, or the Browniſtian, or the Genevian, or the Gehennian platforme. And there are Ib pag 169.
                   at the leaſt a hundred principles, and odde tricks concerning government, auctoritie, tyrannie, popularitie, treaſon, conſpiracie, &c. which they iumpe as iuſt togither in, as if both were made of one mould. Ib pag 154.
                   Verie dangerous, vnleſſe ſome order be taken for thē both in time: Ib. pag. 26.
                   but of the twaine, the Ieſuits are more dangerous than the Puritans.
               
            
            
               The 4. Propoſition. The Ieſuits are worſe than the Turke, &c.
               
                  Watſon in his Quodlib. p 138.
                   THey are blaſphemous wretches, an Ib. pag. 18.
                   impious brood, Progenie of vipers, to vſe our Saviours words againſt them, the offals of the old Scribes and Phariſees, who hath taught them to eſchew iram venturam? 
                  Ib pag. 169.
                   they vſe to turkize over men in a ſhameful maner, nay, it Ib. pag. 4
                   were better to liue vnder the Turke for the ſecuritie of their ſoules, than vnder the Ieſuits government, or rather captivitie.
            
            
               
               The 5. Propoſition. They are dangerous fellowes.
               I Ib. in the pref. muſt be forced to open to the world, what groſſe errors they do maintaine, how marveilouſly the people are blinded and ſeduced by them, and how dangerous a race they runne, to their owne and all others deſtruction. Ib. pag. 294.
                   Doubtleſſe, there will come much danger vnto the Catholike Church, if theſe violent ſpirits bee not in time ſuppreſſed, and therefore Ib. pag. 47.
                   theſe fellowes muſt be looked vnto in time; yea, Ib pag. 102.
                   it is high time for al Chriſtendome to looke vnto them, for, if let goe anie longer, hardly reclaimed.
            
            
               The 6. Propoſition. Vitious both in life and manners.
               
                  Letter of A. C. pag. 29.
                   Heretofore the Lay did debauch the Religious, now the Religious doe debauch the Lay and that as bad, as bad may be. I knowe Quodlibet. p. 240.
                   they can endure nothing worſe, then to heare of their owne lewdneſſe: yet, Ib. pag. 82.
                   becauſe they pervert all both God and mans lawes, and runne againſt the courſe of nature and kind, I will diſcover theſe Ib. pag. 359.
                   Ieſuiticall ſpirits, whoſe Luciferian pride is ſuch, as it delighteth to bee counted famous in miſcheife, and to haue none to equall them in impiety; but all baſe, and meanely eſteemed of, compared with themſelues in villanie: as A Dialogue betwixt a ſecular Prieſt▪ & a Lay Cath. in the Preface. vnhoneſt, vncharitable, irreligious, vnprieſtly practiſes, vnſpeakable pride ambition, envie, malice, extortion, crueltie, and aboue all their intolerable backbiting tongues, for invectiues

againſt them they hate. A let. of A. C. pag. 29.
                   What ſhall we ſay, when a religious ſocietie, and that of Ieſus, can beget ſuch brats? Ib pag. 78.
                   Fie on ſuch Fatherhood, ſo rooted, ſo fruited. Quodl. pag 7
                  Are they not rockes of ſcandall, to all Prieſthood, and is it A let. of A. C. pag. 34.
                   not a ſhame that ſo religious a corporation, ſhould ſo ioine hands with the Divel againſt the vertuous? Surely Ib. pag. 38.
                   I ſee no reaſon, why to the Wickeleviſt vpbraiding vs with the enormous manners of the religious heretofore in Gods Church, we ſhould be ſo ſtraight laced, as not to acknowledge him as much: ſeeing that even at this day in England, we haue Ieſuits ſuch manner of Religious.
            
            
               The 7. Propoſition. The Ieſuits are noted of Ambition.
               THe Watſons Quodlib. p. 200
                   wicked Ieſuits are of Luciferian ambition, 
                  Declaratio motuum ac turbationis in Anglia. pag. 36.
                   
                  moſt ambitious and cunning, in ſeeking to beare rule over the Clergie, and being once A. C. let. p. 20.
                   fired in the ambitious mounts of Phaetons chariot, they trouble all Europe, by this their ambitioning aboue all Religious orders in holy Church, in ordine ad daemonem, aemulantes ſtil chariſmata peſsima.
               
            
            
               The 8. Propoſition. Vaine-glory.
               
                  Declaratio motuum &c. in Anglia pag 5
                           •
                        .
                   THeſe good Fathers, are ſo deſirous of their own credit and glory, as if they were Quodl. p. 156
                   a companie of Swaggerers, Ruffians, or bragging braggates of Toledo.
               
            
            
               
               The 9. Propoſition. Envy.
               
                  A Dialogue betwixt a ſecular Prieſt and a Lay Catholick in the Pref. There is Envy in them, to ſee any doe well that followes not them, Quodl. p. 74.
                   proving themſelues right Momiſts, Zoiliſts, and Ariſtarchiſts; and I A Dialogue &c. in the Pref. verily thinke, nether Zoilus, Ariſtarchus, Timon, or other Miſanthropos, ever equald, or elſe was to be compared with a Ieſuit in the damnable art of detraction, or Envy.
               
            
            
               The 10. Propoſition. Malice.
               WHat ſhould I ſpeake of the Quodl. p. 84.
                   inhumane parts of theſe cruell men, their dogged natures & Jewiſh hearts, where once they conceaue a diſlike? rightly following that Atheall principle of Machiavell never to pardon, vnleſſe for diſadvantage where once thou haſt taken a diſpleaſure: ſo that A Relation of the faction at Weſbich pag 74
                   revenge with them, hath never an end, but with the death of their adverſaries, & their reproch after death. whereby it is evidently proved, that there is A dialogue betwixt a ſecul. Prieſt and a lay gentleman in the Preface. more like Diveliſh, then humane malice in them.
            
            
               The 11. Propoſition. The Ieſuits are noted of Vncharitie.
               THe Colletons defence of the ſlaūdered Prieſt pag. 32.
                   
                  Ieſuits pretend Fatherly Charitie, exhibited towards all Prieſts: an affirmance ſo far from truth, as to doubt, concerning this matter in queſtion, whether

it be true or no, were to doubt, whether there be a Sunne in the Firmament, or no. For what is more cō
                  mon with them, then by their A. C. let. p. 80.
                   Ieſuiticall vncharitie, to leaue a man [not to Gods mercy] but to his iudgement?
            
            
               The 12. Propoſition. Of Crueltie.
               THey Quodl. p. 315.
                   are mercileſſe, hard, and cruell harted to their afflicted brethren; for Ib. pag. 22.
                   inſteed of meekeneſſe, mercy and compaſſion, they haue put on a ſteme, harth and cruell hardnes, void of all pittie, mildneſſe or remorſe. And A relation of the faction as Wisbich. p. 78.
                   in the Low-countries, they haue beene ſo cruell, as that they haue not only brought many excellent men to a miſerable end, but haue reproched thē after death.
            
            
               The 13. Propoſition. Famous for murders and Maſsacres.
               
                  Quodl. p. 317.
                   THe only thing they long for, is to bring al a flore in fire and ſword, according to their A relation of the faction at Wisbich pag. 67
                   prowd, Machiavillian, and cruell deſignements, committing many Quodl. p. 18.
                   ſecret murders, & open Maſſacres. And verily ſome breath of bloudy garboyles and cruelties is threatned to all nations, by theſe Aſſaſsiniſts. For what are they all, ſay ſome that know them, but maſſacring, butcherlie, buyers and ſellers of their deare country mens bloud?Ib. pag 83.
                   The very Canibals, and Anthropophagies, ſhall riſe vp at the laſt daie, and condemne this barbarous and ſavage generation of Belials bloud for this crime.
            
            
               
               The 14. Propoſition. Saucie fellowes.
               
                  Quodl. p. 15.
                   THeſe malapert Ieſuits, become ſawcie everie where, where they once get but never ſo little advantage.
            
            
               The 15. Propoſition. Impudent.
               
                  Quodl. p. 249
                   WHo would thinke, that anie ſtrumpet were ſhee never ſo impudent, could put vpon her ſuch a brazen forhead? They are all Ib. pag 9.
                   like common ſtrumpets. For Ib. pag. 320.
                   they will ſtand to nothing, though there be a thouſand witneſſes.
            
            
               The 16. Propoſition. Iniurious.
               THe Colletons iuſt deſenee, pag. 32
                   
                  Ieſuits abettours of moſt grievous wrongs and infamie, Ib. pag. 267.
                   eſpeciallie to the Prieſts.
            
            
               The 17. Propoſition. Vnhoſpitall.
               A man may H. Elyes notes vpon the Apol. pag. 208.
                   as ſoone breake their neckes, as their faſts at a Ieſuits College.
            
            
               The 18. Propoſition. Pillars and polers of the People.
               
                  THere Quodl. p. 75.
                   is much polling and pilling of Catholickes in England vnder the colour of holie vſes. Ib. pag. 69.
                   
                  Verres not more odious for pilling than the Ieſuits.
               
            
            
               The 19. Propoſition. Cauſers of diſſention.
               
                  Quodl. pag. 2.
                   THe Ieſuits beginners of contention, A relation of the faction as Wisbich. p. 74.
                   firebrands of all ſeditions. All the Cleargie and ſociall diſſention in our Realme, proceeded from the Fathers of the Society; and theſe are the very Quodl. pag. 4.
                   firſt brokers, breathers & brochers of contention abroad. Whoſe A relation of the faction at Wisbich. p. 68.
                   delight is in nothing but in factions and novelties, and why? becauſe Let. of. A. C. 61.
                   with their Zizaniaes of faction, they make boot & havocke of Catholickes eſtates; Declaratio motuum &c. p. 62.
                   getting more by diſcord than otherwiſe, and therefore it is no marvell if A relation of the fact. at Wiſb pag. 76.
                   in private families, they ſeparate brethren one from an other, and the huſband from the wife, inflaming them with rancour and envie, one againſt an other. For this Ib. pag. 78.
                   is a knowne poſition amongſt the Ieſuits, Divide & impera;; and therefore, they do both ſtir vp, and maintaine diſsentions.
               
            
            
               The 20. Propoſition. Accuſers and diffamers of their brethren.
               
                  A dialogue betwixt a Secul Prieſt and a Lay Gentl. pag. 56.
                   THeir Adverſaries haue alwaies found them to vſe as ſharpe teeth, and as hurtfull tongues, to the renting aſunder their good names, and wounding them other wiſe (yet all in ſecret manner) as anie other men they had occaſions to deale with. For why, Quodl. p 122
                   they paſſe all

that ever yet were for detraction; yea, even when they haue tormented a man to death, yet haue they moſt ſlie and cunning ſlights, to make it ſeeme apparent they never did ſuch a thing, and withall to make the party crucified by them, yet ſtill to be condemned of the worlde, as maledictus, and an iniurious ſlanderer of them. And that you maie know, that A. C. let. p. 9.
                   of defamations their Societie hath the exacteſt ſchoole vnder heaven, they obſerue certaine Quodl. p. 123
                   
                  Atheall orders, and Machiavillian maximes, for their owne advantage: as, detrahe audacter, aliquid adhaerebit: but Ib. pag 124.
                   the chiefe points to be kept are theſe two: the one, that the matter haue ſome ſhew of probabilitie in it ſelfe, the ſecond point is, that having a ground to build vpon what kind of detraction he pleaſeth, he muſt alwaies apply the infamie, in iuſt oppoſition to the true fame and report. Thus, Declaratio motuum, &c. p. 18.
                   by accuſing others, they make way for their owne hawtines. But Quodl. p. 133.
                   is it not a moſt vnchriſtian, Turkiſh, hereticall, and traiterous ground they ſtand vpon, and a Promontorie farre beyond all the capes and points of pietie, lying out into the dead Sea, Perſian gulfe, or Stygian lake of perdition, to affirme, that all muſt be defamed, detracted, backbitten, deſpiſed, and borne downe that are oppoſite to them and their deſignes? yea, Ib. pag. 96.
                   whatſoever parſon is directly bent againſt them, they muſt never leaue him; but calumniat, ſclander and invent new matter againſt him, ſo that bee Ib. pag 99.
                   hee Pope, or Prince, or other Monarch that doth not favour their Ieſuiticall Allobrogicks, (although he do no waies ſtir againſt them,) yet for that he runs not with them, he ſhall be ſure to haue heart, head and pen, yea and hands to bee laid vpon him, vntill both eares and

cheekes, do burne with infamies. For they that are not with them, are againſt them. And they A relat. of the fact. at Wisbich. that oppoſe themſelues againſt them, cannot be iudged vertuous, or of any eſtimation. A. C. let. p. 21.
                   Whereas on the contrary ſide, bearing the print of their praiſe, it skils not howe very a foole or knaue, or both a man bee. Thus wee may perceaue, Ib. pag. 27.
                   
                  Detraction to be the moſt Ieſuiticall vice of all others, And the Quodl. p. 99.
                   
                  Ieſuits, to be the moſt malitious, traiterous, and irreligious calumniators that ever lived on earth, vnworthy that ever the earth ſhould bear them, and an intolerable indignitie to the whole Church of God, that ever ſuch wicked members ſhould liue vnpuniſhed in her, as they doe.
            
            
               The 21. Propoſition. High conceited of themſelues.
               HOw meanely they think of others; yet they haue Quodl. p 45.
                   Diveliſh ſpirits, of a Luciferian ſpirit and Conceit of their owne proper excellencie, & a H. Elyes notes vpon the Apol. fond opinion, to thinke that nothing can be wel done without them. Relation of the faction at Wiſb. pag. 69.
                   All muſt depend on them. Nothing holy, Catholike, ſound, not the Maſſe rightly celebrated, vnleſſe it be by them. Quodl. p. 73.
                   Every one of them muſt be Rector chori, and dominus fac totum, and an abſolute ſuperlatiue in all things. Ib pag. 16.
                   All ſuperlatiues, all Analogiſts, all Metaphyſitians, all entia tranſcendentia. And they Ib. pag. 244.
                   will bee called new Apoſtles, Illuminats, and extraordinary Rabbies, that haue more neere familiaritie & acquaintance with God, then any other, Ib pag. 64.
                   to obtaine al ſutes: & hence it is, that a A. C. let. p. 25
                   Gentlewoman ſaid; that ſhee was brought

by a Secular Prieſt on her way to heaven, by a Ieſuited Prieſt to heaven gate, by a profeſſed Ieſuite beholding to him for heaven: ſo that you may hence collect, that every Quodl. p. 72.
                   
                  Ieſuit is a rare man, A. C. let. p. 26.
                   all his crowes white, & Quodl. p. 112.
                   finally, that their many Atheall principles, are all reduced to two monſtrous heads, to wit; exaltation of themſelus, and downecaſt of all that ſide not with them.
            
            
               The 22. Propoſition. For learning.
               
                  A true relatiō of the faction at Wisbich. THe moſt vnlearned Ieſuite (if wee beleeue them) doth far excell the moſt learned Secular Prieſt. H Elyes notes on the Apol. pag 203.
                   No learning in the world before the Ieſuits appeared, no learned man now, if hee hath not beene brought vp vnder them.
            
            
               The 23. Propoſition. For Religion.
               
                  Quodl. p. 73.
                   
                  REligion had beene vtterly quailed, if they had not beene.
            
            
               The 24. Propoſition. Commended by others
               
                  Ib. pag. 72.
                  THe Ieſuits haue learned one ſpeciall tricke of Machiavell, to be at compoſition with certain Nobles, Gentlemen, and others in Princes Courts, to ſpred abroad their workes, with report, every thing to be very rare. Theſe ceaſe not to Ib. pag. 5.
                   extoll them vnto the skie.
            
            
               
               The 25. Propoſition. By themſelues.
               THere is another Ib. pag 335.
                   tricke of Machiavell, to make all other mens writings odious, and to commend their owne by themſelues, or their Neutrals. Yea, Ib. pag. 113.
                   it is as common a practiſe with the Ieſuits, to ſeeke to advance themſelues, as to ſay their Breviarie.
               
            
            
               The 26. Propoſition. The Ieſuits not to be ſpoken, nor written againſt.
               
                  Quodl. p. 44.
                   THe Ieſuits muſt not be ſpoken againſt. For Ib pag. 108.
                   if a man ſpeake directly againſt them, out vpon it, it is not to be heard ſpoken of, or once looked vpon. As if there were Ib. pag. 95.
                  an Act to bar others from ſpeaking againſt them, or that it were Ib pag 332.
                   high blaſphemy, to cōtradict theſe Demi-gods in any thing. And generally the Ib pag. 122.
                   people are ſo inchanted by the Ieſuits, that they will not beleeue any thing againſt thē, that Ib pag. 69.
                   all are accounted hereticks that croſſe their proceedings; they Ib. pag. 337.
                   muſt not be diſgraced, yet their brokers can revile others: and in like ſort, the Ieſuits haue this Ib. pag. 195.
                   coggery, to make the bookes written against them, to be infamous libels and ſatyricall invectiues, neither to be read, nor anſwered.
            
            
               The 27. Propoſition. That they are generally prowde.
               
                  A. C. let. p. 23.
                   THeir kingdome is wholly of this world, which may be ſeene Quodlibet. p. 145.
                   by their capers of ambition & arrogancy,

and Ib. pag. 157.
                   
                  Luciferian pride, in all which they Ib. pag. 336.
                   imitate Lucifer. For their Ib. pag. 42.
                   
                  pride and diſdaine hath already paſt gradum ad octo, and paſſe it any farther, it is twentie to one, it will paſſe extra ſphaeram activitatis.
               
            
            
               The 28. Propoſition. In Apparrell.
               
                  Quodl. p. 70
                   THe Fathers beſtow much on themſelues, like Ib. pag. 46.
                   
                  gallants or courtly Rabbies, and A let. of A. C. pag. 23.
                   their pride in apparell amongſt Lords and Ladies is ſuch, that like Quodl. p. 70.
                   vaine-glorious Phariſees, they ride to and fro in their coaches, like Surleboies, Moūtſeignors, or other mē of State, being in this Ib. pag. 70.
                   their great gallātry richly attended on, with a great traine of ſervants, as if they were Barons, or Earles; and A Dialogue betwixt a ſecular Prieſt & a Lay Gentlemā. p 90
                   there hath been found a Ieſuit, that hath worne a girdle with hangers and rapier aboue ten pounds, a Ierken alſo that coſt no leſſe, that made three ſuits of apparell in one yeare, whoſe horſe and furniture, and his owne apparell on him, was valued to an 100. pounds, who for his part diſpendeth yearely 400. pounds, and yet hath no patrimony.
            
            
               The 29. Propoſition. Cooſeners.
               
                  Quodl. p. 352.
                   THeſe Ieſuits are cogging mates, and Ib. pag 315.
                   vſe cony-catching deviſes to get mony, A let. of A. C. pag 9.
                   with all manner of falſehood and coggerie, that may be imagined. Beſides this, they haue ſundrie other Quodl. p. 36.
                   dogtricks of couſenage, to cut purſes, pick-locks, commit burglaries, extortion, ſimonie, and all kinde of Lombardinian deviſes to make gaine

of, and theſe Ib. pag. 96.
                   finefingred boies, are very nimble about Ladies & gentlewomens iewels, & thus by their Ib. pag 70.
                   prettie ſlie couſenage, and ſuch points, rules, and principles of learning and knowledge, as pertaine to conycatching, and other Machiavilian deviſes, (wherein there is none that goeth beyond them) they haue here in A relation of the faction at Wiſbich. pag. 75
                   
                  England gotten into their hands all auctoritie, good eſtimation, and all the ſtocke or treaſury of mony, doing what they liſt, both at home and abroad; but for theſe and the like Quodl. p. 96.
                   
                  couſenages to enrich themſelues, they haue beene baniſhed both out of the cittie of Perugio, and Ib. pag. 137.
                   
                  Milan.
               
            
            
               The 30. Propoſition. Hypocrites.
               
                  A Dialogue betwixt a Secular Prieſt and a Lay Gentl. in the pref THeſe men make an hypocriticall ſhew & vaine vaunt of Religion, Quodl. p. 37
                  a chiefe meanes of drawing others to them. For A dialogue betwixt a Secular Prieſt and a Lay Gentleman in the Preface. vnder pretence of their Phariſaicall zeale & Quodl. p. 197.
                  liues, theſe Ib. pag. 336.
                   
                  mocke-religious perſons, 
                  Ib. pag. 197.
                   haue deluded many vertuous men & women; becauſe Ib. pag. 83.
                  every Ieſuit takes vpon him to be an illuminate, an inculpate guider of ſoules, and a man come to the higheſt ſtep of the ſcale or ladder of perfection, Ib. pag. 22.
                   voide of all pitty, mildneſſe or remorſe, ſaue only Cateolinian carrying his countenāce in his hands, to ſob and ſmile in a trice.
            
            
               The 31. Propoſition. Making a vaine ſhew of Religion and good works.
               THeſe Quodl. p. 140.
                   prowde Phariſees by Ib. pag. 314.
                   
                  pretended pietie allure multitudes: for Ib. pag. 137.
                   they pretende themſelues to bee

                  more holy than the reſt, and that therefore in reſpect of the ſins that raigned amongſt others, they would neither eate nor drinke with them, and ſuch a Ib. pag. 13.
                   blind conceit, haue theſe Ib. pag. 139.
                   illuminates of high aſpires, of their Puritanian holyneſſe, that they make arrogant vaunts therof, Ib. pag. 60.
                   by oſtentation of mortification, obedience, perfection of ſtate, that one of thē brake out into theſe words. A let. of A. C. pag. 25.
                   O my good God? how much haſt thou honoured me, aboue thouſands of my brethren in thy ſervice, howe may I not hope, for my long ſufferances for thy ſake, my watchings, praiers, faſtings, to bee thine for ever! Thus you Ib. pag 26.
                   ſee what vertue theſe Quodl. p. 140
                   prowd Phariſes haue, and how boldly it may beſpeake Gods iuſtice: but in fine, it will Ib. pag. 60.
                   proue nothing, but avarice, extortion, couſening, treacherie and treaſon.
            
            
               The 32. Propoſition. Vſe to doe evill vpon good pretences.
               
                  A letter of A C. pag. 26.
                   THey vſe to do all their evils, eſpecially vpon pretext of Religion and holynes Ib pag. 39
                     ▪
                   as ordo ad Deum, and bonū ſocietatis, or, propter 
                  Quodl. p 68.
                   
                  obedientiam, or A dialogue betwixt a ſecular Prieſt and a Lay gentleman, pag. 59.
                  
                  maiorem Dei gloriam. By theſe principles they may Quodlib. pag. 103.
                   not only detract & calumniate, and take away mens good names, but even alſo their liues if need require; by Ib. pag. 244.
                   anie treacherie, crueltie, treaſon, or what miſchiefe ſoever it skils not, ſo it be propter bonum ſocietatis, or ordine ad Deum, they are to omit no opportunitie or villany, that may further ſuch their intents. And is not this Ib. pag. 68.
                   a ſeditious, odious, blaſphemous and ſacrilegious abuſe of Gods divine graces, vertues, and benefits beſtowed, to make them

dogbolts in every bow, and ſhafts in everie quiver, to draw out for the managing of any impious fact whatſoever? For they Letter of A. C. pag. 27.
                   may ſay ordo, anie thing, ſo the rule and ſtandart in their conſciences be, ordo ad deum, or bonum Societatis: but nevertheleſſe, this Ib. pag. 39.
                   ſame ordo ad deum, or bonum ſocietatis, is ſuch a matter with a Ieſuit, that it makes him all manner of waies diſordered, & not ſo bonus ſocius, as Robin good fellow. For here hence are al his Equivocations, wherein his tongue runs one waie, and his meaning an other, that yee know not where to finde him; a ſhame that bonum Societatis, ſhould ſubſiſt vpon ſo vile ſupport, as ſuch an ordo ad Deum. 
                  Ib. pag 51.
                   Whereby all a Ieſuits evils, muſt bee reputed from the holy Ghoſt, and the verie name of a Ieſuit, to import infallibilitie in faith and charitie, and ſo farre forth, that what he beleeveth, ſaith, or doth, (be it never ſo much to the blemiſh of any parſon, yea to the preiudice of a whole common wealth) muſt not be thought to neede anie collaterall credit: for by one of their Quodl. p. 68.
                   two Principles, ordo ad Deum, or obedientia, (by which as by a common medicine, they will ſalue all they do) there is nothing cā go, or be done amiſſe, by any Ieſuit: for that alwaies, it is either in ordine ad Deum, if an act of a Superiour; or propter obedientiam, if done by an Inferiour.
            
            
               The 33. Propoſition. They are diſſemblers.
               
                  Quodl. p. 33.
                   THe Ieſuits neuer meane truely, ſincerely, and directly, there is D. Bagſhaws anſwer pag. 
                        
                           •
                        8.
                   ſcarſe a true word in anie of them, and manie notorious vntruths: but a Quodl. p. 345.
                   
                  falſe heart, in all, or moſt

of them. Their A let. of A. C. pag. 9.
                   ground where they take, be it even againſt the holy Sea, is dolus not virtus, their Quodl p 296.
                   ſpeech indefinite, peremptorie, and diſſembling, and therefore Ib. pag 13.
                   it is hard to convince them of any errours in faith, by reaſon of their ſly diſſembling, 
                  Ib. pag. 35.
                   equivocation, ſophiſtication, winding and doubling; they can A. C. let. p. 18.
                   
                  collogue with anie courſe, by either oath, or other externall ſigne whatſoever ſhould be required at their hāds, according to the lawes of their mentall evaſions and equivocations, grounded vpon their ordo ad Deum, which permits them any diſſimulation: and therfore Quodl. p. 187.
                   ſenſeleſſe be that man or woman holden for ever, that ſhall iudge anie ſinceritie, fidelitie, naturall and humane affection or other good meaning, to be in them.
               
            
            
               The 34. Propoſition. Equivocators.
               
                  Quodl. p. 32.
                   NO one thing breedeth greater danger and hatred to all Catholikes in England, then the Ieſuits abuſe of Equivocating, making it indeed nothing elſe but an art of lying, cogging, foiſting and forging, and that without al reſpect of matter, time, place, perſon, (ſo it be not to a ſuperiour Ieſuit) or other circumſtance, whatſoever: all is one, vti ſcientia, Iura, periura, ſecretum prodere noli. 
                  Ib. pag. 67.
                   For they hold it dogmatizando, that they may not only to our adverſaries: but even alſo to any Catholike Magiſtrate, yea to the Pope himſelfe, anſwere one way and meane another. And this Ib. pag. 304.
                   doctrine of the Ieſuits, touching equivocation, hath already bewitched ſo many of the Lay Catholiks, that

                  Ib pag. 67.
                   impoſſible it is, for any (that is not a Ieſuit) to know a Ieſuits hart, & A relation of the faction at Wisbich. p. 46.
                   no man is able to bind vpon any words of theirs, they haue ſo many ſhifts, and ſo little conſcience in ſpeaking truly, except it bee one of themſelues to another: otherwiſe, their manner is, to frame their ſpeeches according to their company, alwaies applying themſelues to the times, and occaſions as they fall out, and Ib. pag. 73.
                   they are ſo delighted with this Equivocation, or a ſubtile and diſſembling kind of ſpeeche, as that to the ſcandall of others (as before hath beene declared) they are not aſhamed to defend it in their publike writings, Quodl. p. 33.
                   in abuſing the words of St Paul, with factus ſum omnia omnibus, vt omnes lucrifaciam; to this end and purpoſe, D. Bagſhawes anſwer, p. 36.
                   abſurdly alleaging diverſe places of Scripture, Quodl. p. 300.
                   by which doctrine of theirs, there is laid forth an open way to Atheiſme, ſo to expound the Apoſtles as they may be thought to temporize, which is a plaine kind of diſſimulation. But let theſe Ib. pag. 61.
                   men of the Bernard high Law, ſuch like as liue by their wits & principles of Machiavell, taught by their Arch Rabbies how to maintaine this their Ib. p. 31.
                   abſurd Paradoxe of Equivocation, 
                  
                     Ib. 354. that haue ſo great facilitie to coine lies, thereby to make any thing liked or diſliked as they liſt, and to giue out by Newters what they pleaſe, A let. of A C. pag. 61.
                   ceaſe their quirkes and quiddities, as mentall evaſions, Equivocations, tergiverſations, and the like: for elſe, A Relation of the faction at Wiſbich. pag. 73.
                   they are commonly now adaies held ſo great lyers, that I doubt whether any, or all of the Ieſuits wordes, yea or others that are in England this day will be accepted of, for the valew of a ſtraw, by any that knowes them, they are ſo ful of Equivocations and doubtings.
               
            
            
               
               The 35. Propoſition. Temporizers.
               
                  Quodl. p. 214
                   THey hold it lawfull to temporize with the Civill Magiſtrate,Ib. p 21.
                   making Religion a matter of ſtate, and policie, to draw people vnto them, by plauſible hypocriſie, and ſhew of zeale: not a matter of conſcience, to direct them aright. And thus, by Ib. pag. 330. & pag. 21,
                   their temporizing platformes, caſting omnia pro tempore, nihil pro veritate, they hold the Ib. pag. 21.
                   making of cloſe Catholiks in policie, Ib. pag. 21.
                   which by their flat Atheall doctrine, ſecretly taught in Scotland, 
                  Ib. are freely permitted, to eate fleſh as companie occaſioneth, to read all kind of bookes indifferently, and to goe to a Maſſe in the forenoone, & to a Puritan Sermon in the afternoone, and laſtly A Dialogue betwixt a ſecular Prieſt and a Ieſuit. pag. 100.
                   licenſed to marry with Catholikes.
            
            
               The 36. Propoſition. Falſaries.
               
                  H. Elyes notes vpon the Apol. pag. 124.
                   IT is no newes with them, to alleage Auctors corruptly, by Ib. pag. 18. & pag. 188.
                   nipping of words and cutting of that, which confuteth the thing for which they are alleaged: which Ib. pag. 188.
                   
                  falſe play of theirs, in taking that which ſerveth their turne (as they think) and leaving out the ſubſtance of the matter, is often practiſed; but aboue all other things, moſt ſhamefull is the corrupting of the Cardinals letter Relatio turbarum exhibita ſacroſanctae Inquiſitionis officio p. 27.
                   vrged by the Prieſts againſt the Ieſuits.
               
            
            
               
               The 37. Propoſition. Polititians.
               
                  Quodlibets in the Pref. THe Ieſuits religious pietie, is turned into meere Secular, or rather temporall and Laicall policie: and they are A Dialogue betwixt a ſecular Prieſt and a Lay Catholick p. 86.
                   Prieſts indeed, but exceeding cunning Politicks withall, and theſe D. Bagſhawes anſwer, pag. 10
                   
                  Politicke canvaſers or Quodl. p. 15
                   
                  Matchiavilian Polititians, 
                  Ib. pag. 147.
                   haue ſo many Matchiavilian deviſes, as every plot and drift, ſeemeth to bee an infallible rule of falſehood, and a principle in chiefe, whereby the Ieſuits doe ſquare their actions, as never a Prince in Chriſtendome, nor any man living, can tell where to find, or how to trace or truſt them.Quodl. p. 17. & 21.
                   For in all ſacrilegious and temporizing platformes, Ib. pag. 18.
                   
                  Atheall plots of perdition,h 
                  Matchiavilian or rather Mahumetan-like faction, Ib. pag 62.
                   Heatheniſh, tyrannical, Sathanicall and Turkiſh government, Ib. pag. 64.
                   none goeth beyond the Ieſuits at this day; Ib pag. 62.
                   and they are able to ſet Aretin, Lucian, Matchiauel, yea and Don Lucifer in a ſort to ſchoole, as impoſſible for him by all the Art he hath, to beſot men as they do.
            
            
               The 38. Propoſition. Entermedling in ſtate-affaires too far.
               
                  A dialogue betwixt a ſecular Prieſt and a Lay gentleman, pag. 84.
                   ALthough there be an expreſſe clauſe in the Ieſuits miſſion into England, that they ſhould not deale in matters of ſtate: Let. of A. C. 14.
                   yet, the Ieſuits themſelues ſticke not to vaunt, that they haue a finger, not only in the Catholicke commons of this Realme, but alſo in the State, and A dialogue betwixt a Secular Prieſt and a Lay Gentleman in pag. 86.
                   they are become officious ſticklers

in Princes affaires Eccleſiaſtical or Tēporall, Ib. pag. 92.
                   both in England and Scotland, as is proued very ſufficiently: & according to Quodl p. 227.
                   their doctrine of ſtatizing, they A dialogue betwixt a ſecular Prieſt and a Lay Gentleman p 73
                   muſt be ſtirring, Quodlib. in the Preface. tamporing, temporizing, and ſtatizing like martiall men, or common ſouldiers in the field of war, in all temporal, mundane and ſtratagematicall affaires; A Dialogue betwixt a ſecular Prieſt and a Lay gentleman p. 96
                   this is their delight, but ever they doe rather harme, than good thereby, and therefore it was well done of the Secular Prieſts, Colletons iuſt defence, p 271.
                   earneſtly to requeſt, that all proceedings of State-buſines by the Ieſuits, ſhould be vtterlie and preſently forbidden.
            
            
               The 39. Propoſition. They haue and mainetaine Intelligencers and ſpies.
               
                  Quodlib. pag. 191.
                   IT is an honourable policie in Princes, to entertaine ſpies, counterfeits, and traitors, Ib. pag. 315.
                   by whom they know preſentlie what is intended againſt them: ſemblably, the Ieſuits 
                  Ib. pag. 65.
                   haue their intelligence in all the kings courts in Europe, by ſome principall man or woman of marke of their placing, Ib. pag. 65.
                   and their chiefe Agent to diſcover the ſecrets of Princes, is alwaies a Ieſuit in re, or in ſpe. Theſe Ib. pag. 315.
                   
                  Agents in all Princes Courts, giue information to their Generall once a month, ſo that Ib. pag. 65.
                   nothing is done in England, but it is knowne in Rome with in a month after at the leaſt. And ſay now, is it a fit thing that H Elyes notes on the Apol. pag 264.
                   Religious men, that ſhould ſpend their time in ſtudy and contēplation, ſhould take their greateſt pleaſure, delight, and contentment in writing and receiving packets of newes, from all coaſts and countries, making that their whole ſtudy and travaile?
            
            
               
               The 40. Propoſition. Worke by great men.
               
                  Quodl. p. 72.
                   The Ieſuits haue learned one tricke of Machiavell, throughly practiſed by Eraſmus, to be at compoſition with certaine noble men gentlemen and others in Princes Courts, to ſpread abroad their workes, with report every thing to bee rare, and Ib. pag. 73. See 24. Prop. there is no Prince in the world, but hath ſome great Lord or other about him, that wil be ready to ſpeake a good word for the Ieſuits, in hope of a better time at their hands, at one time or other when kingdomes are at ſtake.
            
            
               The 41. Propoſition. They effect all by Bribes and promiſes.
               
                  Quodl. p. 153.
                   THe no leſſe conſcienceleſſe than mercileſſe Ieſuits, collect great ſummes of money over all the Realme, and wherefore is all this done? Becauſe Ib. pag. 131.
                   the greateſt enterpriſes taken in hand by thē, are done more by bribes given to brokers, and c great promiſes made to them, that are ſticklers for them: A dialogue betwixt a ſecul. Prieſt and a lay gentleman pag. 65.
                   for the later it hath beene long the faction of the Religious Fathers ſo to doe, to put men to great expectation of favour and advancement when their day ſhall come, & to ring every yeare freſh Alarums of forein preparation, and I know not what: and as touching the former, it was an Quodl. p. 351
                   old ſtale principle of Machiavell, to packe and ſack vp ſackes of mony to bring and binde mens tongues therewith, to preach and prate in court, country, and Pulper,

what they will haue, to keepe themſelues in.
            
            
               The 42. Propoſition. Intercept Letters.
               
                  The hope of peace, pag. 12.
                   VVHo knoweth not that the Jeſuits, H. Elyes notes vpon the Apol. pag. 216.
                   ſuch as ſhould haue made a conſcience to open other mens letters, doe intercept letters and lie ſo in wait to intercept what paſſeth to and fro, that a ſmall letter can hardly and that very ſeldome eſcape them? For they, & eſpecially the A relation of the faction at Wisbich pag. 77
                   
                  Ieſuits of Rome, do intercept all manner of letters, of al men whoſoever, Ib. pag. 75.
                   as they pleaſe themſelues, not forbearing the packets, neither of the Cardinals, nor of Princes.
            
            
               The 43. Propoſition. Iniurious to Priests by debaſing them.
               
                  Quodl p. 198
                  THe Ieſuits tongue-torments, more cruell and heavie to the Prieſts, thā their adverſaries, racks, ropes or Tiburne Tippets, A Dialogue betwixt a Secular Prieſt and a Lay Gentl. in the pref calling anointed Prieſts knaues, villaines, ſpies, ſouth-ſaiers, Idolaters, Libertins, Atheiſts, with other the moſt odious termes that the Divell or malice is able to invent; Quodl. p. 16.
                   ſhaking their heads, & vſing diverſe very diſdainfull exclamations, as, ah, hah, hah, a Seminarie, an old Queene Marie Prieſt, a Secular, ah, ah, ah, alas poore men, you ſhall ſee thē all leape at a cruſt, ere it be long; and A dialogue betwixt a Secul. Prieſt and a Lay Gentl. pag. 67.
                   where theſe Fathers haue had moſt converſation and dealing, many of modeſt and temperate conſtitution, are become impious, brazenfaced, & furious men againſt Prieſts, wherevpon Quodl. p. 17.
                   the Catholickes

haue not beene afraid to lay violent hands, with offer to ſtrike, or to run with drawne ſwords at Prieſts, and Ib. pag. 161.
                   reported that it were no more offence to kill one of them, than to kill a notorious perſecutour and hereticke: ſo that, Ib. pag. 174.
                   if the Ieſuits ſhould prevaile, the poore Seculars were as good to be all hanged vp togither, as liue to endure the inſults, triumphs & vpbraidings that ſhalbe laid againſt them, Relation of the faction at Wiſb. pag. 33.
                   as though no Secular Prieſt were worthy to be named the ſame day that mention is made of a holy Ieſuit, 
                  Ib. pag. 38.
                   and that it might be ſufficient for them, if they might haue ſome curat-ſhips to ſay Maſſes, and ſo much favor, as to attend vpon them to know their Maſterſhips pleaſure, what they would command them; and Declaratio motuum &c. in Anglia pag. 86.
                   this debaſing and abaſing all Prieſts, the A relation of the faction at Wisbich. p. 74.
                   
                  Ieſuits will not ceaſe, vntill they haue caſt out the Prieſts, and that by wicked meanes, not only of themſelues, but A Dialogue betwixt a Sec. Prieſt and a Lay Gentleman. even of Schiſmatickes and common enemies.
            
            
               The 44. Propoſition. By ſuſpending them from their faculties.
               
                  Colletons defence of the ſlaūdred Prieſts pag. 32.
                   HOw mány of the Secular Prieſtes were ſuſpended from the vſe of their faculties, becauſe they would not confirme Blackwels auctoritie vnder their hand?
            
            
               The 45. Propoſition. From the Altar.
               AS you may plainely ſee in a iuſt defenſe of the ſclā
                  dered Prieſts by Ib. pag 185.
                   
                  Io. Colleton.
               
            
            
               
               The .46 Propoſition. From Preaching.
               
                  Declaratio motuum, &c. p. 
                        •
                     . THey were forbidden to preach and teach the lay-people, during the contention betweene the Prieſts and Ieſuits.
               
            
            
               The 47. Propoſition. From their Reſidences.
               
                  Ioh Colleton
                        •
                      defenſe pag. 63.
                  AVctority was given, Ib. pag. 49.
                   when it pleaſed the Ieſuits, to change and remoue the Prieſts from one reſidence to an other, they being endowed with no Church living, nor the Lay-catholicke bound, by as much as the leaſt ſhew of charitie, to mainetaine anie one in their houſes, but ſuch as themſelues ſhall chuſe or caſt affection vnto.
            
            
               The 48. Propoſition. From all Companie.
               
                  Colletons defenſe, pag. 159.
                   ALL Catholicks warned to ſhun their companies, & Ib. pag. 201.
                   all meetings of Prieſts forbidden.
            
            
               The 49. Propoſition. From Chriſtian buriall.
               
                  Ib. pag. 20
                           •
                        .
                   THey were not to be buryed after a Chriſtian manner.
            
            
               
               The 50. Propoſition. From all Almes.
               
                  Quodl. p. 18
                   
                  REliefe was taken awaie from the Prieſts by the Ieſuits, ſo that they Colletons defenſe, p. 158.
                   were exempted from part of the common dividents, being priſoners, and faine to ſell their very cloathes of their backes, their Breviaries and other Service-books, being elſe Quodli. p. 83.
                   not able to holde out in priſon, for want of mainetenance: & whiles the poore Seculars Ib. pag. 82.
                   were in this extremity, it was a world to ſee the ſuperfluity of the Ieſuits.
               
            
            
               The 51. Propoſition. Getting all the Almes to themſelues.
               
                  A Dialogue betwixt a ſecular Prieſt and a Lay-gentleman, Pag. 112.
                   NEver larger almes giuen then of late yeares (for the Declaratio motuum &c. p. 27.
                   Catholicks beſtow their almes plentifully throughout the land, for reliefe of priſoners, & other godly vſes:) but Quodl. p. 70.
                   the Ieſuits, pretending to be Religious collectors for priſoners, and other diſtreſſed catholicks, and Ib. pag. 38.
                   having gotten Iudas his office, ſcilicet, to carrie the monie bagge, into their ſubſtitutes hands, diſpoſe all the wealth and charity of Catholickes, (conſiſting of many thouſand pounds) moſt ſinfully, irreligiouſly, and abuſiuely; they convert theſe pios vſus, intended by the benefactors where need is, into their owne purſes: or into their purſes from whom they may coniure it at their pleaſures: ſo that A relation of the faction at Wisbich. p. 70.
                   the expences of one Ieſuit, is able to mainetaine twenty Prieſtes plentifullie

and richlie; and if it ſo chance they doe beſtow out of their Almes-purſe any thing, it is not beſtowed Relatio turbarum, &c. p. 99.
                   vpon the needy; but E
                        •
                      no
                        •
                     es vpon the Apologie Pag. 213.
                   partially as they pleaſe thēſelues. A Dialogue betwixt a ſecular Prieſt & a Lay Gētlemā. p 11
                           •
                        
                     
                   Thus where the Ieſuits haue abundance, the poore Prieſts & Catholicks never ſuffered ſuch great want of reliefe, & therfore A let. of A. C. pag. 20.
                   it is to be wiſhed, that they would ſpend their almes better, in hoſpitalitie and good edification.
            
            
               The 52. Propoſition. Starving the Prieſts.
               
                  Quodl. p. 18.
                  MAny Prieſts are pined away with griefe & want of food, and Ib. pag. 178.
                   like to die of famine, by reaſon of the Ieſuits, 
                  Ib. pag. 198.
                   and in Framingham caſtle all of them were readie to ſtarue, as receiving no maintenāce, nor reliefe of the common benevolence.
            
            
               The 53. Propoſition. Domineering over them.
               
                  Elies notes on the Apol. pa. 34.
                   THe Ieſuits ſeeke to rule the roſt, to haue all men at their becke and cōmandement, to haue nothing done without their adviſe and appointment, and that they will haue all Prieſts their prentiſes.
               
            
            
               The 54. Propoſition. Forcing them to yeeld the place vnto them.
               
                  A Dialogue betwixt a ſecular Prieſt and a Lay gentleman. Pag. 118.
                  IT was thought a diſorderly thing, that the Ieſuits being no Prieſts, and ſome ſay brethren, ſhould take place before the Prieſts: maintained by the Ieſuits, as

a point of good nature: and albeit H. Elyes notes vpon the Apol. in the Pref. p, 8
                   in proceſſion the Ieſuits march in the loweſt rancke, and therefore almoſt Quodl. p. 52.
                   never come to proceſſion, becauſe they muſt take the loweſt place; yet if a A letter of A C. pag. 22.
                   Secular Prieſt meet them abroad, he muſt vaile bonnet vnto them: for it is a good argument, Quodl. p. 16.
                   he is a Ieſuit, ergo ſilence, ergo yeeld the ſtoop in his preſence.
            
            
               The 55. Propoſition. Diſgracefull both in word and deed to Popes.
               
                  Quodl. p. 57.
                   They haue preached openly in Spaine againſt Pope Sixtus the laſt of al holy memory, & railing againſt him as againſt a moſt wicked man, & monſter on earth. They haue called him a Lutheran, Hereticke, they haue tearmed him a Woolfe, they haue ſaid hee had vndone all Chriſtendome if he had lived: and in few, Cardinall Bellarmine himſelfe, as Iudge Paramont, being asked what he thought of his death, anſwered. Qui ſine poenirentia vivit, & ſine poenitentia moritur, proculdubio ad Infornum tendit: and an Engliſh Doctor of our nation ſaid, conceptis verbis; quantum capio, quantum ſapio, quantum intelligo, deſcendit ad infernum.
               
            
            
               The 56. Propoſition. To Cardinals.
               
                  A Dialogue betwixt a Secular Prieſt and a Lay Gentl. pag, 8
                           •
                        .
                   THey report many diſgracefull things of Cardinall Toledoes death, contraried by one, in whoſe armes he died, who ſaid he made a vertuous ende.
            
            
               
               The 57. Propoſition. To Kings.
               ITA relation of the fact. at Wiſh pag. 77.
                   is to be feared leaſt they will bring in bondage, not only Prelats, but the very Princes and Monarches themſelues. For there is a Quodlibet. p. 496.
                   marveilous contempt of Princes, 
                  Ib. pag. 283.
                   whoſe proceedings they ſlaunder, which they ought not to doe. The French Ib. pag. 59.
                   
                  King for railing againſt him, might haue put them to death for Traitors: for Ib. pag 312.
                  they reviled him, as oft as they thought on their expulſion, and to let paſſe this, Ib. pag. 173.
                   they haue bolſtred, banded, bearded, and borne out many foule matters, againſt the greateſt and chiefeſt Princes on earth.
            
            
               The 58. Propoſition. Plotting forraine invaſions.
               
                  Declaratio motuum ac turbationis in Anglia. pag. 17.
                   THe Ieſuits haue plotted diverſe forraine invaſions: yea, Ib pag. 83.
                   they ſet kingdomes to ſale, and talke & write of nothing, but of forraine enimies that ſhall invade this land. So that Quodl. p. 186.
                   this land, by their miſchievous drifts and deviſes, lies open to the ſpoile, of who that firſt can catch it. But Ib pag. 178.
                   J hold him worſe then mad, that would take part with theſe Ieſuits, or invaders in truth, notwithſtanding any Excommunication.
            
            
               The 59. Propoſition. Diſpoſing of kingdomes.
               
                  Quodl. p. 223
                   ALthough they ſhould not meddle directly or indirectly with diſpoſing of Crownes, yet the Ib. pag. 62.
                   
                  Ieſuits
                  
are iolly fellowes to cap crownes, to canton kingdomes and to crown Kings with ambitious Pamphlets in their hearts, A. C. let. p. 20.
                   and, in ordine ad daemonem, aemulantes ſtill chariſmata peſsima, they buſie themſelues in diſpoſing and depoſing of Crownes and Scepters, betraying one Nation over vnto the hands of another, and all this in Ieſus name.
            
            
               The 60. Propoſition. Traitors.
               THere is A. C. let. p. 11.
                   an expreſſe charge of Chriſt to all ſubiects, reddere quae ſunt Caeſaris, &c. as alſo the ingenerate law of all men to bee loyall to their Countrey: and yet the Ib. pag. 11.
                   
                  Ieſuits proued no leſſe infeſt foes againſt the late Princeſſe and Countrey, then Spaine it ſelfe was at that time, and ſuch as laboured nothing more, then to betray that ſweete portion, this ſweete plot, our Country to Spaine, a meere forraine and Moriſco nation. To this end Quodl. pag. 1.
                   there was caſting of Plots for their purpoſe and moſt advantage, aſwell by plauſible perſwaſions, in paſſages of ſpeech, as alſo by countermined platformes in practicall conſpiracies, for elſe whereto tended A. C. let. p. 64.
                   a Blanke importing treaſon, wherevnto many were requeſted to ſubſcribe Ib. pag. 69.
                   their new Spaniſh Doleman, to which day for the delay of it, they giue the daily pox, A Dialogue betwixt a ſecular Prieſt and a Lay Ieſuit. pag. 93.
                   their treaſonable plots, for ſurprizing the Lady Arbella, for ſolliciting Earle Ferdinando to riſe againſt her Maieſtie, for entertaining Yorke, and Yong in the plot for firing her Maieſties ſtorehouſes, and to flie with ſhips and all into Spaine? &c. And the like in Scotland.
                  
For by A let. of A. C. pag 8.
                   their doctrine of Prince-killing, 
                  Quodl. p. 85.
                   haue they not enioined one for penance to murder his Soveraigne, and doe they not hold it for ſound doctrine, that Quodl. p. 111.
                   if one of them be commanded to murther an annointed Prince he muſt doe his endeavour, and none hath beene wanting, as Letter of A. C. pag. 92.
                  lately enough in the murther of the laſt French king, and latelier might haue beene ſeene in the now H. the 4. afterwards murdred alſo. regnant, & in our own deare Soveraigne, ſundry times by the Ieſuiticall hand, had not Gods hand beene the ſtronger, Ib. pag. 26.
                   Three or foure of them were eſteemed Martyrs in Englād; but they died rather to their ſhames, for their ſinnes, than to Gods glory, & A dialogue betwixt a ſecul. Prieſt and a lay gentleman in the Preface. if her Maieſtie and the State would take them at the worſt, they might all bee iuſtly condemned for erroneous and traiterous perſons. Quodl. p. 321
                   For out of the Jeſuits docttrine, certainely there is nothing elſe but treacheries, treaſon, and conſpiracies, and hence Quodl. p. 121
                   it muſt needes followe, that there is not a Ieſuit in all England, but hath a ſmacke of impietie, irreligioſitie, treacherie, treaſon, and Machiavillian Atheiſme: and Ib. pag. 112.
                   it cannot be, but as long as there is one Ieſuit left in England, there wilbe mutinies, treaſon, conſpiracies and factions, do what Pope, or Prince, or any other is able to do, or ſay to the contrary. Ib. pag. 153.
                   All their plots and conſpiracies (wherof I am fully perſwaded there are a great many yet lie hidden and vnknowne) tend herevnto: this is it that Ib. pag. 11.
                   makes their bookes ſo full of plots, exaſperations and conſpiracies againſt the Church and common weale,Ib pag. 38.
                   that cauſes their mony to fly ſo faſt over the Ocean, (A dialogue betwixt a Secul. Prieſt and a Lay Gentl. pag. 112.
                   two thouſand pounds intercepted in one yeare going over) to prepare for an invaſion, for an exploit in

time to come. But how hath God favored theſe A let. of A. C. pag. 70.
                   prevaricators, Quodl. p. 196
                   
                  Phariſees, and Conſpirators againſt God and their country,Ib. pag. 47.
                   theſe maſſacring butcherlie buyers and ſellers of their deare countrymens bloud? Ib. pag. 145.
                   Their hopes of the Engliſh Nation were vaine, Ib. pag. 264.
                   and their Catilinian coniurations and conſpiracies were not ſanctified, nor bleſſed by the hand of God; A let. of A C. pag. 29.
                   Gods hand was ever the ſtronger, and to conclude Quodl. p. 263
                   their evill ſucceſſe ſhewes, that God was not pleaſed with them.
            
            
               The 61. Propoſition. Murderers of Kings, Popes, Cardinals, &c.
               
                  Quodl. p. 295.
                   THe Ieſuits and their ſeditious faction, do broach & publiſh ſuch a kinde of doctrine, that ſubiects are no longer bound to obey wicked Princes in their temporall Lawes and commandements, but till they be able by force of armes to reſiſt them. A moſt dangerous doctrine, & moſt vnfit to be publiſhed in this age. Ib. pag 262.
                   By this doctrine the Ieſuits murdered Henry the third, and writ a diſcourſe againſt him de iusta abdicatione, H 3. as if it had beene hatched in hell, Ib. pag. 311.
                   practiſed againſt divers kings in France, 
                     Ib. 311. defeated the Polonian of his kingdom, and Ib. here in England haue ſought to compaſſe their wicked purpoſes by Norfolke, Stukely & Saunders. 
                  Ib. pag. 262.
                   For all which and many mo traiterous practiſes, the Ieſuits are at this day an odious & deteſtable Generation. But though they ſeeke to murder wicked Princes and Ib. pag 228.
                   propoſe rewards to ſuch as kill tyrants: yet it may be they will ſpare Popes, Cardinals, & Biſhops: ſurely no; A. C. let. p. 26
                   they grow as bad as bad may be, namely to the outraging of

that which is moſt holy, Quodl. p. 246.
                   and if there be (as there are) ſhrewd ſuſpitions in Rome cōcerning the death of two Popes, two Cardinals, and one Biſhop already, I make no queſtion at all, but that if hereafter, any Pope ſhall croſſe their plots and purpoſes, the Ieſuits wil haue ſuch a figge in ſtore for his Holines, that ſhall do ſo, as no Rubarbe, Angelica, Mithridate, or other medicine or Antidote ſhall expell the venim, poiſon, and infection from his heart; nor any bezar, perle, gold or vnicornes horne, long preſerue his life after it.
            
            
               The 62. Propoſition. In Doctrine they turne all topſie turuie.
               
                  Elies notes vpon the Apologie. Pag. 9. in the Pref. THey plunge themſelues over head & eares into Eccleſiaſticall affaires, with ſuch audacity and obſtinacie, as they haue turned all topſie turvy.
               
            
            
               The 63. Propoſition. By hereticall Poſitions.
               
                  Quodl. p. 321
                   OVt of the Ieſuits doctrine, certainely therein is nothing els but fallacie vpon fallacie, errour vpon errour, one contradiction encountring an other, all nothing. Ib. pag. 100. & Declaratio motunm &c. pag. 29.
                   A Ieſuit mainetained this moſt vile, Atheall, and heatheniſh aſſertion, that one that is not a Chriſtian may be Pope of Rome, and an A. C. let. p. 67.
                   other Ieſuit openly and for ſound doctrine maintained it, firſt to his Auditors in the Schoole, & at this inſtant openly in the Inquiſition doth: viz: non eſt de fide credere hunc Romanum Pontificem eſſe Chriſti vicarium, that it is no

matter of faith to beleeue that this or that Pope of Rome is Chriſts Vicar. Quodl. p. 31.
                   To let paſſe their erroneous doctrin, concerning their Generals infallibilitie of truth, for deciding of matters, their abſurd Paradoxes of Equivocation, Ib. p. 29.
                   The Ieſuits every way in printed Books, in writen copies or Manuſcripts, and moſt of all in privat conference haue taught contrarie to the beliefe of the Romane Church, and therefore, A letter of A. C. p. 40.
                   it is no marvell, if in materiall points of catholike faith, they oppoſe againſt the Angelicall Doctour, and be therefore at this preſent in dighted before his Holineſſe, by the Dominicans in Spaine, for Pelagians, and ſundry other kindes of Hereticks; as alſo for impoſtors, by the Sorboniſts of Paris, and all other French cleargie, as we credibly heare.
            
            
               The 64. Propoſition. By extravagant opinions.
               
                  Quodl. p. 138.
                  NEver was there any religious order that tooke their courſe, that held ſuch phantaſtical, extravagant, exorbitant, irregular opinions, as they do.
            
            
               The 65. Propoſition. Approving of the Stewes.
               
                  D. Bag ſhaws anſwer, pag 20.
                   Fa: Weſton and Archer, charged by Doctor Norden for defending the Stewes 
                  Declaratio matuum, &c. Pag 29.
                   to be lawfull, and very neceſſarie; to be as lawfull, as the Pope himſelfe, as if they had made (as it ſeemeth) a verie league with Hell, againſt truth.
            
            
               
               The 66. Propoſition. Abuſe of Confeſsion.
               
                  Quodl. p. 69.
                   THEY abuſe this ſacred ſeale for the managing of worldly buſineſſes, & herevpon it is reported, that A dialogue betwixt a ſecular Prieſt and a Lay gentleman, pag. 35.
                   the Pope ſent a precept or a decree to the Religious houſes in Rome, thereby prohibiting vnder great penalties, that any ſhould vſe the knowledge of a mans eſtate in the Sacrament of confeſsion, to any Politicke ende or matter in any external affaire whatſoever; but the Ieſuits delayed their obedience herevnto, and ſo they Quodl. p. 85.
                   make confeſſion a cony-catching or couſening tricke or ſlight, to picke a man, or womans purſe; nay to get all their lands by it; and yet (which is more ſhamefull, Ib. pag. 8
                           •
                        .
                   though it ſeeme never ſo ſtrange to heare) they doe ordinarily reveile confeſſions per tertiam vel quartam perſonam, vel ſub incerto nomine.
               
            
            
               The 67. Propoſition. Vſing fond Revelations and Prophecies.
               
                  Quodl. p 123
                   THe Ieſuits, and thoſe of the Familie of loue alike, ſaue only that the Ib. 
                  Ieſuits haue a more plauſible and deceitfull means to deceiue poore ſouls, then any one of the Familie of loue or others. Ib. pag. 244.
                   Theſe new Apoſtles, Illuminats, and extraordinarie Rabbies, haue more neere familiaritie and acquaintance with God, than any other. Herevpon, they take vpon them to Let. of A. C. 24.
                   
                  Prophecie of the changes and deaths of States and Statiſts, (though for the moſt part moſt fooliſh & falſe)

whereby you may ſee, from whence their Illuminations come, and with what holy Ghoſt their familiaritie and correſpondencie is, whereof they ſo much boaſt.
            
            
               The 68. Propoſition. Turne Atheiſts.
               
                  Quodl. p. 300
                   THe doctrine of the Ieſuits, an open way to Atheiſme, and Ib. pag. 113.
                   there is not a Ieſuit, nor a Ieſuits fautour any where to be found, but hath a foule taſt of Atheiſme, either directly perſe, or indirectly, virtute primi & principalis agentis.
               
            
            
               The 69. Propoſition. Are at ſtrife with others.
               
                  A dialogue betwixt a Secul. Prieſt and a Lay Gentl. pag. 83.
                   THere is continuall, bitter ſtrife, betweene them, & the Dominicans in Spaine.
               
            
            
               The 70. Propoſition. Among themſelues.
               
                  Quodl p. 236.
                   THe Ieſuits often at open warres by brawlings, wranglings, contentions & chidings amongſt themſelues, defaming, backbiting ſlaundering, & ſupplanting one another, 
                  Ellies notes vpon the Apol. Pag. 2.
                   what doe I ſay write? Nay, doe ſo calumniate one another, and as it were teare in peeces the fame, name, and good renowne one of the other, and A. C. let. p. 45▪
                     
                   both at Framingham and elſewhere, agree like cat and dogge within it ſelfe.
               
            
            
               
               The 71. Propoſition. Againſt Schoole Divinitie.
               
                  A Dialogue betwixt a ſecular Prieſt and a Lay gentlemā. p. 119
                  ALL our Students, by Parſons and Creſwels means ſet to Poſitiue Divinitie, and not ſuffered to bee Philoſophers, or Scholasticall Divines, 
                  Quodl. p. 278
                   becauſe ſcientia inflat.
               
            
            
               The 72. Propoſition. Men that cannot erre.
               THey ſay Quodl. p 320
                   themſelues that their Societie cannot erre, 
                  Ib. pag. 331.
                   in any act, word, or thought, ſuch Lords, lawleſſe Sirs, and Legifers they take themſelues to be; thinking A let. of A. C. pag 24.
                   their Societie more perfect than a Generall Councell, and talking much Quodl. p. 31.
                   concerning their Generals infallibilitie of truth for deciding of matters; whereby A let. of A. C. pag. 46.
                   you may ſee, how erroneous a Societie theſe Loyolians are, and how no aſſurance it hath at all of the holy Ghoſt, wherein it vaunts it ſelfe equall with the Pope and a generall Councell.
            
            
               The 73. Propoſition. Full of Noveltie.
               
                  Quodl. p. 147
                   THe Ieſuits are wholly ſicke of the faſhions, 
                     Ib. pag 144.147 and muſt needs ſmell, or haue one tricke of innovation or ſingularitie in every thing: for like Ib. pag 
                        
                           •
                        2.
                   newe vpſtart ſquibs, and ſtrange men, all muſt conſiſt of innovations, novelties, and new names amongſt them.
            
            
               
               The 74. Propoſition. Intemperate writings
               
                  A let. of A. C. pag. 4.
                  THe Ieſuits writings are fowle, and full both of intemperance and vntruth. A ſhame that inke and paper, & the preſſe, ſhould be ſo abuſed; for they do A dialogue betwixt a Secular Prieſt and a Lay Gentleman in the Preface. vſe, the moſt odious tearmes, that the Divell or malice is able to invent.
            
            
               The 75. Propoſition. Libellers.
               
                  H
                        •
                      Elyes notes on the Apol. pag 219. & 225.
                  THey blame others for Libells and verie D. Bagſhawes▪ anſwer, p. 24.
                   vnprieſtly Paſquils, & yet write themſelues, H. Elyes notes vpon the Apol. pag. 220.
                   giving Hereticks occaſion of laughter and mocking.
            
            
               The 76. Propoſition. Write much.
               
                  Quodl. p. 71.
                  THe Secular Prieſts write not ſo many bookes as the Ieſuits doe: the reaſon may bee, money makes the preſſe goe, and thereof Ib. pag 38.
                   it cannot bee but they haue infinit treaſure in their hands.
            
            
               The 77. Propoſition. Forbidding others.
               
                  Colletons defence of the ſlaūdred Prieſts pag. 197.
                   PRieſts Bookes accounted hereticall, as in Bulla Coenae Domini, bereft of all manner of helping themſelues, and Quodl. p. 337.
                   it ſtands vpon the Ieſuits to ſuppreſse all writings.
            
            
               
               The 78. Propoſition. Seducers of youth.
               
                  Declaratio motuum &c. in Anglia pag. 84. & 132.
                   THey draw the beſt wits into their Societies, by vndue and wicked meanes, ſo as Quodl. p. 279.
                   the caſe now ſtanding, no Catholicke is to ſend their children or friends thither, for feare A. C. let. p. 40.
                   of banker upting them both in ſpiritual & temporall patrimonies. For Quodlib. pag. 141.
                   they that go or ſend their children, doe either by conſequent caſt themſelues into a voluntarie ſlaverie, as bad as if vnder the great Turke; or elſe they muſt change the true nature of an Engliſh heart, and become traitors or fautors of conſpiracies, againſt their Prince, country, and deareſt friends; and I Ib. pag. 141.
                   conclude by a probable coniecture, there is not one amongſt a 100. that goes to be a Ieſuit, that hath anie true Religious intent in him.
            
            
               The 79. Propoſition. Admit none but rich men into their ſocietie.
               
                  A relation of the faction begun at Wi
                        •
                     bich. pag. 72.
                   THey fawne vpon men of noble birth, eſpecially if they be rich, and inveigle them to ſell all that they haue, and enter into their Societie and likewiſe women are induced by them to become Nunnes: but Elies notes on the Apol. p. 212.
                   none are welcome without mony, or commendations: as for example, A dialogue betwixt a ſecular Prieſt and a Lay Gentlemā p. 121
                   at the college of S. Omers only for children, none can haue place there, vnleſſe he bring with him fortie pound, or fiftie pound, or more; or haue ſome good annuitie to maintaine him. So that you may obſerue Quodl. p. 137.
                   three ſorts of men admitted in their Societie, men of wit

wealthy or worſhipfull, 
                  Ib. pag. 137.
                   ſuch as may bring ſome gaine helpe and means to their further preferment, & advancement here on earth.
            
            
               The 80. Propoſition. Teaching gratis.
               
                  Quodl. p. 69.
                   THeir teaching gratis is dangerous: Letter of A.C. pag. 68
                   For I haue heard of a certaine familiar Ieſuit, who erected a kinde of familie of loue by his night Lectures to his faire femal-auditors, thus in truth Quodl. p. 137
                   they doe not all things gratis, and of pure devotion.
            
            
               The 81. Propoſition. Irreverence to Parents.
               
                  A. C. let. p. 15.
                   THe Catholicke children of either ſex after their becōming Ieſuited, do very ſcandalouſly neglect their filiall duety and reverence to their Parents, and which is worſe, cleane ſet them at naught: ſuch ſwolne and Puritan ſpirits theſe Fathers haue put into them.
            
            
               The 82. Propoſition. Make them worſe and worſe.
               
                  Declaratio motuum &c. p. 129.
                  MEn ſend their children vnto them holy, godlie, peaceable, ſimple, and abounding with the ſpirit of God; but within a ſhort time, they are, God knowes, cleane changed and altered from what they were.
            
            
               
               The 83. Propoſition. They are well followed and favoured.
               
                  Declaratio motuum, &c. Pag. 12.
                   THe Ieſuits haue many, both of the Cleargie & Laitie ſecretly devoted vnto them, & Quodl. p. 123
                   they are brought into ſuch a fooles Paradiſe, that Ib. pag. 122.
                   the people inchanted by them, will not beleeue any thing againſt them. Thus Ib. pag. 78.
                   do they carry poyſon in their tongues vnſeene, and infect all vnknowne that gaze and admire at them: ſed haec eſt poteſtas tenebrarum, but the beſt is, Ib. pag 17.
                   all their fautors are either fooliſh, ambitious, or needy.
            
            
               The 84. Propoſition. Eſpecially by women.
               
                  Quodl. p. 17.
                   AS all Hereſies began with talkatiue women, (
                     Ib. 65. theſe of nature being as flexible to yeeld, as credulous to beleeue) Ib. in the Preface. ſo Silly women more devout than diſcreet, (as alwaies in extreames, either Saints or Devils,) Ib. pag. 39.
                   poore ſoules do mightily dote and run riot after them, Ib. pag. 16.
                   amōg theſe they title tatle, and lull babies a ſleepe, and Ib. in the Pref. the ignorant multitudes of the Ieſuits do vſe moſt women goſpellers, trumpetters of their praiſe, & Ib. pag. 40.
                   with theſe womē-tatlers & women-Goſpellers, the Secular Prieſts are much troubled: but in the end, their fraud will appeare, Ib. pag. 65.
                   whē theſe hot Ladies ſhall lay their hands a little heavier on their hearts, with mea maxima culpa.
               
            
            
               The 85. Propoſition. Do all for gaine.
               
                  
                  Declaratio motuum, &c. pag 10.
                   IT was a graue cenſure of Cardinall Allen concerning the Ieſuits: that they ſought more their owne commodity, than the ſtudents weale, or Gods glorie. A dialogue betwixt a ſecul. Prieſt and a lay gentleman Pag. 115.
                   For they are much moved with temporall commodity, 
                  Declaratio motuum, &c. pag. 23.
                   ſeeke their owne good; and A let. of A.C▪ pag. 20▪
                     
                   their kingdome is wholly of this world. e In their worldly wealth they ſettle like bees in ſoile, Ib. and by reaſon of ſuch their riches, they neglect Gods honour, by preferring their owne before it. Quodl. p. 73.
                   Thus do they diſpoſe of laſt wils of the ſicke, thus loue they to intermeddle with the marriages of many, with their temporall goods, and indeed with al things. Alwaies taking that courſe with all men, that ſomething happen vnto their ſhare; having mindes indeede of nothing▪ but of their owne gaine; and accordingly, A Dialogue betwixt a ſecular Prieſt and a Lay gentleman, in the Preface. all mens fortunes graces favours, and actions whatſoever, ſhalbe evil thought of, which are beneficial to any, with out a commodity to their Societie: and yet nevertheleſſe, Quodl. p. 94.
                   there is no enquiring after their lands, if they doe, this ſhall be their anſwere, mirantur ſuperiores.
               
            
            
               The 86. Propoſition. They get great ſummes of mony into their hands.
               NOw let vs conſider Quodl. p. 315.
                   what huge maſſes of mony, & infinit treaſures the Ieſuits haue every where, in England, and 
                     Ib. pag. 187.186 other Countries, Let. A. C. pag 20.
                   even from the Indies.
                  Ib pag 315.
                   Some one of them hath receaued many thouſand pounds. 
                  Ib. pag. 38.
                   A french Ieſuit reported, that the King of France gained three millions of gold at their expulſion thence; ſo that it cannot be, but Ib. pag 91.
                   they daily and nightly encreaſing their riches, and enriching their Cofers, haue

infinit treaſure in ſtore, for an exploit in time to come; expecting a time no doubt, when to drawe it forth, to their most advantage. Thus, whiles Declaratio motuum ac turbationis in Anglia. pag. 47.
                   other Orders want, the Ieſuits abound: Ib. pag. 85.
                   they vow, and others feele povertie. A letter of A C. pag. 21.
                   They may truly ſay, Domine quin
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      talenta dediſti mihi, ecce alia quin
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      ſuffuratus ſum. Now Ib. pag. 20.
                   if it appeare to all men, that by meanes of ſuch their wealth they trouble all Europe, by ſetting kingdomes at odds, by ſowing of factions whereſoever they come, by ambitioning aboue all Religious Orders in holy Church, queſtionleſſe this will in the end be their deſtruction.
            
            
               The 87.88. Propoſitions. Reſort only to rich mens houſes, and there domineere
               
                  Quodl. p. 36.
                   NO man Maſter of his houſe where they may beare ſwaie and be admitted of: but Declaratio motuum, &c. p. 28.
                   they neglect the poore, and hant only rich mens houſes. For A relation of the faction at Wiſbich. pag. 73
                   they skorne to come to any, but where they may be daintily and coſtly entertained, they looke not after the Cottages of the poore, nor miniſter their helpe to them, be there never ſo much need; Quodl. p. 68
                   but all their reſort (as I haue ſaid) is to Noblemen and Gentlemens houſes, where they domineere over Tenants, children, ſervants, and all.
            
            
               The 89. Propoſition. Build and governe Seminaries.
               
                  The hope of peace, pag. 21.
                   THere are certaine Seminaries in Spaine built by the Ieſuits, which would be better employed in the reliefe of the poore. And H. Elyes notes vpon the Apol. p. 213.
                   the king of Spain
                  
hath ever ſince the yeare 1583 given thē 2000 crowns by the yeare; the payment procured by Father Parſons, ſo Quodl. p. 76.
                   that all the Colleges beyond ſea, are now vnder the Ieſuits tyrannie, as may be ſeene by Ib. pag. 300.
                   the moſt egregious, tyrannicall, vſurpate, intruſiue auctoritie of the Ieſuits, gotten over all the Seminaries at Rome, at S. Omers in Spaine, and at Doway.
               
            
            
               The 90. Propoſition. Take all into their hands
               
                  Elyes notes on the Apol. Pag 34.
                  THe Ieſuits ſeeke to rule the roſt, to haue all men at their becke and commandment, and ſo A relation of the faction at Wisbich. pag. 69
                   miſerais the ſtate of Catholiks in England, that all muſt depend on them. 
                  Quodl. p. 9.
                   As though the fee ſimple of all mens acts, words, and thoughts were in their gift, to raiſe and let fall the price of all at their devotion. And therefore of all Orders Quodl. p. 24.
                   the Capuchins liue beſt with the Ieſuits, becauſe the Ieſuits would willingly haue all, and the Capuchins would willingly haue nothing, but even to keepe ſoule & life together.
            
            
               The 91. Propoſition. Enterdeale with the Civill Magiſtrate.
               
                  Quodl. p. 188
                   THe Ieſuits haue continuall enterdeale with the Civill Magiſtrates, Relation of the faction at Wiſb. pag. 75.
                   with Heretickes, and men of a ſuſpected Religion.
            
            
               The 92. Propoſition. Betraying ſome vnto the Enimie.
               
                  Ib. pag. 79.
                  IT is feared they doe indirectly betray ſome vnto the enimies.
            
            
               
               The 93. Propoſition. Bring others vnto their ends and afterwards ſlaunder them.
               
                  Ib. pag. 78.
                   THe Ieſuits are ſo cruell, as that they haue not only brought many excellent men to a miſerable end, by Ib. pag. 75.
                   driving them into deſperation, and to take ſome miſerable courſe, but haue reproched them after death.
            
            
               The 94. Propoſition. Laying a foule imputation on thoſe that leaue them
               WHen any one leaues their Religion for the better, Quodl. p. 44.
                   they blaze abroad, that the party was once long agoe reiected, and never accounted of amongſt them, but let alone, for that they knewe what end he would make before hand.
            
            
               The 95. Propoſition. All for a Monarchie.
               
                  Quodl. p. 182.
                   THe Ieſuits fiſh for a Monarchie, 
                  Ib pag. 324.
                   & haue at all Chriſtendome for both ſtates Eccleſiaſtical and Temporall: but A relation of the faction at Wisbich. p. 71.
                   eſpecially they challenge a ſpiritual Monarchy over all England, by Ib. pag. 74.
                   right or wrong ſeeking it, ſo that Quodl. p 234.
                   all the Ieſuits aime at one marke, and one courſe, and conceaue one and the ſame generall hope, to haue England a Iaponian Monarchie (as once one tearmed it) or an Apiſh Iſland of Ieſuits.
               
            
            
               
               The 96. Propoſition. Hated of all Orders.
               
                  Quodl. p. 75.
                   THeir Order is mightilie impugned, Ib. al Orders being againſt them.
            
            
               The 97. Propoſition. Their ſpirituall exerciſe.
               
                  A Dialogue betwixt a Sec. Prieſt and a Lay Gentleman, pag 116.
                  THey vſe their exerciſe as a chiefe meanes to catch the Schollers: ſome of their owne Societie much condemning them for it, and A let. of A. C. pag. 61.
                   by the abuſe of this Quodl. p. 83.
                   falſe kind of ſpirituall Exerciſe, they make boot & havocke of Catholicke Eſtates, (for therefore was it deviſed by the Jeſuits thereby to fleece charitable people.) A Dialogue betwixt a ſecular Prieſt & a Lay Gētlemā. p. 116
                   
                  Father Parſons and Father Creſwell, are moſt zealous in this point, theſe are noted for Fiſhers, Piſcatores Patris Generalis, that emploied their wits and labours, to draw vnto them the beſt they could finde every where.
            
            
               The 98. Propoſition. Their Diſcipline in their Colleges.
               
                  Relatio motuum, &c. p▪ 
                     135.
                   THeir Diſcipline is with great ſeverity, many are diſcouraged therewith. Colletons iuſt defence p. 5.259
                   Two cannot ſpeake togither without a third, nor the ſtudents of one chamber recreat their fellowes of an other, A Dialogue betwixt a ſecular Prieſt and a Lay-gentleman, Pag. 121, 112.
                   For they muſt recreat with none, but ſuch as they are appointed vnto. Ib. pag. 122.
                   And in everie companie of Schollars, the Ieſuits haue their Spies, which they call Angeli Cuſtodes, which lie in

wait what they cā heare ſaid, or ſee done by any Schollar, and forthwith carry it to the Superior. Ib. pag. 121.
                   No Scholler can write letters abroad, or receiue any without licenſe and ſurview of the Ieſuits their governours; no not to the fellowes of the ſame College. Quodl. p. 55.
                   There are many like Turkiſh cruelties, eſpecially in enioyning there Schollars penances; ſome for breaking their faſts in a cookes houſe, others for eating a little milke, others for waſhing themſelues: ſome put to pennāce of bread and water, for not asking penances, ſome for ſlipping with their tongues; one violently pulled by the ears for calling a lay-Ieſuit Hermanno that is brother, for Father.
               
            
            
               The 99. Propoſition. Feare a viſitation.
               
                  A Relation of the faction at Wiſbich. pag. 79.
                   THey feare nothing more than to render an account of their dealings, or to heare of their lewdnes.
            
            
               The 100. and laſt Propoſition. Their fall prophecied and wiſhed for.
               
                  Quodl. p. 19.
                   IT is obſerved by men, how Religious Orders haue their periods and times, and againe, Ib. p 74.
                   that at the riſing of every new Order, ſome are raiſed vp to bee a curbe to that Order: this being ſo, (D. Bagſhawes anſwer, pag. 8.
                   as ſome of the Tē
                  porall Magiſtrates haue told the Ieſuits) that Ieſuitiſme from a Serpigo, is become a Gangraena, it muſt therefore be cut of. Quodl. p. 175.
                   For we are perſwaded they will be drawne to ſuch matters, as, a viſum eſt ſpiritui ſancto & nobis, muſt iudicially paſſe in definitiue ſentēce againſt them,

and the A relation of the faction at Wisbich. p. 7.7
                   Pope is to bee entreated to lay the axe to the root of the tree, & cut of this pride of the Societie ſpreading it ſelfe farre and neere. Ib pag. 77.
                   
                  Quodl. p. 188.
                   For vnleſſe a damme bee ſet againſt the ſtreame thereof, the raging courſe will burſt aſunder all bands of honeſtie and modeſtie, and carry away headlong many with the force thereof. It is high time to looke to them, Quodl p. 128.
                   for they are become already incorrigible of any Prince, Prelate, or People, Ib pag. 45.
                   & therefore a heavy deſtruction, ruine and downefall is likely to come vnto their Societie: and ſurely, The Copies of certain diſcourſes, pag 118.
                   their fall without ſome ſpeciall miracle is incurable. Quodl. p. 58▪
                     
                   And they are like enough to be expelled by force, theſe contentions cannot end but with bloud. Ib. pag. 50.
                   For as they liue iuſt Templarlike in all things, ſo Ib. pag. 46.
                   there wilbe a right Templarian downefall. Ib pag. 19.
                   And all ought to aſſiſt to the pulling down of theſe ſeditious, Templarian, Ieſuiticall, Sectaries, and Ib. pag. 316.
                   baniſhing them out of all the Chriſtian world. In the meane time, I conclude with this praier of the Secular Prieſts. Ib. pag. 141.
                   Curſed be that houre, that ever they got entrance into the College, and curſed be the time that ever they ſet foot on Engliſh ground, and a triple curſe vnto them all, that to maintaine their ambition, pride, & ſeditious factions, haue ſcandalized the whole Chriſtian world. Amen faxit Deus.
               
               
                  HEtherto, by Gods eſpeciall providence, we haue made a generall deſcription of the Ieſuits, compriſing their doctrine, diſcipline, policie, faſhion and manner of life; now it remaineth, that by way of Appendix, or for a ſmall concluſion, (becauſe it is a true ſaying, that generalia non probant,) we deſcēd vnto ſome particulars, and come from the Theſis, vnto the Hypotheſis, exemplifying their villanies & impieties by ſome particular inſtances to be given, and for brevities ſake, we will preſent vnto your iudicious eie, the liuely picture of an abſolute Jeſuit, one ſhal anſwere for all; a man of An other equal nay farre aboue that worthy pillar of the Church S. Aug. the Doctor Angelical S. Thomas Aquinas, the moſt ſubtle diſputer Doctor Sco
                           •
                        us is the top of wit. Quodlib. p. 72.
                   incomparable learning, Ch. Pagets anſwere, p. 22.
                   ſuperlatiue knowledge, tranſcendent zeale, for devotion pietie and other good qualities, generally reputed amongſt the vulgar ſort of people, beyond the degrees of compariſon; to wit, Father Robert Parſons, our coūtryman, a Ieſuit, who is 
                     Moſt eſteemed amongſt the Ieſuits for his wiſdome and other good parts.
                     A Dialogue betwixt a Secular Prieſt and a Lay Gentl. pag. 85.
                     
                   thought to haue few perſons like, none before him, in the Practicall, or Speculatiue part, in Poſitiue, or School-Divinity, in State buſineſſes, or Church affaires in what kind ſoever. Now if this man, a Ieſuit, and one of the chiefeſt amōgſt the Fathers of that Society, ſhal be found in the particulars of his life and converſatiō, to haue bin no A dialogue betwixt a Secular Prieſt and a La Gentleman pa
                        •
                      
                     109.
                   Saint nor ſincere honeſt man; but a A. C. let. p. 38.
                   man of the only ſcandall, and turbulence, both to our church and country,Ib. the vnfaithfulleſt, prowdeſt, buſieſt, & vnderminingſt man that liued, Quodl. p. 217
                   a lewder perſon than whom is not: D. Bagſhaws anſwer, pag 3.
                   moſt exorbitant, & diſcompoſed, Quodl. p 109
                   a ſacrilegious baſtard, Ib. pag. 128.
                   baſtardly runnagate, filius populi, filius peccati, filius terrae; Ib. pag. 108.
                   a dangerous Polypragmō, Ib. pag 187.
                   Archſtatiſt, I Colletons defenſe, p. 255.
                   Archdeviſer, Quodl. p. 156.
                   
                  Summus Pontifex, or iudg-paramont on Earth, Ib. pag. 97.
                   impious caitife, Ib. pag. 160.
                   Atheall Stratagemitor,

                  Ib▪ p. 237.
                   buſie-headed; a Ib. moſt diabolicall, vnnatural, and barbarous butcherly fellow,A dialogue betwixt a ſecular Prieſt and a Lay gentleman, pag. 106.
                   exceeding bold, and of great vndertaking, Quodlib. p. 284.
                   an impudent calumniator, Ib. a moſt ſcurrilous traitour, Ib. p 298.
                   like a right Puritan, a Ib. pag. 286.
                   newe Anabaptiſt, or king Iohn of Leyden, 
                  Ib. pag. 237.
                   violator of al laws contemner of all auctoritie, Ib. pag 288.
                   naked of all honeſtie, wiſdome or iudgement, Ib. pag. 237.
                   monopolie of all miſchiefe, Ib. a ſtaine of humanity, an impoſtume of al corruption, a corrupter of al honeſty, Ib. pag. 330.
                   exlegal legifer, Ib. 295.
                   very peremptory, ſly, and ſaucie, impudent, Ib. pag. 242.
                   falſehearted Cataline, a Ib. pag. 129.
                   
                  zoilus, a Timon, an hiſpanized Cameleon, like Ib. p. 130.
                   
                  Proteus, wretched ſeed of Cain, and ſonne of Beliall, 
                  Ib. p. 242.
                   monſter of mankinde, Ib p. 237.
                   worthy the name of a beaſt or a Divel, Ib. p. 242.
                   fitter for hel then for earth, Ib. p. 325.
                   an Anteſignan or immediate fore-runner of Antichrist; and in few, a Ib. p. 121.
                   moſt vnworthy, diſhonorable Prelate: if I ſay al theſe, and ſundrie other bad qualities be to be found compiled togither in one Engliſh Ieſuit, what lewdnes, villanies, miſchiefes and impieties, may wee expect to come from that viperous brood, diſperſed over al the world, and devided into ſo many hundreds of Colleges & thouſands of perſons? Surely, ether this wil be ſufficient to make al ſorts of men to loath their liues, deteſt their māners, and quite abandon their wicked Societie; or els nothing wilbe ſufficient: and it is not to bee doubted, but that Almightie God, who hath a iuſt eie, and a ſure hand, wil in the end (when the meaſure of their iniquities ſhalbe fulfilled) poure out his heavy wrath and indignation vpon them, and recompenſe them their owne vnto the full: ſuch height of pride, muſt needs haue a fal, and ſuch a fal muſt of force be verie grievous, which is occaſioned

by ſo manie foule, enormous, and grievous ſinnes: which that we may learne to ſhunne and avoide, as the Lacedemonians were wont to ſet drunken men before their children, to make them ſee, and ſeeing to deteſt the beaſtlines of that vice: ſo wee will propoſe and ſet before your eies, the picture of Father Parſons a man drūk with the cup of ſpirituall fornications, and long exerciſed in all kind of villanies, that the childe of God may learne to deteſt him, and in him all ſuch blaſphemous wretches, impious brood, and progenie of vipers, if hee wil eſchew iram venturam. 
                  Doctor Bagſhaws anſwere, p. 39.
                   It is reported that diverſe Papiſts heretofore haue gone about to ſet out Parſons life, but we ſee it is not done, wherefore, ſeeing they haue ſurceaſed, whether diſcouraged with the waight or the length of the buſineſſe, I know not, it ſhal not, I hope, proue diſtaſtful vnto any, if the ſame be deſcribed by a Proteſtant, dulie collecting the ſame, like ſo many broken pieces out of diverſe workes of learned Papiſts, whoſe auctorities cannot iuſtly be excepted againſt, as being either eie or eare witneſſes to all that ſhalbe ſpoken, and thus having ſhewed you the cauſe, we come now to ſpeake of the perſon Father Robert Parſons.
               
            
         
         
            
            The life of Father ROB. PARSONS an Engliſh Ieſuit.
            
               THis famous Father Rob. Parſons, was Declaratio motuum, &c. Pag. 58
                borne of meane parentage, infamous from the time that hee was firſt borne, Quodl. p. 109
                vnhoneſtly begot, and baſely borne vpon the body of a very baſe queane; A letter of A. C. p. 38.
                his ſuppoſed father of gentry no better then a Black-Smith, his right father indeed the Pariſh Prieſt, by meanes whereof hee was Ib. pag. 31.
                binominous; ſome times called Quodl. p. 109.
                
               Rob. Parſons, ſometimes Rob. Cowbucke, & ſhould Letter of A.C. pag. 38
                not being baſe borne, haue beene a Prieſt, as altogether Quodl. p. 236.
                illegitimate and irregular; the place where he was borne was Ib. pag. 236.
                called Stockerſey in Somerſetſhire wherevpon he was called the Baſtard of Stockerſey, 
               A.C. let. p. 23.
                a knowne baſtard (for the Ib. diſparages of his birth, not his baptiſme could waſh away;) his parents were ſo Ib. pag. 35.
                poore, that his mother and ſiſter had an annuall almes beſtowed on them, towards their ſuſtenance, who elſe had gon a begging, after his ſuppoſed fathers death. But how meane ſoever his Fathers eſtate was, ſure it is that he was brought vp in his tender yeares vnto the ſtudy of learning and the Arts, and in proceſſe of time (his towardly inclinatiō being more generally known) he was preferred vnto Oxford, and there choſen fellow of Baliol College, where he ſpent his time, partly well, partly ill. Well, D. Bagſhawes anſwer, p. 33.
                for he profeſſed himſelfe a Proteſtant, & that with ſuch affectation, as he dealt with Mr Squire for direction in the ſtudy of Divinitie, and conferred

ordinarily in the reading of Calvin, with Now a religious and Reverend Doctor of Divinitie. 
               Mr Hide, a fellow in the houſe, a knowne Calviniſt; but otherwiſe learned, and a very morall gentleman; and he was ſo eagar in promoting the Religion then Ib. pag. 34.
                profeſſed, that being Burſar he disfurniſhed the College Librarie, of many ancient bookes and rare Manuſcripts, & in their ſteed, brought in a number of Proteſtant Books, the firſt that were ever there▪ and laſtly his Quodl. p. 21
                        •
                     
                  
                reſolution was ſuch for his conſtancie in this Religion, that hee proteſted to one Iames Clarke, his old ſchoolefellow then abiding in the Inner Temple, who doubted his Religion, that hee neither then was, neither ever ment to be a Papiſt, and offered to take an oath for aſſurance of the ſame. Furthermore, his Morall converſation and diſcipline was ſuch, and ſo ſtrict, that hee would haue D. Bagſhawes anſwer, pag. 33.
                puniſhed one of his owne Pupils and Schollars (A briefe Apol. pag. 144.
                whereof being the ancienteſt fellow of the College ſaue one, of Noblemen and Gentlemens Sonnes and kinſmen he had aboue 20 at one time) to this day both very vertuous & learned, for going to a play. In like ſort, D. Bagſhawes anſwere, p. 36.
                he wēt about to bring ſeven or eight in danger, for taking, after the faſhion of ſchollars, certaine puddings from a Pupill of his.
            Hetherto he behaved himſelfe very well, but marke what followed. This his too great ſeveritie was remitted, and his dealing in Oxford in the end Quodl. p. 217
                proved lewd, ſeditious, and wanton, and Ib. ſo infamous was hee there being then Maſter of Arts, that hee was hiſſed out the College with whouts and hobubs, and ringing with bels, and D. Bagſhawes anſwer, p. 34.
                the reſoluteneſſe of the fellowes was ſuch to hee rid of him, that they had provided the toling of the Bell for him, as the manner is for one which is to depart the

world. Declaratio matuum &c. p. 58.
                Thus was he baniſhed Oxford with the great ioy of all men, not for Religions ſake: but for libelling, ſiding, and other lewdnes D. Bagſhawes anſwer, pag. 34.
               True it is he had the favour to reſigne being firſt lawfully expelled; tendring his ſubmiſſion with teares, and promiſe, that he would ever after carry himſelfe in good ſort.
            Now is Mr Parſons put to his ſhifts, and the griefe of this expulſion did ſo farre prevaile with him, that he notwithſtanding his ſolemne proteſtation vnto the fellowes of the College and his old friend of the Temple, packs the A briefe Apol. p. 183.
                next yeare after, over the Sea, to ſtudie in Padua, and the yeare after that, to wit, in the yeare of our Lord 1575. he hies him to Rome, and there enters the Societie of Ieſus: but A.C. let. p. 23.
                now ſee what a thing it is to be a Ieſuit, he ſtaies not long there, but like a forward child putting himſelfe out, he A briefe Apol pag. 183.
                obtaines of Pope Gregory the 13. to be ſent together with F. Campian into England, at the ſute of D. Allen (as was ſaid) in name of all Engliſh Cartholiks who deſired greatly the aſſiſtance of the Ieſuits in that miſſion, where for the furtherance of the Popiſh cauſe, hee was appointed Superiour; this happened in the H. Elyes notes vpon the Apol. pag. 13.
                yeare 1580. Theſe two holy Fathers being ſafely and ſecretly arrived here in England ceaſe not to doe that for which they came, to withdraw men from their allegiance to their true and lawfull Prince, to ſide with the Pope, and the king of Spaine: but their employments were diverſe, according to their ſeverall gifts. Campian excelled in ſpeech, Parſons beſt was in writing▪ the one therefore travelled vp and downe the Country, making his chiefe abode in & about London: the other kept more about the Sea coaſts, and eſpecially

about the parts of The briefe Apol. p. 183.
                
               Suſſex, from whence being diſcovered, he might the more eaſily get into France & ſaue one. For he had well learned our Saviours words when you are perſecuted in one Citty▪ fly vnto another. This precept of our B. Saviour he quickly put in practiſe; for as ſecret as he lay, and as cunning as hee was, in caſting his plots by letters written, and bookes printed, to exaſperate the State yet the Fox was vncaſed, his Letters intercepted, and the Print and Printers which hee had procured for divulging of his Popiſh books: ſo that the next yeare after his firſt arrivall, he was conſtrained to flie into France leaving his fellow labourer to the mercy of the Magiſtrates, into whoſe hands ſhortly after he fell, and by the hands of iuſtice was as he well deſerved ſoone cut of.
            Thus hath our cunning Polititian, that learned coū
               ſeller, Colletons iuſt defence p. 207
                forſaken our Campe, and reſcued himſelfe from our Country perils, and now he begins to cry quit with the State, as well as he could, minding nothing but revenge. His firſt approaches are verball by Quodl p 286.
                ſeditious books, or rather A let. of A.C. pag 49.
                enormous Libels: for example Greencoate, Philopater, his Bookes of Reformation, Admonition, and of Titles. His ſecond attempts Real, by plotting ſecret Treaſons, open invaſions, and laſtly by Quodl. p. 258.
                vrging both Pius 5. and Sixtus 5. to excommunicate the Late Queene, whome not long before as is to bee ſeene in a certaine D. Bagſhawes anſwer, pag. 11.
                Supplication made to the Queene by one Ieſuit for all the reſt, hee tearmes moſt mighty, moſt mercifull, moſt feared, beſt beloved Princeſſe, the ſhot-anchor of all their iuſt hopes, perfect in all Princely duty, Sacred Maieſtie, and what not? with

proteſtation made vnto her, that hee will yeeld and perſwade in conſcience, all Temporall obedience, and take her part even againſt the Popes Armie. Thus wee ſee our Quodl· p. 244.
                
               Ieſuiticall, or rather Ignatian Apoſtle A let. of A. C. pag. 4.
                
               Father Cowbuc beginning to play his priſes, and bathing his hands in bloud, ſitting at the Colletons defenſe, pag. 45.
                ſterne & vnmasking his violent nature, of whom Quodl. p. 237
                
               Cardinall Allen held this opinion, that he was a man very violent, and of an vnquiet ſpirit, and ſaid, that his turbulent head and lewd life, would be a diſcredit to the Catholicke cauſe: and no marvel, if we obſerue either his words, or Actions, how they haue alwaies ſince his interdealings in State affaires, tended to moſt cruell, barbarous, and butcherly deſignements, as by the ſequel of his life ſhal more plainely appeare. And firſt for orders ſake, I intend to note vnto you his diſcompoſed writings, and afterwards his exorbitant or extravagant and lewde Actions, not compriſing al, (for that were impoſſible, & would aske a wider volume;) but comprehending ſome of the chiefeſt in each kinde.
            The Bookes which he compoſed were partly of Religion, partly of State: of Religion, as his Reſolution, &c. of State, as his Green-coat, Philopator, &c. the former ſort were very commendable, and worthy workes indeed, not only in the iudgements of Papiſts but of a very learned and iudicious Proteſtant, who hath publiſhed ſome of them in print, with open profeſſion of ſome ſmall additions, where the Auctor or Tranſlatour rather was found to goe amiſſe: but the later ſort, are condemned by diverſe learned writers in ſundry paſſages of their bookes and nether Proteſtants nor Papiſts haue

allowed them. The beſt and firſt Booke which he writ, and A Dialogue &c. p. 107.
                which won him all the praiſe, was his Booke of Reſolution, which he premiſed and divulged reſpectiuely, as an exordium to all the reſt of his ſeditious Pamphlets, and lying Libels, to breed in mens minds an aſſured opinion of his Religion, pietie, and devotion: and yet not to heap more praiſes vpon him, then he iuſtly deſerues, he was but A let. of A. C. pag 71.
                a Collector, or a Tranſlator at the moſt: Quodl. p. 327
                the Booke not of his owne abſolute invention, but taken out of other Auctors, his praiſe was for wel tranſlating of it, cloſe coutching and packing it vp together in a very ſmooth ſtile, and ſingular good Method; and Quodl. p. 
                     
                        •
                     1.
                alack, alack, (as all men knowe) it is eaſie to lay fine threads together, when they are gathered to a mans hand; and as eaſie to tranſlate a worke almoſt verbatim, out of peece-meale Copies into his mother language. A Dialogue betwixt a ſecular Prieſt & a Lay Gētlemā. p. 107
                The true praiſe, to ſay the truth of this worke▪ was due to Granada, that laid the platforme to Fa. Parſons hand, and gaue him the principall grounds & matter thereof and which alſo was deſerved by Mr Brinckley for the penning, as diverſe report.
            When he Ib. pag. 108.
                had made an end of this Book, he made an end alſo therewith of devotion, ſinceritie, & honeſt dealing. For after the publication of this worthy work, A Dialogue betwixt a Sec. Prieſt and a Lay Gentleman, pag. 95.
                he more beat his braines about State matters, then about the exerciſe of a Religious life, and I
                     •
                  h. Colletons defenſe p 256,
                happy had he beene (as one wiſely obſerues) if his pen had ſtaied here & gon no farther: but when Religion was once wordlefied in him, and that State matters and the deſigning of kingdomes had ſo great a part in his ſtudies,Colletons defence pag 39.
                then he ſhooke hands with all ſhamefaſtneſſe, and bid all truth

and modeſty farewell, and began to furniſh the world with ſundry bookes of State, touching Succeſsion, after the death of the Queene, and Reformation vpon the Conqueſt of this Land, and ſuch like: and ſee the wilineſſe of this Fox, his turnings and windings here & there: theſe Libels, 
               A let. of A. C. pag. 49.
                the contents whereof were wholly infamatory came not forth with his name, or any knowne liverie, he Quodl. p. 286.
                either concealed his name, or gaue thē ſuch names as it pleaſed him to deviſe: for which cauſe ſome Papiſts haue little cauſe to thanke Mas Parſon, and namely Mr Doleman, in whoſe name hee ſet out the Booke of Titles, (notwithanding that hee deteſted the contents of it,) which might haue brought him in great danger. Quodl. p. 71.
                This Booke was ſet forth againſt the whole State, Ib. pag. 107.
               entituling moſt traiterouſly the Spaniſh Infanta, to the Engliſh Crowne; and the Ib. pag. 315.
                king Catholike (as ſome thinke) and ſpare not to ſay) was privie to the ſetting forth of this luckleſſe labour: now this was Parſons policie and forecaſt; if the Booke had beene commended (as it neither was, nor deſerved it) then who but Fa. Parſons ſhould haue beene the Father thereof: Ib. pag. 226.
                but now that many exceptions are taken vnto it, hee good man is not the Auctor of it his name is not Doleman, and gladly hee would ſhift and waſh his hands of it: but all the water betwixt this and Rome, will not ſerue his turne ſo to do, and thus much be ſpoken of his Doleman.
            
            There followes, or rather as ſome thinke goeth before a An anſwere to certaine articles obiected againſt D Biſhop, p. 16.
                railing Booke of one Andrew Philopater, alias Robert Parſons, 
               Quodl. p. 271.
                written in accuſing, or reprooving ſome one, or many of all her Highnes Nobles, and civill Magiſtrates. What opinion trow we, haue the beſt learned

               Papiſts of this Booke? Some hold it, to be Ib. pag. 11.
                a moſt ſeditious, treacherous and infamous Libell, and worthy of Father Parſons, 
               Ib. pag. 284.
                fraught til it almoſt burſt againe with al Ieſuiticall pride and poyſon; An anſwer to articles obiected againſt D. Biſhop p. 16.
                ſome to be a moſt vnpure and loathſom booke againſt the State, take one example for all: in this Philopater, the Quodl. p 295.
                Auctour very peremptory, ſlie, and ſaucie (as his manner is,) very bold lie affirmeth, that when kings do deflect from the Catholike Religion, and draw others with them, Liberos eſse ſubditos &c: poſse
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   & debere (ſi vires habuerint) huiuſcemodi hominem dominatu eijcere. I wil not Engliſh the words, for very ſhame.
            Let vs go on forwarde to the examination of ſome of his other Bookes. Was not his Quodl. p. 11
                
               Greencoate, alias his Leyceſters Common wealth a famous booke? Yes verely, as Bookes in the Law are called, famoſi Libelli. For it was an A. C. let. p. 49.
                inormous Libell, written againſt one of the Peeres of this Land? Wherein the Malapert or Reſolute Ieſuit keepes his old wont, to reſolue vs peremptorily, that a Quodl. p. 316
                different Religion, is a barre to inheritāce.Ib. pag. 266.
                He might haue left ſuch ſcoggerie, as he hath ſet out in this Book, to Tarleton, Naſh, or els to ſome Puritan Mar-prelate, or other like companions.
            Next followes his Booke of Reformation, which vnder reformation, was Colletons def. p. 294.
                
               Father Parſons Babell, that is, his caſtle in the aire, wherein he preſcribes Rules to al Eſtats: here you ſee, he is no changeling, the ſame man that he was before; or rather growne more audacious and impudent, and wel he might, conſidering that theſe orders Quodl. p. 92
                were begunne in their deepe Ieſuiticall Court of Parliament at Stix in Phlegeton, and ſuggeſted thence into Father

Parſons ſconce, being ended and compiled into a full and complete volume, by him and his Generall, intituled, The High Court of Reformatiō for England. Wherin are ſundry wiſe Acts contained. Amongſt the reſt, that the Ieſuits & Capuchins only ſhould liue there, that Ib. pag. 289.
                Biſhops muſt be Penſioners, Ib. pag. 92.
                
               Abbey-lands thus & thus diſpoſed: he alſo hath his Legem Agrariam, limiting the Nobilitie and Gentry how much they ſhould ſpende, with a number of the like ſenſeleſſe fooleries, al which I willingly let paſſe, and come to the reſt of his ſeditious Bookes, as his Admonition and Appendix.
            
            For the former of theſe, Quodl. p. 247
                
               Don Lucifer the wittieſt Fiend in Hel, could not haue written more ſpitefully, & Ib. pag. 284.
                ſo that all poſteritie, cannot chooſe but condemne him for a moſt ſcurrilous Traitour, and had he beene brought vp amongſt all the Ruffians, and Curtizans in Chriſtendome, he could not haue learned to haue writ more vilely, prophanely, and heatheniſhly: for the later, to wit, his Appendix, the Ib. pag. 107.
                
               booke was impudentlie fathered on Cardinall Allen after his death, being hatched by the vnnatural heat of his ambitious hart, wherin Ib. pag. 218.
                the Arch-Statist, preſumes to cal his learned Maieſtie that now is king of great Brittaine, and then was of Scotland, obſtinate Hereticke. Who ſo bold they ſay as blind Bayard, he feares no colours, hath no ſhame, or conſcience what he writes, ſo he write with an invectiue humour, as hath beene largely proved already.
            Wherefore, having viewed, examined, and reexamined his Bookes and Writings, we will now enquire farther after his life and converſation; for as the Poet ſaid, a man may chance to write a lewd Booke, which is a ſober

honeſt man. But was he ſo! ſo was Don Lucifer, and al the Fiends in Hell, from whom this man ſeemed to be deſcended in the right line, giving occaſion to diverſe, by Quodl. p. 239.
                his ſoule, enormous, and diveliſh life, to think that he was not a meere man; but ſome Fairies brat, or begotten by an Incubus, or aeriſh ſpirit, vpon the bodie of a baſe woman. Shew me that Treaſon, treacherie or noted villanie, wherein Parſons had not a hand, a heart, and a head? name that vice, whatſoever it be, lying, cooſening, forgerie, periurie, craft, hypocriſie, diſſimulation envie, pride, covetouſnes, vaine-glory, backebiting, ſelfe-loue, crueltie, murders and oppreſſions, ambition, hereſie. Atheiſme, whereof he was not guilty in the higheſt degree? Speake you holy Prieſts of a ſacred function, that knew him beſt, and lived longeſt with him, ſpeake boldly and ſhame not, to tel him roundly of his faults. We wil deſcend vnto ſome few particulars, in order as they ſhal lie, moſt convenient for our purpoſe, and firſt of his foule conſpiracies, treaſonable plots, & plottings of Treaſon. You wil ſay, perhaps it is not good rubbing that ſore any more, it hath beene touched alreadie to the quicke, I confeſſe it hath beene ſo, but in a different kinde; For, it is one thing to write, an other to act treaſons; Parſons is guilty of both; of the former, there is little doubt, by that which is ſpoken: and of the later leſſe, by that which now followeth, by way of evident demonſtration.
            To proue that Father Parſons; was no leſſe a traitour in action, then in writing, firſt we ſhew (and can proue that we ſay, with a wet finger) that he gaue his Colletons deſ. p. 240.
               concurrence, & furtherance to a forraine invaſiō here in England,

               Quodlib. p. 257.
                ſought to indanger his Maieſties perſon by the Scots, 
               A Dialogue &c. p. 129.
                ſet his reſt vpon the hopes of Spaine, 
               A relation of the faction at Wisbich. p. 75.
                procured himſelfe to be the kings ſervant, practiſed with the Quodl. p. 306.
                ſtudents there, and diverſe others to giue their names to a Charter of ſubſcription; firſt 
                  Ib. p. 209.210 prophecied, and promiſed vnto himſelfe good ſucceſſe, and then tooke vpon him with his Ieſuiticall Plotcaſters, to be an Actor, an orator or a broker, in labouring to bring that prophecie to an effect, and rather then it ſhould faile, to be the bloudie inſtrument to worke it of his owne head. Againe, who is A Dialogue &c. pag. 110.
                it that cauſed the Seminaries in Spaine, and S. Omers to be erected, and that The briefe Apol. p. 24.
                alone, procured 2000 crownes a yeare penſion more, for the College at Doway, though he deſerved ſmall thanks for his labour, conſidering the decay of Students at Rhemes, and Lovaine? Father Parſons. Who was it, that A briefe Apol pag. 183.
                procured, that the firſt forme of oath now vſed▪ was brought into the Roman Seminarie, and after that example, by himſelfe, into the Seminaries of Spaine, whereby al promiſed, to take holy orders, and returne into England, when they ſhould be appointed by their Superiors? Father Parſons. Who was it, that The Copies of certain diſcourſes, pag 123. & the Anſwer of D. Bagſhawe, p. 13.
                vſed perſwaſion at Rome to the Students there, that they ſhould haue at State and al: for which State-medling, they could but die, and dy they ſhould if they were taken without State-medling? Father Parſons. 
               Quodl. p. 218
                Who is it, that vpon a Luciferian pride, durſt preſume to cal the king of Scots an obſtinate hereticke, and the French king a reprobate, of God forſaken? Father Parſons. Who is it that Copies of certaine diſcourſes p. 114.
                chopped and changed the crowne of England 8. or 9. ſeveral times, as it pleaſed him, playing with it, as little boies ſport themſelues with king by your leaue, the

great ones every hand while crying, a New King, a new, and in the end ſet it to ſale: wherevpon,A let. of A.C. pag. 43.
                a certaine Romiſh gentleman, affixed a briefe Libell vpon Paſquines buttock, in diriſion and ſcorne of him. If Colletons iuſt defence p. 241.
                there bee any man, that will buy the kingdome of England, let him repaire to a Merchant in a blacke ſquare cap, in the Citty, and hee ſhall haue a very good penny-worth thereof? Was not this F. Parſons? ſo then, the premiſes duly conſidered, we may ſafely conclude, that Quodl. p. 237
                this is that ſame Parſons, 
               Ib. pag 211.
                whome all the Realme, Ib. p. 237.
                
               Prince and Peeres, with all true Engliſh hearts, haue cauſe to curſe, hate, & ſpit at, and ſo an end of that matter.
            Now as his predominant, and moſt exorbitant qualitie was Treaſon, ſo was he deepely learned, and in a ſhort time a great proficient, in ſundry other qualities, belonging to the Divels craft: as firſt, for truth, in him there was none, An anſwere vnto the particulars againſt D Biſh
                     •
                  p p. 3.
                
               Qui poſuit mendacium ſpem ſuam, profeſſing the Art of lying, and vſing Ib pag. 17.
                tricks, as in adding, diminiſhing, equivocating and ſubintelligiturs, to ſerue his turne, for you muſt note by the way, that Quodl. p. 286.
                Equivocation is the Divels Sophiſtrie, and the common principle of the Ieſuits, and Quodl. p. 257.
                he is not ſcarſely to be accounted a Ieſuit, that cannot lie▪ diſſemble, and equivocate at every word; theſe be the Ib. pag. 239.
                
               Aphricanian Phalanges, and Ieſuiticall forces. Hence it is, that Ib. p. 150.
                
               Cameleon like, he hath banded of, and on with time, like Protheus, and in truth Ib. p. 330.
                neither Protheus in his complements, nor the Sea Euripus in his Croſſe tide Ebbes and flowes, for his inconſtancy of old, hath beene held more infamous, then E. Parſons.
            
            Yet he had a worſe fault then all theſe, and that is▪ he

incurred the hateful crime of forgerie taking vpon him Copies of Certaine diſcourſes p. 124.
                to thruſt in and out for his purpoſe, as if hee had had Colletons def. pag 39.
                a diſpenſation granted, to forge at his pleaſure. Ib. pag. 77.
                Hee was ſhrewdly miſtruſted, to haue added or altered ſomwhat in Bellarmines Letter, hee did alter the ſentence of the two Cardinals, Caietan and Burgheſio. 
               Copies of certaine diſcourſes pag. 124.
                Corrupted the Regiſters, and Records at Rome, and hee D. Bagſhawes anſwer, pag. 34.
                was charged in Oxon amongſt very many things, with forgerie by one Stancliff his fellow Burſar: theſe wee thought good to note by the way, for a taſt of ſome of his forgeries in leſſer matters, Quodl. p. 31.
                but hee might haue come in danger, to haue beene degraded, and ſet on the pillarie, for forgerie, not in ſmall matters, or privat actions; but in points of as high importance, as are Crownes and kingdomes, or Iuriſdiction Apoſtolicall and ſupreame.
            From forgerie he fell to flat couſenage, and Collet. def. p. 151.
                being invred with the trade of deviſing ſhifts, hee proved in the end an Quodl. p. 149
                Arch-couſener, a Ib. pag. 244.
                falſe-hearted Catelin, the A.C. let. p. 38.
                vnfaithfulleſt man that lived, the time will not permit me to produce many examples: Ib. pag. 64.
                Hee detained in his hands a legacie, which Sir Fr. Inglefield gaue, and Quodl. p. 306.
                couſened Mr Middleton Prieſt, of 300. pounds at leaſt in Spaine, and handled him roughly when he had done; and laſtly, A relation of the faction begun at Wi
                     •
                  bich. pag. 52.
                being come to Rome, in the midſt of all his Machiavillian plots, vnder pretence of compounding the ſtirres in that Seminary, he ſo dealt, as in a very ſhort time, by couſening the Rector, he got the place for himſelfe.
            Thus couſening diverſe, in the end, he grew famous for all kind of cunning and Policies, and he Quodl. p. 107
                was generally reputed to be ſo politicke, that who was in requeſt

with Popes, Cardinals, and other States, but Fa. Parſons 
               I Colletons defenſe, p. 39.
                had the office of Informerſhip in the Engliſh affaires, aswell in Spaine as at Rome, 
               Ch. Pagets anſwer. p. 22.
                had and did place diverſe of his Agents in Honorable houſes, and elſewhere, as his ſpies; to make ſecret relation vnto him, of al that paſſed in their houſes▪ nay rather then faile, he Quodl. p. 21
                        •
                     
                  
                offered himſelfe like an impudent baſe fellow, to be a ſpie; ſo that it Ib. pag. 9
                        •
                     .
                is doubted, whether Mr Nicholas Machiavell, or Fa. Rob. Parſons excelled one the other in Policie; for he is now become that Ib. pag. 237.
                learned counſeller, that muſt rule, ruffe, and range through every eſtate, but with all it Colletons defenſe, pag. 64.
                was wiſhed, that his policie would redound more, to the good of Church and Commonwealth. Now is Father Robert where he would be, Collet. def. pag 45. & 54.
                ſitting at the ſterne, & governing all, or the chiefeſt Colleges in Rome, and (an Ib. pag. 64.
                overruling humour raigning in him) he ſeekes to bee our great Ib pag. 31.
                
               Maſter and to rule all both at home and abroad, Quodl. p 236
                exempts himſelfe from controlement of any Superiour, and as a Collet. def pag 152.
                
               Vicepope, or rather, as Sūmus Pontifex, or Quodl. p. 156.
                
               Iudge Paramount on earth, vnder the Divell in Hell, Ib. pag. 236.
                commands all others, as Actor independent of any, to act all his actions, Cop. of certain diſcourſes, p. 77.
                without whom, no Engliſh Ieſuit dares doe any thing, for he Quodl. p. 304.
                raigneth, & hath the whole direction for all the Miſsions that are in England 
               Collet. def p. 130.
                vaunting himſelfe of the command he holdeth there (it is ſpoken from report of an eie and eare witneſſe) aſwell over many of the Laitie, as of the Cleargie; & ſurely A letter of A. C. p. 23.
                he was a very proper perſon, to carrie ſo great a tail after him, as he did at that time in England: but let this which hath been ſpoken, 
                  〈◊〉
                to note vnto the world, Ch. Paget
                     •
                   anſwere, p. 23.
                his ambitious deſire of directing and commaunding

both private perſons, Prelats, and Princes, and vnleſſe he coulde obtaine it, there was nothing but warre with him.
            This great auctority, which this Quodl. p. 318.
                preſumant Scribe tooke vpon him, made him no little prowd and vaine-glorious with all: it was obſerved by wiſe men, that hee A.C. let. p. 38.
                was the prowdeſt man that lived, and his Quodl. p. 341.
                ſtrength did ſo much conſiſt in vaine glorie, that hee writ Collet. def. pa. 297.
                no Booke, Diſcourſe, nor ſcarſe any letter againſt the Prieſts, wherein he doth not make mention of the Colleges he erected, or recount ſome other good act of his owne. Amongſt many the man is thought to be ill neighboured, in that he is thus driven to praiſe himſelfe and few do thinke it religious modeſty, to farce bookes with their owne commendations, but Quodl. p. 218.
                a ſhame of the Divel and al Hypocrits, and Phariſees, he had Panegyries of his praiſes and pieces ſhot of, to make report of his learning, his vertue, his prudence, his government, his piety, his charity, his conſtancie and I know not what. Some of his claw-backes haue made Quodl. p. 72.
                him equal, nay farre aboue that worthy Pillar of the Church S. Auguſtine, the Doctor Angelicall S. Thomas of Aquine, the moſt ſubtill diſputer Doctor Scotus, being not worthy to holde the candle before the meaneſt of any of all theſe, or ſundry other farre their inferiours. But, to giue the Divel his due, he was at the firſt, before he grew to bee Quodl. p. 336.
                an abſolute Stateſman, Paramont, Paregal, peremptorie, ſundry waies wel qualified, both for writing & ſpeaking; but partly, A Dialogue &c p. 132.
                his policies in Temporall matters, blinded his iudgement 
                  〈◊〉
                
               
                  •
               piritual, partly, he Quodl. p. 237.
                loſt his good ſpirit by ambitious 
                  ••
               rts aſpires, and grew afterwards

ſo vnable a man, to ſpeake or write of any Prieſtlie, or religious matter, as a very Reverend Prieſt reported, that he never heard a meaner Sermon made beyōd the Seas, than he heard of Father Parſons, and that his words and writings, for edifying, or giving any good inſtruction, and ghoſtly counſell, were as barren, bare, and farre from his former abilities on that behalfe, as if he had beene before Robert Parſons the Ieſuit, and nowe poore George Parſons the wayward foole his brother.
            This might haue ſerved to Quodl. p 218.
                pul down his Peacocks plumie-heart, and to ſlake Ib. pag. 241.
                the vnnatural heate of his ambitious harts aſpires; but Parſons muſt be Parſons ſtil, who like a true Ib. pag. 108.
                
               Wolſey in ambition, never left, til he had purchaſed his owne diſcredit, and as Woolſey being once a Cardinal, would faine haue beene a Pope: ſo Father Robert, of a Ieſuit would willingly haue contented him ſelfe to haue beene made a Quodl. p. 150
                
               King Cardinall. Wherevpon, when it was knowne to his friends that he Letter of A.C. pag. 23
                ambitioned the Cardinalate, Worthington and Father Holt, cauſed a petition to be made to the king of Spaine, by boyes and girles at S. Omers: effectuall Cop of certain diſcourſes. p. 127
                letters are written to the Pope, Parſons himſelfe goes to Quodl. p. 141
                
               Rome on pilgrimage in the yeare of our Lorde 1597. being come, is viſited preſently with two Cardinals at his lodging, Baronius, & a Spaniard, ſpeech in the cittie that he ſhould be Cardinall, ſo rife, that being ſicke, and in his ſicknes willed to weare ſcarlet, he ſent to his Brother for a ſtomacher, who dreaming of nothing but of his Brothers advancement, procured two Merchāts to carry in a whole waggon, loden with diverſe re
                  ••••
               eces of ſcarlet, for his red robes: but as God would haue it hee ſcaped the Cardinalſhip,
               
and got the canvaſe; and yet like a craftie Foxe, gaue it out,Cop. of certain diſcourſe, p. 127
                that both he, and the Generall of the Ieſuits, yea, and all the friends that they could make, in the Court of Rome, were little enough to keep him from being a Cardinall.
            
            Thus we haue ſeene pride haue a fall, and our ſecond Wolſey begin to waine, wherevpon Quodl. p. 129
                he grew a zoilous Timon, of an envious emulatiō, at the reverend eſteeme of others, and Ib. pag 280.
                what the malice of the Divell or wit of his foule inſtrument could poſſibly bring to paſſe, is effected; his Ch. Pagets anſwer, p. 75.
                turbulent, ſeditious, and irreligious head and heart are a working. For he was ever Colletons iuſt defence p. 176
                accounted contentious, and Declaratio motuum &c. pag. 58
                given to ſtirres, factions, and ſeditions, even whiles he was an hereticke. Ib. pag. 58.
                what banglings had he with Creſwell, Scot, Gibbons, Holt Engliſh, Alphonſo an Italian, and a number more of his Societie? What contētions had he with Reverend Biſhop of Caſſana, with Doctor Barret Preſident of the College at Doway, with Gifford with the Reverend Prieſt Mr Middleton, with manie others of qualitie and due reſpect.
            And as he had a ſpecial gift An anſwer to articles obiected againſt D. Biſhop p. 18.
                in canvaſing and wrangling; ſo Declaratio motuum, &c. Pag. 73
                  ▪
                in detractions and calumniations (which are neighbour vices,) he was exceedingly well verſed. Wee need ſay no more, Quodl. p. 130
                he was the moſt impious detractor on Earth, that ever lived, Ch. Pagets anſwer, p. 23.
                from whom nothing came but detractions, calumnies, and ſclaunders, the Quodl. p. 341
                beſt weapons the Ieſuits haue to defend themſelues, and wound their oppoſits Colletons def. p. 168.
                in the ſpeedingſt place they can. Laſtly to draw to an ende, becauſe I haue dwelt too long vpon this vnfortunate ſubiect, Quodl. p. 237.
                the generall conceit of all that haue ever throughly converſed with him

is this, that he is of a furious, paſſionate, hot, chollerick, exorbitant, working humour, buſie-headed, and full of ambition, envie, pride, rancour, malice and revenge, wherevnto through his latter Machiavillian practiſes, may be added, that he is a moſt Diabolicall, vnnaturall, and barbarous butcherlie fellow, vnworthy the name; nay curſed be the houre wherein hee had the name of a Prieſt, nay of a Religious perſon, nay of a Temporall Lay-man Ieſuited, nay of a Catholick, nay of a Chriſtian, nay of a human creature: but of a beaſt, or a Divel, a violatour of al Laws, a contēner of al auctoritie, a ſtaine of humanitie, an impoſtume of all corruption, a corrupter of all honeſty, & a Monopolie of all Miſchiefe. Thus haue you briefly the life of Father Robert Parſons, the Ieſuit, faithfully collected out of the Relations of ſundrie Reverend Prieſts, who (as I truſt) make a conſcience of lying, and deteſt from the bottome of their harts that abſurd, and hitherto vnheard of doctrine of diſſimulation, Equivocation and hypocriſie: if their report bee true (as I am in conſcience perſwaded it is for the moſt part) then wo worth the Ieſuits, and principally Father Parſons, whom they haue arrained of ſo many treaſons, petty Treaſons, Felonies, villanies & I know not what: if falſe, they which are ſo fowly miſtaken, in matters of fact, how may they ſafely be truſted in a matter of faith which concernes the loſſe or gaine of a mans ſoule? For my part, though I do rather incline vnto the Prieſts, thā vnto the Ieſuits, as ever taking them to be the farre honeſter men: yet ſeeing Will W
                     ••
                  ſon Prieſt, executed for high treaſon at Wincheſter. one of the chiefeſt of them, which was accounted whiles he was living A let. of A. C. pag. 35.
                a very Eccleſiaſticall Macchabe againſt the Spaniard, 
               Ib pag. 39.
                a bleſſed

confeſſor towards God, and a good Patriot for his Country, whoſe Ib. pag. 35.
                integritie & confidence of his heart was ſuch (as was reported) that it was never but with the right; who made this Quodl. p. 350.
                ſolemne proteſtation in his Bookes, that not all the Art that either the Divell, or the Puritans, or Ieſuits haue, ſhould bring him within the compaſſe of a treaſonable or treacherous thought, againſt God, his Soveraigne, or the Commonwealth of this land: but in life and in death he would by Gods grace bee as loyall a ſubiect, as any the Engliſh ſoile affords, then the which none more loyall to their Prince in any nation to be found: who to manifeſt his farther hatred of Treaſon, and his loyaltie to his Prince and Country, writ an Antiperiſtaſis to Parſons Doleman, and conceaved the forme of an Oath I W.W. doe from the bottome of my heart, plainely and ſincerely, without all Equivocation or doubling, profeſſe and ſweare, that I will never giue eare to that bloudy doctrine of depoſing kings, or diſpoſing of kingdomes for hereſies ſake, and that were our nūber and ſtrength much more & greater then her Maieſties, I will never be perſwaded or drawne, either by threatnings or promiſes of any (be it the Pope himſelfe) to beare armes againſt her Highneſſe, to the deſtruction of her Royall perſon & State: but I will be ready to aduenture my goods and 
                     •
                  ife in her Maieſties defence, againſt him or any other, that ſhall aſſaile, or invade by hoſtile hand hir State and kingdome, vnder pretence of reſtoring the Catholike faith, or whatſoever; and farthermore I doe proteſt for my ſelfe, that I doe lothe and deteſt this point of doctrine, that Princes heretickes may be depoſed or put from their kingdoms, with patience and ſufferance expecting, and in the meane time obaying in things Temporall her Maieſtie, as my lawfull Soveraigne▪ evermore retaining an Engliſh reſolution for my natiue Prince, State, and Country, and reſolutely intending (God aſſiſting me with his Grace, ſo to remaine conſtant, loyall, ſerviceable, and faithfull vnto the death, ſo helpe me God, &c. Quodlib. pag. 304.305.346. & 351. in effect the ſame with the Oath of Allegiance which was afterwards enacted in Parliament, to diſtinguiſh the loyall from the diſloyall Papiſts: ſeeing I ſay, this Reverend and loyall Prieſt, was within few yeares after, indicted, convicted, and executed for high Treaſon againſt his Soveraigne, I could wiſh that all ſuch as religiouſly feare God, & honor their

Prince, from the bottome of their hearts would conſent to beleeue nether nother. For queſtionles as long as both Prieſts and Ieſuits doe conſtantly maintain this abſurd Paradox and blaſphemous doctrine, as a ſolid & certaine Article of their faith, that the Pope is the onely Prelat, that cannot erre, in deciding a controverſie or doubt in faith and Religion, and that all the world elſe may erre in deciding of ſuch doubts: Princes cānot reſt ſecure of their ſubiects, nor the ſubiects certaine of performing their obedience either to God or their Soveraignes. For example; the king cōmands his ſubiects to take the Oath of Allegiance, God forbiddeth his ſervants the Worſhipping of Images: there are many honeſt Papists in this land, I nothing doubt, that of themſelues are in conſcience ſo fully perſwaded of the truth of both theſe precepts, as well the affirmatiue as the negatiue, as that they will profeſſe to liue and die in this beliefe: yet let the Popes definitiue bee brought vnto them, viz: you ſhal not take the Oath of Allegiance, you ſhal worſhip Images; they wil waxe pale, turne colour, and be ready to ſweare and abiure their former opinions, though never ſo wel grounded on Fathers, & Councels, reaſon, and auctorities. For why? Councels may erre, and Fathers may be deceived, al the Prelats & Superiors in the world may faile, none vpon Earth is warranted from erring, but one, and that one is the Pope, and this Pope is Chriſts Vicar and Peters Succeſſor, and he hath decided it thus: ergo ſo it is, his auctoritie is an infallible rule of truth. This is the Popiſh doctrine, and this is the Papiſts beliefe, the foundation ſtone of all Poperie, a moſt abſurd doctrin, which hath not it proofe

either from teſtimonies of Scripture, or conſent of Fathers. but not to diſpute the caſe being from our purpoſe, nor to detaine you any longer, my exhortation ſhal be vnto al the Popiſh Recuſants of this land, that as they feare God and haue a care of their ſalvations, they wil not be too credulous to truſt their Prieſts or Ieſuits, but rather ſuſpect the Ieſuits for Parſons, and the Prieſts for Watſons ſake; for the wicked life of the one, and the miſerable death of the other, may giue vs pregnant cauſe of ſuſpicion, that al is not true that either of them both ſhall ſay, though it be ſpoken tanquam ex tripode, vel in cathedra, that is, reſolutely and definitiuely. Our Lord Ieſus preſerue vs all vnto his ſaving Grace.
            Deo ſoli ſit gloria.
            
         
      
   