
      
         
            
            
            A Defence of the
Articles of the Protestants Religion,
in aunsweare to a libell lately cast
abroad, intituled
            Certaine Articles, or forcible reasons, discouering the palpable
absurdities, and most intricate errours of the
Protestantes Religion.
            Vt loquerentur calumniam & transgressionem, conceperunt et locuti
sunt de corde verba mendacii. Esa. 59. 13
            
            
               
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               . Basilius.
            
            LONDON
Imprinted by Iohn Wolfe, and are to bee sold in Pauls
church yard by Mathew Law, 1601.
         
         
            
            
            To the Right Reuerend Father in
Christ, Richard, by Gods permission,
Bishop of London, my very
good Lo
                  •
               d.
            
               TVVo venemous worms
there are, which (like
snakes at the Palme
roote) doe gaster and
infect the floorishing
state of a setled Church, Sacrilege and
Haeresie: which double mischiefe to
the Church, is principally imputed to
men of the Church; ambition, basely
yeelding to any compact for titular prefermentes,
feeding the sacrilegious
humour: factious traducing each of
other for opinions different, or rather
indifferent, opening a gap for the haereticall
inchanter. This last, through

the despite of Rome, transmitting her
traiterous shauelinges to seduce good
subiectes; disgorging loathsome slaunders,
to defame our Prince and State
among forreners; and principally, dispersing
their infamous libels against
our religion, to make it more odious to
our domesticall professors, hath of late
much pestered, and haunted this our
Church and Realme: the inward cause
is their inueterate malice, but this outrage
in multiplying their blowes thus
thicke and threefold (pardon, my good
Lord, if I gesse amisse) is incensed by
an opinion they haue conceyued, that
there is among vs, a generall declining
to Poperie, aud the ruine beginning at
the very groundcelles of religion, our
schooles of learning; which, God bee
thancked, stande both fast and sure, against

the strongest battery of the Romish
factiō, & if euer heretofore, cleerly
voyde of all her superstitious infections:
yet this hot surmise, though very
vaine and false, hath, notwithstanding,
receiued the flame from a wildefire
zeale of some vniuersitie men, who
pronounce euery position to be Popish,
which is not within the verge of their
paper booke common places; and wanting
the Towne-clarke his discretion
Act. 19. 36, to do nothing rashly, but
to referre the determination to a
lawfull assembly vers. 39. proclaimed
that for heresy in a solemne meeting,
which comming to a higher, and more
mature examination, prooued to bee so
farre from Popery, that it was on the
contrary conuinced by the writings &
verdict of the greatest authors of accompt

among vs, to bee most sound doctrine
and orthodoxall. By which offensiue
clamour, woorse then Cham his
irrision, so farre carried and sorting to
so smale effect of trueth, howsoeuer
without seuere and condigne punishmēt
it escaped, yet surely, the whole state of
this realme, the vniuersitie it selfe, and
the particular persons thus slaunderously
abused, haue receiued a wrōg scarcely
expiable by the diuestiture of the accusers
from their places. The Realme,
because report, which getteth feathers
by flying, will sound it out in forreine
partes, that our fountaines are infected;
the vniuersitie, in that no parent
of wisedome and religion, will send
his sonne to a place suspected; the particuler
men, beeing iniuried in their
good name, impeached in their preferment,

discouraged in their indeuours,
being as readie to confront, as willing
to encounter, as able to ouerthrow any
Papist, as the most forward and whotspurred
challengers of the opposite enraged
faction; which by your Lordship,
and other of authoritie Ecclesiasticall,
being not allayed and scattered, it is no
marueile if the Papist take courage, &
like another Antaeus thus redouble his
strength to the preiudice & disgrace of
this our famous Church. An instance
hereof, among many other, is this smal
pamphlet aunsweared by mee, so commaunded
by his Grace, wherin the author
taketh euery occasion to triumph
in our diuisions. VVhich aunsweare I
haue presumed to present to your Lordship,
both as a testimony publike of that
reuerent regard, which I euer acknowledged

due from my selfe vnto you; &
principally, for that I am acquainted
with that most earnest desire and care
which your L. reuealed at your first inuestiture
into that great dignitie, to
haue the common aduersarie euery w
                  •
               y
answered: This if your good Lordship
accept and approue, it is the accōplishment
of mine endeuour; if not, the secōd
part (for this is but the first) may bee
imposed vpō some other, who with more
opportunitie for leysure, & sufficiencie
for learning, may discharge it better.
In the meane time I commend this to
your L. fauour, and your Lordship to
God his protection.
            
               From his Graces house in Lambeth
Ianuary. 11. 1601.
               
               William Barlow.
            
         
         
            
            
            The fiue Articles obiected concerning
knowledge and faith.
            
               1. The Protestantes haue no faith,
nor Religion.
               2. The Learned Protestantes are
Infidels.
               3. All Protestantes ignorant of the
Greeke and Latine tongues are
Infidels.
               4. The Protestants know not what
they beleeue.
               5. The Protestāts haue no meane
to determine controuersies, &
abolish Heresies.
            
         
         
            
            In the aunsweare to them, these pointes are fully handled,
occasioned by his obiections.
            
               
                  
                     In the first, the
                     Returne of the Article in generall vpon the Papistes.
                  
                  
                     Antiquitie of our particular Church.
                  
                  
                     Inuisibilitie
                     of the true Catholike Church.
                  
                  
                     Constancie, and
Diffusion
                  
               
               
                  
                     In the second, the
                     Qualities and nature of Infidelitie.
                  
                  
                     Best exposition of Scripture,
                     Publike
                  
                  
                     Priuate
                  
                  
                     Authoritie of Fathers.
                  
               
               
                  
                     In the thirde,
the
                     Credite of Councels and the Church.
                  
                  
                     Vse of tounges.
                  
                  
                     Bibles translation.
                  
               
               
                  
                     In the Fourth,
the
                     Motiues to faith, not subiect vnto reason.
                  
                  
                     True rule of faith.
                  
                  
                     Authoritie,
                     of the Apostles Creede.
                  
                  
                     Dignitie
                  
                  
                     Vse and
Substance
                  
                  
                     Fiue Articles
of the Creed
examined.
                     1. Catholike Church
therein the
                     Definition
& Description
                     of the true
Church.
                  
                  
                     2. Communion of
Saints, wherein of the
                     Nomber of Sacramentes.
                  
                  
                     Presence in the Eucharist
                  
                  
                     Inuocation of Saintes.
                  
                  
                     Prayer for the dead, and
Purgatorie.
                  
                  
                     3. Remission of
sinnes, wherein of
                     Baptisme.
                  
                  
                     Pennance.
                  
                  
                     Iustification by not imputing.
                  
                  
                     4. The Deitie of Christ.
                  
                  
                     5. Descent into Hell.
                  
               
               
                  
                     In the fifth,
                     The fittest arbiter and iudge in decision of controuersies.
                  
                  
                     The differences betweene Protestantes and Puritans.
                  
                  
                     An aunsweare to an odde extrauagant syllogisme about the
Certaintie of Saluation.
                  
               
            
            Et me prodes, nec tibi proder is, nisi perlegas. Hieronym.
            
            To reade as the booke opens casually, not from the beginning orderly,
is to betray my paines, and thy profite.
         
         
            
            The greater faults escaped thus to be corrected.
            Blunderus. lege Bunderus, pag. 20. marg. In quos
read In quo. pa. 32. lin, 8. maiestl
                  •
               , for maiestie, pa.
36. lin. 24. 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                read 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               . pa. 52. lin, 9. 11, Cor, for 1.
Cor. pa. 53. marg. 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                for 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               . pa. 63. lin, 2.
abundance, lege abundare. pa. 64. lin. v
                  •
               t. pag. 67.
marg. Durius for Duraeus. mendatium for mendacium.
pa. 70. lin. 10. 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                for 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               . pag. 71. lin, 6. 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               ,
lege 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               . pa. 72. li. 14. Ephes. 42.
lege Epistol, 42. pa. 73, marg. ius bt. foris bu
                  •
               . pag.
75. li. 1. guilt. for gilt. pa. 76. li. 10. Art. 4. for Art. 5.
ibid. marg. implicit, è either, for implicitè, either.
pa. 100. li. 13. speciallyo, for specially, one. pa. 102.
li. 24. mattere for matters. pa. 105, li, 6, any, good
for any good, pa. 133. li. 8. 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                for 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               .
pa. 144. lin. 6. which concealed, reade which was
concealed. pa. 144, li, 6. we, with. reade we, who
with, pa. 147, li. 20. erufflations, exufssations, pa.
148, lin, 2. implay, for imply. pag. 165. lin. 13.

                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                for 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               . pa. 178. lin. vlt. 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                for 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               .
pa. 181. liu. 21. Pelus. ep. 30. reade ep. 299. ibid.
Marg. ad Patres, lege ad fratres. p. 182. marg. their
for there. p. 184. lin. 13. 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                for 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               . p. 183
li. 3. 1▪ Tim. 3. for 2. Tim. 3. ibid. marg. high iudge,
for higher, pa. 190. li. 11. thwey are no, read they are
now. pag. 195. l▪ 4. diuision of. for decision of p. 214.
li. 22.
         
         
            
            A Preface to the Reader, with an aunsweare of
the Letter written to his frend.
            
               IT may passe for a diuine Oracle, rather
then an humane sentence, which Publius
hath,Publius Mim. 
               Veritatem nimiûm altercando
amitti, that opposition by
argument, hath not onely much weakened,
but vtterly abandoned the trueth,
both for substance of doctrine (selfeGregor. Mag. loue on both partes
taking scorne to yeeld, and so causeth an opinión at first
but probably controuertible, to bee in the end as an axiom
mainely defensible) and also in the manner of dispute,
the opposite argumentes of our moderne aduersaries being
not contradictions doctrinall, but personall maledictions:
Can. lib. 
                     •
                  
                as one of their owne well noteth, hauing no care to discharge
a good conscience, without preiudice, to enquire the
rectifying of their errours, wherewith they haue bene deluded,
but to disgorge their virulent stomackes against the
Church and profession, wherewith they are discontented:
for 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                saithThucyd. lib. 1. 
               Thucydides, the present
state, be it neuer so excellent, hath his malecontents. Examples
hereof none more pregnant then the Romish Clergy;
and in that rabble none more pestilent, then our homeborne
fugitiues; and of these the most aspish and poysonfull,
those two Runnagates with three names, Rossaeus, Rainoldes,
and Gifford: who (as if with thePlutar. Auth. 
               Ophigenes
               
and Psylli, they had bene fed and fostered with no
aliment but poyson,) haue breathed foorth, their in-bred
malice against the heauens, and infected the aire and
earth, with their pestiferous libels,
                  
                     〈◊〉
                  
                
               
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               ,
as Epimenides once said, the very Alters and
scenes of reproachfull blasphemies, against the religion we
professe, euen the sincere doctrine of our Sauiour Christ.
As if the purport of their writinges were, as
                  
                     〈◊〉
                  . 
               Ierome
speaketh, Non quomodo saluentur, sed quomodo
superent, not the issue of Saluation, but the pursuite of
conquest, by what meanes soeuer;Hom
                     •
                  r. 
               
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               ,
whether the extreamest tyranny, or the most spitefull
suggestions, fastening vppon vs, what malice could
forge, or impudency out-face. Yet th
                  •
               se writ in Latine,
& so the learned alone, if wauering, might be peruerted;
if resolute, were assaulted: but of late, a vernaculer penman,
an Abyssian Locust; to verify the Prouerbe inEpiphan. lib 1 & Tertullian. 
               Epiphanius,
Aspis a vipera venenum mutuatur, hauing
translated them into English, abbreuiated into a portible
libell, dedicated vnto a namelesse gentleman, capitulated
into Articles, sorted into two heades, hath scattered them
abroad in our vulgar tongue, that so the meanest idiote,
carrying fire in his bosome, and poison in his hand, might
hardly escape without daunger or infection. And requesteth
his frend,pag. 
                     •
                  . Epist. 
               That if an aunsweare be attempted, by any itching
spirite, (a fit correspondence, to such a scuruy libeller)
to intreate him to performe it briefly, orderly, and seriously. First,
for the aunsweare, were it not enioyned me, by him, who by
his authority in the Church, and for some fauours extended,
doth commaund me, it had bene none for me, because,
if I were woorthy to be heard, the whole frame of the Articles

being,Theodor▪
                to speake with Theodoret 
               
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               
the perturbation of an ignorant and a distempered
Apostata, neither the pamphlet shold haue bene so straightly
suppressed, Nam perfidiam exposuisse superasse fuis
                     •
                  et,
asHieron. 
               Ierome saith, the very front of the articles bringing
with it the brand of manifest confutation: nor any
Apology should be shaped, holding that rule ofContr. Ap. lib 1. 
               Ioseph
for proper and sound, 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               ,
Ci
                     •
                  et orat. pro Cael. silence is the fittest aunsweare for importunate and
profuse lyars. Their impudency gayning them this Priuiledge,
saith Basil, and Tullie, not at all to be aunsweared,
because as a man cannot fastenB
                     •
                  sil. 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  
                
               
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               . any maine
stroke and visible vpon soft and yeelding bodies, in that
they haue no repercuss on: so is it bootelesse, and well neere
impossible, to confute the manifest madnesse of shamelesse
heretikes 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                with any forcible reioy
                  •
               der, because
they want modesty: & therefore as theAristot. Philosopher
would not haue them vouchsafed disputation, who deny
principles; no more were this masked Iesuite to be deigned
an aunsweare, his articles being nought els but abhominable,
and Lucianlike contumeltes. For the breuitie
which he requesteth, it may soone be graunted, and no other
aunsweare made, but either that which bothZach, 3. 2 Christ
and the
                  
                     •
                  ud. ver 9 Archangell gaue vnto Sathan, The Lord rebuke
thee: or that ofSenec
                     •
                  
                Cato to Lentulus, dicam falli
                     •
                  os
quite negant os habere, I will say they are much deceiued,
that deny thee to haue a mouth and a soule one too: or
that of thePlut. lye. Spartans, to the Theban Orator, his tedious
and bold speech, 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               , if, that is, if he thinke as he
writes, his ignorance is desperate, if otherwise▪ his conscience
is feared. Yet the iudic
                  •
               o
                  •
               s Reader will consider,

that as aPlut mor. wound though geuen in a trice with a thrust,
cannot so soone be cured:A pul. Apolog. so a slaunder by an ill tongue
may be quickely fastened, not so briefly aunsweared,Act. 24. Tertullus
had soone termed S. Paul a Sectary, a seditious, & a
pestilent fellow, but the Apostle his Apology in clering him
selfe, could not be so succinct: notwithstanding assure thy
selfe good Reader, that as much as I can, I will auoid al prolixitie
& perplexitie, being naturally an enemy to tedious
and ambagious superfluitie. As for the order it shall be that
of theTerent. Poet I prae, sequar: the very method (such as it
is) which himselfe hath vsed; that as face in the water
aunsweareth to face, according toPro. 27. 19 
               Salomon; so euery
Article shall receiue his seuerall aunsweare: which, being
twelue in all, he referreth to
               pag 3. Epistol. 
               two heades, wit and will, faith and
good life, vt vno rotatu gladii percutiat vtrumque,
               Hieron. saith Ierom of such another: because, quoth this Articler
heresy, inueigleth the one with errour, and seduceth the other with inordinate
affections. If we list to be curious with him, their
owne diuines seeme to say otherwise, videlicet,Tho. Aq. 22. q. 11. that a prinate
conceite of the wit, differing from others, and pertinacy
of the will, defending the difference (both the sprouts
of selfe loue) hatcheth and causeth heresy: so that heresy is
rather conceiued by the wit, then the wit deceiued by heresy.
And for good life, how heresies can be referred to
manners, except improperly, no diuine sheweth: for albeit
theGal. 5. 19 Apostle numbreth among the workes of the flesh,
Sectes and Heresies; yet neither the word Flesh is in that
place to be taken for the sensuall & brutish part of mā, but
for the intellectuall corrupted: neither were it so, is it a
worke of the fleshTho. 
                     •
                  bi sup. & Alf. de cast. l. 1 in respect of the obiect, but of the cause,
so farre forth as the will propoundes finem indebitum
               
an vndue and vnlawfull ende, which rising from the depra
                  •
               ation
of the flesh, either pride to be singular; or desire
either to be magnified, or to be enriched, or to haue the
lusts satisfied,Theoph. ad Rom 13 breedeth an heresy, rather then is seduced
by it: For carnall men giuen ouer to their sensuality,
betake themselues to some heresy in opinion, thereby to
support, or to shelter their lustes: as theAug. Epiph. Fathers do shew
in the Cerinthians, Adamites and Aërians, and experience
fresh and frequent, that the dissolutest liuers among
vs, whome our Church and State doth vomite out
for their loosenesse, therefore fly to Rome, beeing a place
exempt, and priuiledged with immunities for filthy wickednesse:
and that Royall exchaunge of Indulgences, by
which euery sinne though neuer so horrible, for money
may be pardoned, or tollerated, hath allured more customers
to Popery, then either the pageant of their Masse,
though daily acted, or the preaching of their Friers, though
perswading mightily, or their Iesuites bookes, though
scattered daungerously, yet vppon these premises he inferreth
a bolde and peremptory conclusion.pag. 3. Epistol. 
               I say then that
no excellent good wit, linked with a religious conscience, can either
accept, or affect the Protestants new coyned Gospell. Of the new
coyne, anone, when we come to the triall of the min
                  •
               e. Belike
then as the Poet said,Martial. Ep
                     •
                  g. 
               Nobis non licet esse tam
disertis, qui musas colimus s
                     •
                  u
                     •
                  riores, all our English
professors are but blockes to Papistes, andDe sig. Eccles. 
               Bozius
saith so plainely: but as Zopyrus, who tooke vppon him
Plat. 
                     〈◊〉
                  . to be a very skilfull Physiognomer, pronouncing of Socrates,
whome Apolloes oracle had adiuged the wisest
man, to be but a 
                  •
               ullard and heauy witted, was laught at
by the company present, but èspecially by Alcybiades: so

beside many others,A
                     •
                  len, Apolog. 
               Cardinall Allen, one of as sharpe
insight as this Pamphleter, hath long since exibilated this
rash illation; whose opinion is, with griefe, that the finest
wittes are ours, for which he yeeldes this reason, because
the more pregnant and sharpe wittes, not enduring to dig
and del
                  •
               e in those quarries of the schoolemen, nor to plod
at those intricate points, which are the rudiments of Popery,
adhere to vs, and imbrace our profession, the principles
and institutes of religion with vs, being more obuious and
easy. As for excellency of witte, it is true which S. Austen
saith, thatde ciuit. lib 4. 
               Ingeniosum nasci foelicitatis est, it is a
singular blessing to be so indowed by nature; because in the
opinion of theTull. Tus. quaest▪
                Orator, men of slow wittes haue seldome
aspired to any great reach, or illustrious vertue. Notwithstanding,
Plut, Co
                     •
                  ol. pregnant natures, are like lustie groundes,
these manured by industry, prooue soundly fertile; but neglected
and vntilled, tarish and weedy: so those illumined
by grace, prooue Theologically iudicious, but left in their
naturall faculties, the more sharpe the more daungerous; as

                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  . 
               Basil elegantly speaketh 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                the acutest
calculators of Atheisme and impiety, the most subiect
and open to any heresy. And therfore our Sauiour Christ
appropriateth diuine knowledge, and sound iudgement in
matters of faith, not to naturall apprehension, but toMath. 11. 25. diuine
inspiration. But were not the comparison of wittes odious
in it selfe, and in theTull. ora
                     •
                  . Heathens opinion ouer burdensome
to the Reader, and among diuines ridiculous and
vnfit (and yet,Martial. 
               Qui velit ingenio cedere ra
                     •
                  us erit) if
we should take Sophocles his course, who being accused
for a delir
                  •
               ous and weake-braindTull. de Se
                     •
                  ect. man, pronounced that
excellent Tragedy, intituled Oedipus Colonaeus of his

owne making, and asked if that might be accompted the
worke of a broken witte, or dotard; and so make a suru
                  •
               ew
of our mens writings, I doubt not but in the most rigorous
censure of any indifferent iudge, they would, both for
sharpe inuention, sound iudgement, sincere interpretation
and forcible argumentes, be much preferred before the
rude gloses of Bardocucullion Monkish Friers, and the
trumping illusions and Sophismes of the most nimbly witted
Iesuites. Millions of instances might be shewed, but
promising breuitie, I refer thee toEras Eacom. stult. 
               Erasmus &Annot. in Aug. 
               Viues,
onely one I bring because he hath made a challenge. The
case is propounded, to a good wit linked with a religious conscience
in a matter of high state, and a deepe point of diuinitie:
Whether it be lawfull for a subiect to murther his Soueraigne
an heretike. We dullard Protestantes thinke no,
because S. Paul hath saidRom. 13. 
               Let euery soule be subiect,
their fine wits hold yea, because S. Paul saith Haereticum
deuita,
               Tit. 3 
               id est, de vita tolle. In a particular, whether
Iacob Clemens the Dominican might by authoritie of
holy writ, kil Henry the III. of France? We blockish witted
professors are of the negatiue part, & suppose hee should
haue said with1. Sam. 24. 
               Dauid, God forbid that I should lay
mine hand vpon the Lordes annointed. But he in the
acute excellency of his witte, linked with a religious conscience,
reasoneth thus with himselfe,Iudg. 3. 
               Ehud killed Eglon, and
therefore I may kill Henry; his ground of resolution very
witty, Eglon was a king, and so is Henry, Eglon signifieth
aMer
                     •
                  punc; Gallobelg. 
               Calue, and Henry is a Caluenist, and therefore
assuredly I may murther him by Scripture; such
excellent wittes and religious consciences let Rome brag of and
foster, God keepe them from vs; and this for his methode

of wit and will. The last request he makes is, that the answeare
should bepag. 2. 
                     〈◊〉
                  . 
               serious. Assuredly in conference about
religion, it is no fit aunsweare for a diuine, whichPlat. Pel
                     •
                  p. 
               Archias
made to a messenger that came to him, with letters
importing earnest matters, & requiring serious consultation,

                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                Serious matters to morrow, let
vs now be merry, for a
                  
                     •
                  er▪ 48. 10. curse lies vpon him that deales in
the Lordes worke negligently, much more in iest: notwithstanding
hauing perused this paltry pamphlet, and finding
it to bee as
                  
                     〈…〉
                  . 
                     •
                  
                
               Iosephus said of Apion his writinges

                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                a very heape and misken of shamelesse
vntruethes, rather then scholler like arguments, or true
cōtrouersies, & the obiections articulated 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               ,
asApolog▪
                
               
                  
                     •
                  stine speaketh, not vpon mature iudgement, but a
passionate discontentment, linked with a bad conscience,
little caring, asNazian 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  . 
               Naz. saith, 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                not what hee
speakes, but how much he can speake; I demurred with my
selfe, as
                  
                     〈…〉
                   2. that learned Iew did in his grapple with that
Granimarian 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                whether it were woorth the
while, to deale seriously or no? Because
                  
                     〈…〉
                   V. g 
               S. Ierome his
r
                  •
               le is, that such open blasphemies procure & deserue magis
indignationem scribentis, quam studium, rather
an aunsweare with skorne, then in earnest; or such an one
as
                  
                     〈…〉
                  . 
               Lactantius gaue Aristoxenus, nimirum manu
pulsandus hic est, but I trust by that time hee hath read
this aunsweare, hee will say there hath bene vsed neither
dalliance nor iest; vnlesse it be such sport as2. Sam. 2. 14. 
               Abner
speakes of, Surgant pueri & ludant, the triall of our weapons
at the least. And this for our prolusion, now we meete;
and behold an vncircumcised tongued Goliah blaspheming
the most high God.
         
      
      
         
            
            The first Article.
            The Protestants haue no Faith nor Religion.
            
               The Protestants haue no faith, no hope,
no charitie, no repentance, no iustification,
no Church, no Altar, no sacrifice,
no Priest, no religion, no Christ.
            
            
               Answere.
               
                  
                     LIngua quo vadis? If Pythagoras
his 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                   were to be credited,
a man would thinke,
that eytherEs. 36. 7. 
                  Rabshekah his
soule had beene transported
into this mans bodie, their blasphemie is
so semblable; the one perswading the Israelites,
that they had neither right altars
whereon to sacrifice, not true God whom
they did worship: and this other impudently
at the first dash auowing, that our
profession is nothing els but Athe
                     •
                  sme and
irreligion:Strabo. Herodot. or els that hee were a Lindian
borne, who vsing to offer their sacrifices
with curses and execrable maledictions,

thought their holy rites were prophaned,
if, al the time of their solemnitie, vel imprudenti
alicui exciderit bonum verbum,
                  Lact. lib. 1 saith Lactantius,
any of them, at vnawares, had cast
out, or let fall a good worde. By which
speech, if he touch our professours, as men
liuing without Faith, Hope, Charitie and Repentance:
or, as if there were neither Church
nor Priest, nor Christ, as it is a slander for the
vntruth, so is it an elench of the accident,
in disputation to reason from the doctrine
to the persons: if he meane the forme and
substance of the profession it selfe, then either
is he ignorantly blind, & so verifieth
that speech of Esay in himselfe, which in
the title of his booke he hath prefixed,Es. 59. 10 
                  Impegimus
meridie quasi in tenebris; like Seneca
his blind woman,Seneca. that said it was darke
night, being a cleare sunshine day, for wee
professe not within the walles, but vpon
the house top: or els (the opinion of the
schoolemen being sound, that a contradiction
of a manifest truth ex destinata malitia
contra conscientiam,
                  Aqu. vpon prepensed malice
against a mans owne knowledge and

conscience is that great sinne and irremissible)
he is Pharisaically blasphemous: for
as they being in their minds assured that
our Sauiour cast out Diuels by the finger
of God,Math. 12. yet, vpon a fixed malice, auowed it
to be coniuring, & therfore were condemned
for blasphemers of the holy Ghost: so
this cursing Shemei cannot but know that
wee preach ChristEsa. 7 Emanuel,Phil. 2. God equall
with his Father,Galat. 4. incarnate of a virgine, crucified
for man,Rom. 10. the perfection of the law,
1. Cor. 1 the summe of the Gospell. Faith, both assenting,
with a setled beliefe of his doctrine,
and iustifying by application of his
merites. Hope, the anchor of our confidence,
in the most daungerous surges sure
and stedfast. Charitie the life of both, the
bond of perfection, binding vs to God,
making vs one spirite with him; and to
our neighbour, both in affection and action,
by giuing and forgiuing. Repentance,

                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                   as Chrisostome speaketh,Chrysost. in Rom. 12. as well
in the cōtrition of heart, as the reformatiō
of the mind: and so of the rest, proportionable
to scriptures. He, I say, which knowing

this shall notwithstanding thus
shamelessely pronounce the contrary, condemnes
himself, giuen ouer to a reprobate
sence, by turning the truth of God into a
lie, and therefore not farre from that vnpardonable
sinne. Yet this must not much
moue vs thus to be censured, because euen
in the Primitiue state the Christians were
so intituled by tyrantes,Eccl. Histo. 
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , away
with these Atheistes.Tutrecrem. vid Canū
                   Yea some of the Popish
Canonists haue not doubted to conclude
of the whole Colledge and companie
of the Apostles to bee heritikes and
infidels: and also that it is an vsuall custome
for the most guiltie to be the vehemētst
accusers, & none so ready to cry treson,
2 Reg. 
                        •
                     . as Athaliah the onely vsurper. For this
giddie Articler which cannot see woode
for trees, nor in the most glorious Church
true religion, if he would but looke backe
into his owne synagogue, might he not say
as hee in Plut.
                  Plut. de profect. 
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , is not our
Church guiltie of that wee accuse them?
Not to examine all these particulars, how
they rather haue no Faith, annihilating it by

merite of worke. No Hope weakening it
by doubtfullnesse of saluation. No Repentance,
auoyding that by Indulgence of toleration.
No Charitie, especially towardes
God, extinguishing that by their heape of
superstitions (for perfect loue casteth out
feare,1. Ioh, 4. but where superstition is, there is
feare more then seruile. This being the difference,
euen in the opinion of a Pagan,
betweene an Atheist and a superstitious
man,Plutar. 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     . that the one, 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                   thinkes there is
no God to rewarde vertue: the other

                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                   wisheth there were no God to
punish sinne.) No Religion, neither as it is
the true knowledge of the true God, concealing
that from the meany,Gen. 26▪ 15. by casing the
Scriptures in a straunge translation, as the
Philistines stopped 
                     
                        •
                     saac his wells through
enuie: Nor as it is the syncere worship of
one God and alone, defiling the puritie,
and diuiding the integritie thereof, by that
latrioduliacall distinction of Idols adoration,
and Saintes inuocation: onely let vs
trie the last, whether it may not iustly be
returned vpon them, that they have No

Christ, and that in his owne methode,
which in his Epistle, he calleth Syllogisticall:
the doubting whether Christ be the
onely Emanuel God and man is the negatiue
of Christ,Innoc. 3. but their diuines dispute, whether
the Pope also beSimplex animal. 
                  simplex homo aAn vnpure beast pure
man, or quasi Deus participet vtram
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      naturam
cum Christo, or as God, participate both
natures with Christ. Againe, the preferring
of any man before Christ in any vertue,
is to deny Christ, but they conclude the
Pope to be clementior Christo,
                  Vid. Eras. in 1. Tim. 
                        •
                     . more kind &
mercifull then Christ, because he neuer released
soule out of Purgatory, as the Pope
hath done many. If it be said, that these are
but Scholasticall combates for triall of
wittes,Basil. 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     . no positiue conclusions: (and yet
Saint Basil▪
                   saith, that such questions propounded
euen 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , for disputation
sake, are blasphemies against the spirite,
and the poyson of religion) you shall haue
a Thesis, in a comparison betweene Iohn
Baptist and S. Frauncis. The impairing of
Christes dignitie, in preferring any aboue
him, is to make no Christ; Now heare and

tremble: Iohn Baptist receiued the word of
repentance from the Lord Christ, but S.
Frauncis receiued it from the Lord also, &,
quod plus est,
                  Conform. Fran. fol. 18 
                  a Papa, and, which is more,
from the Pope. Adde another betweene
Christ & Dominike. The diuiding Christs
soueraigntie with another, is to make
no Christ, for hee will all or none, because
both his father hath giuen him the whole
world for his possession,Psal. 
                        •
                     . and himselfe
challengeth it, Omnis potestas mihi data. And
therefore is he called,Math. 26. Apoc. 19. the Lord of Lords:
but say they; Christ indede is Lord absolutè
& authoritatiu
                        •
                     ,
                  Antouin. 
                        ••
                     st. lib. 3. tit. 23. by absolute commission,
but Dominike is Lord possessiuè by actuall
possession: yea, by the ingenuous cōfession
of one of their owne schollers, till the
time of Pius Quintus,
                  Martin. de anni institut. which is not aboue
50. yeares since, Iesus Christ had bene banished
out of Rome, but that Pope thē brought
him backe againe. So then, to giue this fellow
his shortest and best aunsweare, this
position argues him to bee maliciously
mad; for a man beeing a member of that
Synagogue, thus execrably opinionated,

and knowing in his conscience the contrary
to this his accusation in our Church,
both by our positions doctrinall, our profession
practicall, and the worldes testimoniall;
thus paradoxically in the entrance
of his booke to articulate, Non Sani
esse hominis, nō sanus iuret Orestes, as the Poet
saith,Ieronym. aduers. to
                     
                        •
                     uin. and Ierome applies it: yet least hee
should seeme mad without a reason, thus
he frames one.
            
            
               For if they haue, thē the world was with
out them for 1000. yeares (as they them
selues must needes confesse, videlicet, Al
that time their Church was eclipsed) &
for 1500. asQuid tā
                     to dignum 
                        •
                     eret hic pro
                        ••
                     ssor hiatu? Horat. we will proue by the testimony
of all records of antiquity, as Histories,
Councels, monuments of auncient
Fathers.
            
            
               Aunsweare.
               
                  Dum breuis esse labor at absurdus fit. He
promised vs syllogismes, wee will shape
one for him. If the Protestantes haue Faith,
Hope, Religion, Christ &c. then the worlde for
1000. yeares wanted them: but the worlde wanted

them not, ergò they haue them not. A fish of
three dayes keeping, and the consequent
of this Maior may goe together for stinking
new: it hauing bene a stale obiectiō
made byHest. 3. 6. 
                  Haman against the Iewes: by
Act. 17 the Pagans against S. Paul: byOrigen. 
                  Celsus against
Christ:
                  Euseb. by the world against the
Gospell: byPrudent. the Tyrants against Christians:
and by the whole cluster of Pseudocatholicall
scriblers against vs, that our
Church and profession, is but of yesterdayes
breed. But I aunsweare briefly, euen
as Aemilius Scaurus answeared Varius his
accuser, Varius dicit, Scaurus negat, vtri creditis?
They obiect it, we deny it, and not
deny it onely, but demōstrate the contrary,
that we worship the same God, acknowledge
the same Christ, professe the
same faith, haue the same hope, which the
Patriarkes before the Law, the Prophetes
vnder Moses, the Apostles vnder our Sauiour,
and the Primitiue Christians vnder
the Gospell, syncerely kept and professed
for 110. yeres after the Ascention of Christ
as Hegesippus obserued,Euseb. lib. 3 & for 600. yeares

after him in the soundest churches were
continued, & by the learned Fathers were
defended. This challenge hath bene sounded,
the gauntlet cast out; some one hath
taken it vp,Virgil. and like Virgill his wolfe caudam
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                     
remulcens turnd his backe with disgrace:
and yet this namelesse and shamelesse
Catholike thinkes to carry it away
with an Hypotheticall proposition, in a
three halfepenny pamphlet: and so hee
might, if he could make that good which
he saith, and confirme it, first, by our owne
confession, and secondly, by the testimony
of all ages. For the first, let it bee supposed
that wee must needes confesse our Church to bee
eclipsed: yet this confession is their confutation.
For, if our church for 1000. yeares
was eclipsed, then it followeth, it was extant,
and that we had one, though a little
one, a small flocke, a few names, and this is
all we desire, & that which they so mainly
deny (especially Stapletō, Cāpian, & Duraeus,
frō whom this libeller hath gleaned those
handfuls of his) for as the Sunne though it
be placed in a tabernacle in the heauēs,Psal 19. 4 that

both the light and heate thereof, might be
seene & felt ouer the whole earth, yet somtimes
by clouds it is enueloped, & by mists
fogged▪ oft times by eclipses obscured, and
once euery 24. houres by the earthes shadow,
which is the night, àbandoned; yet
still as Dauid speaketh,Psal. 19. 5 both like a Giant he
continues his course and force naturall; &
like a gallant bridegrome, kepes his brightnesse
and glory, though not alwayes visibly,
yet substantially. So Christes church,
though euen from the Apostles time, thorough
the mystery of iniquitie, and the
mistes of impietie, and the eclipses of Apostacie,
and the darkenesse of ignorance, it
was obscured, and as it were, vnder the
earth,Heb. 11. in caues and holes, and rockes, and
desertes, saith the Apostle: yet still she kept
her course inuisibly, but effectually; which
makes it saith Austen,
                  August. 
                  non vt nulla sit, sed vt
parum gloriosa. Not that it wanted her glory
at any time,Psal. 87. 3 For glorious things are spoken
of thee, thou Cittie of God. But the
kings daughter being all glorious within,Psal. 45.
it was not alwaies aspectable to fleshly

eyes. But might it please this challenger to
set downe some inforcement of our confession.
We say for our Church, that is, for
our profession,Euseb. lib. 3 with Egesippus, that it remayned
a pure and immaculate Virgine
till the Apostles were taken from the
earth, and so had still continued, if the
Suruiuers and Successours, so tearmed,
had remembred our Sauiours caueat of
the Pharisees leauen, humane inuentions,
or Saint Paules premonition of aliud Euangelium,
vncertaine traditions:Gal. 1. or that
councell which Vegetius giues to common
souldiers ne palustribus aquis vtantur,
                  Veger. lib. 3 cap. 2
                        •
                     
                   to kepe
themselues to the pure fountaine of the
Scriptures without blending or corruption:
and by that first church we desire to
haue ours examined, thinking the neerer
the purer; whereas some of them, shunning
this touchstone, stick not to say that
the church, euen in the Apostles time, was
but rude, and vnsound in many preceptes
of doctrine,Bl
                        •
                     nder. &, for exāple, one sets downe
an instance of Priestes marriage. And for
our particular English church, as auncient

euery day, and as Christian euery way as
the Romane,Polydor. 
                  a primor dio Euangelii saith Polidore,
                  Faber. and therefore by Faber, called Semen
Apostolicum: being planted and watered
either by Paul the Apostle of the Gentiles,
or by Ioseph of Arimathea,Theodo
                        •
                     . as Theodoret witnesseth.
And for the integritie thereof, one
of their owne auerres, that from the time
of Eleutherius Bishop of Rome anno 177.G
                        •
                     lf. Mon.
of Christ, Christianitas inter eos nunquam defecit.
And least you should thinke this
Christianitie to be the Romish Religion:
first, remember the difference of our obseruation
of Easter from them, kept according
to the custome of the Eastern church,
which for long after would not stoope any
way to the Romane Bishop: secondly,
the opposition, which was made against
the Monke Austen, forced vpon our land as
a Legate:Platina▪
                   and lastly, that which Platina
writeth, that Gregory his course, which he
tooke by the ministery of this his Apostle,
was not fidei dogma integrè tractare, sed
eius integritatem adulterare. His second presumption
is, the testimony of Histories, Fathers

Councels, for 1500. yeares. This is but the
cracke of an elder pipe: and as the poore
man said of his sow when he sheard, here
is great crie & little wooll: he might (affecting
such breuitie) haue more shortly
said, we will proue it by the Pope. For they equalling
the Fathers with Scriptures, and
preferring Councels before the Fathers, &
amounting the Pope aboue Councels (in
saying that the sentence of the Pope in rebus
fidei,
                  Naclant. Clugi. is, penitus definitiua, but of the Councels
definitionis ambulatoriae) all the proofes
he can bring, must be from the Oracle of
the Popes brest: and yet there he will faile,
for euen their owne Popes will crosse thē,
Iulius the Pope, for the immersion of the
bread at the Cōmunion. Clement the Pope
in the challenge of both swordes Leo the
Pope for their reiteration of Masses: and
Gelasius the Pope, for their halfe Communion.
As for antiquitie, we request it our
iudg, so it be that which Ignatius appealeth
vnto,Ignatius 
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                   the antique doctrine
of Christ. For histories, none rather then
those written by his finger, which is the

Ancient of dayes. For Fathers, none sooner
then him whome Iustine calleth,Dan. 79 Iustin. 
                  Patrem
Patrum, that is, S. Paul. For Councels, none
more earnestly thē the consent & sentence
of the Synode of the Apostles. And let him
promise vs not to deale as Apelliconis tineae
with Aristotles books, to bring vs moatheaten
Fathers▪ and counterfaite Councels,
mutilated, depraued, corrupted, falsified,
as Clement serued Theodoret, and Pighius S.
Austen, and the Louanistes Origen, & their
Index expurgatorius all the monumentes of
antiquitie, and his challenge shall be aunsweared:
but he did well to take a day, &
say, we will prooue it, for hetherto as great
men as he haue fayled in it, and till he performe
it, we will expect him. Meanewhile
let him take the aduice with him, which
Archidamus gaue to his foole-hardie sonne,Archidamus.
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , either to bring
more strength, or lesse rage; for challenging
without valour, argues more rage,
then courage. But vpon these 
                     •
                  premisses imagined,
not proued; presumed not grā
                  ted;
he inferreth two corollaries proportionable,

first, that we countenance Iudaisme,
secondly, that we induce and support
Atheisme. as followeth.
            
            
               
                  1 Corollar. Whereby it plainly appeareth, that the
Synagogue of the Iewes, was more
constant in continuance, and more
ample for place, then the Church of
Christ (for they haue had their Synagogue
visible in diuers countries euer
since Christes death and passion, euen
vntill this day.
            
            
               Answere
               Iron sharpneth iron,Prou. 27. 17 saith Salomon, and
one absurditie drawes on another. If constancie
in the same state, and visibilitie in
outward apparance were the indiuisible
and essentiall markes of Christes Church,
there might be some shew of these consequentes:
but for the first, it hath often bene
shewed, that the Church is in scriptures
and Fathers resembled to the Moone:Cant. Apocal.
which, howbeit nourished with earthly
vapours, is lightned from the Sunne, and
the neerer the brighter; yet by the interposition

of the earth, hath her often eclipses:
so the Church of God for the bulk
and greatnesse thereof, consisteth of men
liuing on earth, but illumined by the Son
of righteousnesse shining with his graces,
sanctified by his spirit,Clem. Alex. li. 7. Strom. Bern. Cant. serm. 
                        •
                     8. Ambr. in Ephes. 3. and therfore by the
Fathers defined Coetus fidelium & electorum,
and also confirmed in the Catechisme decreed
by the Councell of Trent, and published
by Pius Quintus; yet the opposition
of the earth, both their owne earthly mē
                  bers,
which they carry about thē, the lusts
& concupiscence which are within them,
subiect thē to many imperfections (as the
Moone is neuer without spots) that they
cannot continue the same tenor of sanctitie
in the same vigour; and of earthly men
also, either the tyranny, or the superstition,
or the ignorance of the world, or some, or
all, obscuring it. Constant it is, for durance,
whether wee looke backward or
forward: Backward, hauing her beginning
in paradise,Iren. lib. 4. Ephes. 
                        •
                     . founded not onely vpon

the Apostles, but the Prophets, and therefore
by Dauid called Congregatio ab initio.
                  Psalm 73
                        •
                     
                  
For, ex quo sancti vocātur,
                  Augustin. Psal. 73. 
                  est E
                        •
                     clesia in terris,
saith S. Austen▪
                   Forward, ad consummationē
seculi. Matth. 28.Matt. 28 therefore by the Prophet
intituled Requies domini in sempiternum Psal.
131.Psal. 131▪ Psalm. 80 properly resembled to a vine Psal. 80
the more it is pruned, the further it spreadeth;
herein differing, because the vine if
it bleed, it dieth, but the churches bleeding
is her breeding:Te
                        •
                     tall. Constant, for assurance
both of his protection, & of her saluation,
beeing predestinate in Gods prescience,
sealed with the indelible character
of his election Nouit Dominus qui sunt sui;
                  2. Tim. 2. 9.
accompanied with his graces whose gifts
and calling,Rom. 
                        •
                     1. 
                        •
                     9. are without recalling; guarded
by his power,Ioh. 10. 28. for nenio rapiet eas de manibus
meis; regarded by his prouidēce stray
they may as sheepe,Psal. 119 
                        〈◊〉
                     . perish they cannot;
ascertained of his fauour, louing them to
the ende,Ioh. 13. 1 whome he once begins to loue;
assisted by his spirite, which beeing semen
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   1. Ioh. 3. 9.1. Ioh. 3. 9▪ Ioh. 1
                        •
                      Rom. 8. Matth. 10. dwelleth in them prayeth
with them, pleadeth for them; assured

of their glorie, one lincke drawing on
another,Rom. 8. 30 for whome he hath predestinate,
called, sanctified, he cannot but glorifie.
This constancie of continuance by succession
of time we acknowledge in the churche,
it beeing Gods generation neuer fayling,
but not in vnchangeable successe either
for state or place, being a flock distressed,
and dispersed ouer the whole earth;
sometimes so great, that we may say to it
with Esay,
                  Esa. 54. 2. 
                  dilata locum tentorio tuo; sometimes
so small, that we may 
                     〈◊〉
                   with the
Apostles Domine pauci sunt qui saluantur?
                  Luc. 13. 23. As
for V
                        •
                     sibilitie it is an externall ornament,Symbol. Apostol.
no necessarie argument of Christs church,
which we are taught to beleue, not to behold;
it is Catholike, & vniuer sale intelligitur,
                  Boetius saith Boetius, singulare sentitur; the
winde bloweth where it listeth, and wee
know not whence it commeth,Iohn. 3 nor whether
it goeth,Iren. lib. 3 but where the spirite is, there
is the church: otherwise this argument
would aswell befit Bethel,
                  1. Reg. 12 where Ieroboam
his calues had more concourse, then the
Templeat Ierusalem,
                  Act. 19. 27 and might iustifie the

Ephesians clamour, Great is Diana of Ephesus▪
                  
whome all the world worshippeth;
and serue Turkie as well as Rome, their
church being as apparant in shew, as ceremonius
for rites, as superstitious in deuotion,
as glorious in temples, and as auncient
for succession as the Romish Synagogue
(since that faithfull citie became an
hailot) both of them beginning about the
time of Phocas anno domini 65 6. And good
for the Arrians, who measured the church
by multitude,Nazianz▪
                   not qualine, saith Nazianz.
But let the church speak for her selfe, I am
blacke ye daughters of Ierusalem:
                  Cant. 1. 3. Let S
                     •
                   
                  Iohn
describe her,Apoc. 12. 6. 
                  a woman fled into a desert; Let
stories hieroglyphically depaint her, Noas
arke,Gen. 8. 1. R
                        •
                     . 19▪ 10 Abrahams progenie, Iobs familie,
Eliahs complaint, Nabuchodonosers furnace,
Dan. 3. Ioh. 
                        •
                     0 the Apostles latent, with the doores
shut, the Christians couchant, when their
liues were sought, the priuate Liturgie in
the time of Traiane, and those antelucani
hymni,
                  
                     
                        •
                     lin. ad 
                        〈◊〉
                     
                     ▪
                   which Pliny mentioneth. But admit
that successiue continuance, and conspicuous
amplitude, were the true notes

of the church, yet neither maketh this for
Rome, which hath had her many eclipses.
Duraeus confesseth,Durae. co
                        ••
                     . Whi
                        •
                     ak. that from the time of
S. Peter, til the inuestiture of Pope Syluester,
the Bishops of that sea had no certayne
place of aboade, but were inforced to
performe their holy rites, in cryptis & coetibus
piorum, in corners and priuate assemblies
of the godly▪ & so Ciruetus Doracensis,
                  In expos. 
                        •
                     . Missali. that the Eucharist was offered occultè
sine pompa; and before the Nicene councell
the church of Rome was little regarded as
Pius the secōd witnesseth.Pius 2. Neither againe
would this Catholikes argument follow,
it being no sound conclusion in Logike,
to reason from a locally scited Synagogue
to a church vniuersally diffused, that, because
the Iewes haue had a congregation visible,
therefore it is to be preferred before Christs church
dispersed. In deede visible it hath bene, but
miserable; seene and scorned; acknowledged,
but detested; Orbis ludibrium & opprobrium;
in so much that some stories record,
and trauailers report, that those places
into which they are remaunded, carry

with thē such a noysome & strong smell,
as may be compared to the remainders of
Sodome destroyed. But haue not the Protestantes
particular churches, beene as conspicuous
as Rome it selfe? View Denmarke,
Polonia, Boeme, Russia, Germany,
Flaunders, Scotland, and principally
Albion, truely 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , England I meane
                     •
                  , so
splendently appearing these 60. yeares together
(onely a quinquenniall Eclyps dreadfull
and bloudie excepted) that the glory
thereof, hath inraged Sathan and his complices
with furious discontentments, the
beautie allured straungers from farre, desiring
to approache it, that they might say
with Dauid Sicuti audiuimus,
                  Psal. 48. 8 and ver 7. 
                  Sic vidimus, &
we with him, Sic videntes admirati sunt: &
yet still he goeth on.
            
            
               Which is the onely path to lead men into
Atheisme,2 Corollar. as though Christ were
not as yet come into the world, whose

                     
                        〈…〉
                     
                   admirable promises, are not accomplished,
Math. 16, 
                        •
                     8. whose assistance hath failed
in preseruinge his church, vnto the
worldes ende,Math. 
                        〈◊〉
                     . 20. whose presence was

absent many yeares before the finall
consummation, & consequently they
open the gap to al Machiuellians, who
say that our Sauiour was one of the
deceiuers of the world, promising so
much concerning his Church, and
performing so little.
            
            
               Answere.
               —Cytharoedus
               Ridiculus, chorda qui semper oberrat eâdem.Hora
                        •
                     iu
                        •
                     
                  
               
               Where a man makes his shadow his combatant,
or appointeth his enemie his weapon,
the victorie is easie; still he supposeth
that weegraunt, the church must bee visible,
or els this his second Corollary must
be true, wherein he would conclude, that
the inuisibilitie of Christes church is the
gap to Athe
                     •
                  sme, 1. denying the certainetie
of Christes first comming, 2. the accomplishment
of his promises, 3. the assistance of his protection,
4. the presence of his power. The cōtrary were
true. Fortake the proportion of the body
by the head, his first aduent being altogether
in obscuritie,Lu
                        •
                     . 
                        •
                     . his conception reuealed
onely to his mother, his birth made

knowne to a few shepeheardes,Luc▪ 
                     
                        •
                     . his lodging
allotted in a cratch; in accompt so
base,Bernard▪
                   that he was reputed, as Bernard speaketh,
pro despicatissimo vernaculo, immò vermiculo,
his inward glorie so great, that the
prophesie was verified Speciosus prae filiis hominū;
                  Psalm. 45. 
                        〈◊〉
                     . 53
in outward shew so meane, that Esay
his description was fullfilled, In quos nec
species, nec decor: (which was the Iewes
stumbling blocke, who admitted no good
out of Galilee and Nazareth;Iohn 1. and the disciples
scandall, who still expected his Imperiall
Diademe) so his body the Church,
begun in a few, not known to the world,
or if known, persecuted, euen as her head
Christ,Bern. set 1 de adu
                        ••
                     . 
                  quem viderunt & oderunt: His second
comming shall bee maiesticall, and the
church triumphant, shalbe conspicuous:
therefore this argument inuerted, is the
sounder, videlicet, The state of the body being
proportionable to the apparition of the head, ascertayneth
to the world his first comming: but the
inuisibilitie of the Church militant on earth, is
proportionable to Christ his personall appearance
in his first aduent; ergo it ascertaineth that he

is already come. So for the second, scilicet,
The accomplishment of his promises.2. The more 
                     •
                  
Catholike the church, the more those promises
by Christ warranted, by Esay prophecied,
Es. 60. 11. by this Pamphleter alleadged, are
in trueth accomplished, and our new Romani
                     ••
                  es
dealing with the church, as the
olde Romanes with their Goddesse Victoria,
clipping her winges▪ and chayning her
to Rome do both fa
                     •
                  sifie the Prophete;
prediction, and p
                     •
                  nion too straightly the
large dona
                     •
                  ue of Christ. The prophecy
was, That the church gate should be open continually,
that the riches of the Gentiles, and their
kinges might be brought in, and the nations standing
out should perish. Therefore to restraine
this vniuersall subiection to Iewry alone,
as the Apostles once ignorantly supposed,Act. 10. 28
and the Iewes afterward arrogantly contended;
Cap. 11. 2 or to Rome, which all her champions
haue so challenged, were to abridge
most presumptuously, those bountifull
promises which Dauid prophecied, that
Egipt,Psal. 87. 4. Babylon, Tyre, Aethiope, and Palestina,
should be borne in her and to her;

and that redemption,Apoc. 5. 9 which the Elders
confessed with ioy, out of euery tribe,
nation, and kingdome: for the church is
not gathered ex vna gente,
                  Au▪ 
                     
                        •
                     erm. 
                        〈◊〉
                     . 23 
                  sed ex vniuersis
mundi partibus reges paritura saith Austen
not of one people, but of all the partes of
the world, bringing foorth kings, which
shold be,Es. 4
                        •
                     . 23. as Esay prophecied, Foster Fathers,
and Queenes to be nursing mothers to the
church; preresembled in those three kings
or sages, which came from farre, to do personall
homage vnto her head, and king at
Bethleem;Matth. 2 and long before that, in S. Austens
opinion,August. yb
                        •
                     sup. prefigured in the Queene of
Saba, her long iourney to Salomon. And
albeit in the primitiue nonage of the
church, this promise of kinges allegiaunce
thereunto, was not so fully àccomplished,
because in those dayes, that prophesie of our
Sauiour, was rather verified,Mat. 10. 18. 
                  You shall be
brought before kings for my names sake,
                  Ioh. 16 
                  by them
to be persecuted euen to death; The best of the
kings, for a long time, reaching but to king
Agrippa
                  
                     
                        •
                     ct. 
                        •
                     6. 28▪
                   his 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                   a slender inclination to
religion,.Po
                        •
                     yd. l
                        •
                     b. 2 And the first
                     •
                  king christened that

euer we read of, Lucius the k. of England
                     •
                  
which was 180. yeares after Christ; and Alexander
Seuerus the I. Emperour,Lamprid. 
                  qui bené
de Christianis sentire coepit, which was 230.
yeares after; yet both before that time, was
the promise, by Esay prophecied, accomplished
in the gathering of the Gentiles; &
in processe of time, the number so incresed,
though still inuisiblie, that as her loue said
in the Canticles,Cant. 6. 7 
                  There are threescore Queenes
and fourescore Concubines, and of the daughters
without number. As for those homages, or
rather base vassalages of Emperours and
kinges, and that much bragd of donation,
which Pipine king of France, gaue to Steuen
the 2. and his successours, in lieu of the
Pope his absoluing this rebell from his loyall
allegiance to his lawfull prince, (falsly
intituled Constantines donation) are nothing
within the circuite of Esay his prophecy,
alleadged by this libeller; but rather
which S. Iohn foresaw,Apoc. 17. 2. and reuealed,
that the kings of the earth should commit fornication
with the strumpet of Babylon.
               
               The two last are easily reioyned, for the

Spirite of God, which is Christ his viceroy
he
                     •
                  e on earth,
                     
                        •
                     . 4. both for his preseruing assistaunce,
and powerfull presence, as hee is called
the Holy ghost, sanctifying the elect in their
hartes and actions; and a Doctor informing
their mindes;
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      14▪
                   and a Pledge assuring
their consciences against the day of Redemption;

                     
                        〈…〉
                     
                   so is he principally called the
Pa
                     •
                  aclete or Comforter, both assisting thē
in their troubles, and comforting them in
their afflictions: so that, if this were the
eu
                     •
                  dent marke, and continuall state of
Christes church to be outwardly glorious,
what neede it either a Protector to defend
it, or a Comforter to support it? for the whole
neede not the Phisi
                        •
                     ion, but the sicke. Therfore
because the church should still be endaung
                     •
                  red,
Luc. 5. 31. he promised his assistaunce; and because
dismayed, his presence; both effectuall,
yet alwayes inuisible. For so saith
Bernard,Bernard de ad
                        •
                     e Dom. 
                  There are three aduents of Christ, in
the first, he was seene on earth, couuersing with
men in flesh and infirmitie; in the last hee shalbe
seene in 
                        •
                     eauen, in glory, and m
                        ••
                     estle: the middle
aduent, which hath-beene since his Ascention,

and is now continuall, occultus est, & soli Electi
in seipsis vident 
                        •
                     um, in spirite and power. Then
our position, denying the cōspi
                     •
                  uous constant
visibilitie of the church truly Cathelike,
to be an essentiall note thereof, is neyther
negatiue of Christ his aduent, nor impeachment
of his promises, nor weakening his assistance,
nor abandoning his presence: but the poorer
and weaker his flocke, the more admirable
is the accomplishment of his promises,
and the more to be magnified is his protecting
power, & his powerfull presence.
For,2. Cor. 
                        •
                     2 
                  my power is per
                        •
                     ected in weaknesse, saith
himselfe to Paul. For Atheisme and Machiauelisme,
in the church of Rome they bred &
from thence haue beene spred, for all her
glorious conspicuitie.
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      p
                        •
                     . 278. 
                  Melch. Canus constantly
auoucheth, Italy to bee the very
fountaine of Atheistes. Machiauell was a Florentine,
and the authour of that detestable
libell, De t
                        •
                     ibus impostoribus, whether Aretinus
or Postellus, eyther an Italian or a
Frenchman, neither of them a visible mē
                  ber
of any reformed church. And not to
ransacke all corners, let a Pope of Rome

speake for Rome it selfe, so glorious, so
gorgious,
                  Franck in 
                        〈…〉
                     . 
                  so constant. Pius Quintus often
spake it with griefe, Roman adhuc magis
gentiliz are quàm Christianizare, and it is not
50. yeares since hee died, that Rome was
yet more heathenish then Christian
                     •
                   so thē
we conclude this point of Visibilitie, with
that speech of Clement.
                  Clem. Ale. 
                  Alexandr. Any thing
becomes a Christian better 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                   then
to be pompous: if euery Christian, whose
bodie is the temple of the holy Ghost,
much more the Church, which is the body
of Christ, should not glorie in her
pompe.
            
         
         
            The Second Article.
            The Learned Protestants are Infidels.
            
               1 Whosoeuer buildeth his faith vpon his
owne priuate, and singular exposition
of Scripture, is an Infidell. This is his
Mai
                     •
                  r.
            
            
               
               Aunsweare.
               
                  STrumpettes,Plut. they say, haue
more easie deliuerie in their
trauaile, then honest womē;
and Sophisticall arguments
are sooner framed then true
syllogismes:Arist. 
                        •
                     len. the tearmes of this proposition
being 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , the connexion will not
hold, for Faith and Infidelitie beeing ex diametro
opposite cānot agree at the same time
in the same subiect. Is it a trueth which he
buildes? then the builder is no Infidell, is it
a falshood? then that which he buildes is
not Faith but errour.Aqu. ad Rom
                        •
                     
                     ▪ d
                        •
                      ad Heb▪ 1. All knowledge in
Diuinitie is threefold, as the light is, opinion,
compared to the twylight; Faith, to
the dawning; science, to the Sunne shine;
the first is neither certaine, nor euident, being
still in formidine oppositi, and so resoluing
vpon nothing, falleth either in obliquum
ambigui,
                  Bernard. or errorem mendacii, and is the
very fountaine of Atheisme and heresie; at
the best,Rom. 2. 20. it is but that which S. Paule calleth

                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , a very morphew & faint

colour of knowledge. The third (Scienti
                        •
                     )
is both certaine and euident, which
being within the compasse of S. Paul his
non 
                        〈◊〉
                     ,
                  
                     
                        〈…〉
                     
                   in respect of vs, is proper to that
other li
                     •
                  e,
                     
                        〈◊〉
                     
                   saith Basil, where we shal know
euen as we are knowne;
                     
                        〈…〉
                     
                   because we having
here not 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , as Damascen speaketh,

                     
                        〈…〉
                     
                   but compassed about with this vaile
of flesh, haue no other knowledge but

                     〈…〉
                   in part and vnperfect.
                     
                        〈…〉
                     
                  
The middle therefore which is Faith is certaine
but not euident, being of thinges not
seene Heb. 11.
                     
                        〈…〉
                     . 
                  quia valdé remota est a sensibus

                        〈◊〉
                     
                   saith S. Augustine.
                     
                        〈◊〉
                     . But there being
exfide in fidem Rom. 1. 17.
                     
                        〈…〉
                     . degrees in

                     •
                  aith, he which reacheth not the highest
step, is not to be concluded an Infidell: for,

                     〈◊〉
                   
                  in vniuersali,
                  
                     
                        〈◊〉
                     . 
                  errans in particulari is no
infidelitie in the iudgment of the schooles;
els the Apostles deriring to haue their faith
increased Luc. 17.Luc▪ 1
                        •
                     . might bee accompted
infidels, and the Apostle his difference betweene
a weakeling in faith and an Infidel,Rom. 14
were superfluous, Wherefore as in that
morall precept of Epicharmus 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  
                  
                     
                        ••
                     charm.
                  
to be the strength,Tull▪ Acad. qu. & ioynts of wisedome,
there is not inioyned an Academicall 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  ,
an obstinate restrainte of the assent to any
thing we reade or heare, but a prepensed
deliberation, not to be rashly credulous:
so in diuine knowledge,August. Faith, being by S.
Austen defined intellectus cum assensu, they
whome Christ calleth 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                   slowe of
heart to bel
                     •
                  eue,Luc▪ 24. were not to bee intituled
Infidels. For tarditie and suspence of the assent,
may arise by some obstacle not remooued,
but infidelitie proceedes from a
pertinacie of the minde. Therefore his
proposition had bene more Theologicall
and Logicall, Whosoeuer builds his opinion
or his errour is an Infidell. For nothing is
to be accompted faith, whose obiect is not
veritas prima;
                  Aqui
                        •
                     . 22 qu. 1. Againe, building of a mans
faith argues his desire to be confirmed therin,
a thing not incident to an infidell. For
all infidelitie is purae negationis or prauae,
                  Schola to
                        ••
                     
                   either
priuatiue or contrary: the first in them
to whome the trueth was neuer reuealed,
as the Pagans and Heathen,1. Cor. 15 which haue
not the knowledge of God; and these can

haue no desire to confirme their faith
which they haue not, for ignotinulla cupido:
the other, in them to whome the trueth is
manifested, which, with Dauid, wee may
call the Adders Infidelitie.
                  Ps
                        •
                     l. 58. 4. Psalm. 58. 4. that
will not heare the voyce of the charmer,
nor beleeue the Prophets report. Esay 53. 1.
but resist the holy Ghost,Esa. 53. 1 and the trueth reuealed
Act. 7.Act. 7. (the Fathers distinguish thē,
with non audire, and nolle audire) and this
beeing an opposition ioyned with a contempt
of the trueth, is right infidelitie, and
the defence of such an one his opinion, is
not to be called a rearing but a rasing, not
a building but a demolition of faith. If it be
obiected that he speakes not of faith in definitely,
but limittes it personally, His faith,
which may be false; I aunsweare, that any
mans faith, if it bee proportionable to the
generall faith receiued, neede no other
building, then that which is allready vpon
the Prophets and Apostles Ephes. 2.Ephes. 2. 20. if exorbitant
from it, then it is no faith, but either
an erronious opinion in the conceite,
or hereticall in the defence, and so no faith,

because fidei non potes
                        •
                      subesse aliquod falsum.
if by his faith hee meane an outwarde profession,Aqu. 22. 
                        •
                     . 
                        〈◊〉
                     . 3
hee gaines nought by it, because
any mans profession is either true or false,
according to his knowledge. And so the
Maior is euery way absurd. yet thus hee
confirmes it by two arguments, first, from
the nature of faith, secondly, from the daunger
of priuate exposition.
               
            
            
               1 Because faith must bee infallible, and
impossible to be either erroneous or
chaungeable.
            
            
               Aunsweare
               
                  Ex tuo ore
                        •
                     serue nequam. If this be true in
faith generally, then he which buildes his faith,
that is, ascertaines vnto himself the knowledge
of trueth howsoeuer, neither buildes
towers in the aire, nor makes by-pathes in
the way idest, neyther conceiues fancies
easily mutable, nor stablisheth errours
daungerously deceiueable, much lesse is
an Infidell▪
                  Heb. 11. Aqu. 
                        •
                     n Rom▪ 1. True it is, that faith is an assent
with an assuraunce, which certitude makes

it differ from opinion, doubtfulnesse, and suspition,
the inseparable pages of him, whom
S. Iames calleth 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  .
                     
                        •
                     ac. 1▪ 8. Iac. 1. 8 Yet there.
may be in faith both assenting, & assuring,
at sometimes and in some pointes hoesitance
and wauering, which demonstrate mans
infirmitie, not to bee called infidelitie. For
though Christ haue prayed that the faith of
his chosen may not suffer an eclipse either
totall or finall Luc. 22.Luc. 22. 23 yet euen the saints
of God, haue their 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                   and defectes in
faith,1. The. 3. 10 1. Thess. 3. 10. yea, with faith, especially
of assent, there may be 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                   Mar. 9.
24.Mar. 9. 
                        •
                     4 which must bee translated incredulitie
for want of that full perswasion which S.
Paule calleth 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                   Heb. 10. 22.Heb. 10. 22. not ininfidelitie,
which, beeing an obdurate pertinacie
he calleth 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                   Ephes. 4. 19.Eph. 4. 19 and
therefore some of their owne writers ventilating
the title of Alphonsus, Dubius in fide
infidelis est,
                  Alph. de Cast 
                        ••
                     b 1. cap. 10 Vid. Can. lib. 12 are bold to say, that this is but
iuris. fictio, not reiveritas, vnlesse with that
doubting there bee ioyned pertinacia. For,
subscribing to an heresie affectu alliciente,
non errante intellectu, though in the suspition

of the Law it be infidelitie, yet in truth
and properly it is not so,Ibid. saith Canus. His second
argument followeth.
            
            
               2 But faith which is builded vppon priuate
exposition of Scripture, is subiect
to errour and change, and consequently
vpon better aduice, & consiration
may be altted.
            
            
               Aunsweare
               His meaning of priuate exposition, wee
will examine in the Minor: onely here in a
word, let vs trie whether faith builded vpon
publike exposition be vnchangeablie true,
and may not be altered. By publike exposition,
wee meane, as they, the Church,
Councels, Fathers, or in truth, the Pope only.
For so Canus will haue it,Lib. 6. c. 8 because to him
alone was giuen Priuilegium infirmitatis not
to erre in his definitiues of faith (in decreto
fidei) I demaunde therefore,Luc. 22 beginninge
with S. Austen, the opinions which hee
once held, and after retracted, were they

built vpon priuate or publike exposition? if vppon
his owne priuate, then, by this fellowes
Maior, he was at the same time both
a Christian & an infidell: if vpon publike,
then a faith so builte also may bee chaungeable.
The sentences of Councels are publike
expositions, is faith vnfallible grounded
vpon them? alteration must be when expositions
are contradictory, and these haue
bene often seene in Councels, that speach
of S. Austen holding true, Plenaria Concilia
soepé priora a posterioribus emendantur.
                  August. de bap. lib. 2 As for
Popes, the obseruation hath beene well
made, that since the time of Stephen the VI.
it hath bene the custome of Popes, rising
either from enuie, or vaine-glory, the succeeding
Bishops acta priorum aut infringerent,
aut omninó tollerent, would either narrowly
empale,Spec. Pont. or vtterly repeale the decrees
of their predecessors. And that the sea
Apostolike may erre in faith, not our men
alone, but very many of theirs, cited euen
by Canus himselfe,lib. 6. cap. 1. doe dispute and conclude.
So then my short conclusion is against

this proposition, first, that he which
buildes his faith, is no Infidell, Secondly, that
the mutabilite or errour in matters of faith is
the euent non expositionis priuatae, but depranatae,
not the singuler interpretation of any mā,
but that which S. Peter calleth 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                   a distorted
corruption of the text,2. Pet. 3. 16. whether publike
or priuate. His Minor followeth:
            
            
               2 But all Protestantes builde their faith
vpon their owne priuate exposition of
Scripture.
            
            
               Aunsweare.
               If by priuate exposition he meane as Moses
speaketh Nombers 16. 28.Nom. 16. 28 a mans owne
fancie without Gods direction, wee deny
this assumption:2. Pet. 1. we say with S. Peter that
no Prophesie, whether of the olde Testament
for prediction or of the new, for interpretation
is 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                   of any priuate explanation,
but holy men in the Law forespoke,
and in the Gospell expound as they
are moued by the spirite.1▪ Cor. 12 We say with Paul
that the naturall man cannot perceiue the

thinges of God. 1. Cor. 2.1. Cor. 2. yet that phrase
of his withall must be remembred alij datur
interpretatio sermonum. 1. Corr. 1
                     •
                  .1 Cor. 12. to
some one particular man a thing may bee
reuealed,1. Cor. 14 vnknowne to the rest. 1 Cor. 14.
In the exposition of Scripture it is not 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  ,
Eph. 4. 14 which must carrie it Ephes. 4. 14.
neither a sence cogd or numbred, that as
in dicing (from that game the woord is
borrowed) the more spots the better cast;Amd
                        •
                     . Fric.
so in expounding, the more voyces the
sounder sence. For not the Spouse onely,
that is the whole Church, but & Tu
quoque saith Bernard,Bern. 
                        •
                     er. 49 euen one singular
partie, finding that in himselfe which Dauid
did, in meditationibus meis exardescit ignis,
Psal. 39. 3.Psal. 39. 3. the assistaunce of Gods spirite in
his studies, may boldly pronounce of himselfe
particularly, as the church in generall
Introduxit me Rex in cellam vinariam.
                  Cant. 2. 4 Cant. 2.
4. euen vnto me (as hee expounds it) hath
he reuealed the vnderstanding of his mysteries.
Lib. 
                        •
                     . c. 8 And therefore both Canus graunts
that vnicuique perse, to euerie particuler man, the
doctrine of faith may bee euident, if hee

haue the spirite of God in him;Panormit. and a great
Lawyer of theirs thinkes that he deserues
more credite, though he be vnus aliquis, hauing
Scripture his witnesse, then the huge
multitude of the aduerse part without that
proofe. So then, grounding vppon that distinction
of S. Paul (in a case not farre different)
2. Cor. 3. 5.2. Cor. 3. 5. 
                  a nobis, & ex nobis, if it
be an exposition giuen by a priuate man
a se, from himselfe, by the assistaunce of
Gods spirite, and the annointing within
him 1. Ioh. 2. 27.1. Ioh. 2. 27 it is sound by that rule of
the Apostle,1. Cor. 2 
                  The spirituall man discerneth all
thinges 1. Cor. 2. and by the iudgement of a
learned Cardinall,Cai
                        •
                     tan. praesat. ad pentat. such an one his sence,
concording with the text, is to be warranted
against the whole current and torrent
of the Fathers;Con
                        •
                     . Nic. and the councell of Nice
put it in practise, in preferring the sole
iudgement of Paphnutius before so many of
a contrary concord: but if it be ex se of his
owne braine, and inuention like the spiders
webb.Esa. 59 Esa. 59. wrought out of her
owne substance, we denie it, neither relie
wee on it. And therefore wee say that a

mans priuate exposition may be allowed, so it
be not his owne priuate, that is, of his own
wit and reason, without ground of Scripture.
yet he confirmes his Minor by a prosyllogisme
            
            
               Either they builde their faith vppon their
owne priuate opinion, in expounding
the Scripture, or the Church, or the
Fathers, or Councels, but not vpon
these three, ergó vpon their owne.
            
            
               Aunsweare.
               The argument is vnsound being fallacia
diuisionis; for there is another building,
which Christ calleth the Wisemans founding,
Math. 7 not vpon men, they are but sand, but
vpon the rocke which is Christ & his doctrine;
the Beraeans building, expounding
scriptures by cōference of scriptures,Act. 17. 11 which
S. Austen calleth the rule of faith,
                  August de dact. chri
                        •
                     t. Chrysostome

                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , the most exact ballance to
weigh the trueth;Chrysost. in 2. Cor. Cypr. ad Pomp. 
                  Cyprian originem Euangelicam,
fontem Dominicum, the springing
fountaine that neuer failes vs, whereas the

Fathers, and Councels, like the waters of
Tema,
                  Iob. 6. 19 especially in exposition, deceaue vs at
our greatest neede: all of them hauing many
errours confessed by themselues, manife
                     •
                  t
contradictions obserued by others, diuerse

                     •
                  arres in great pointes of faith, as hee
might demonstrate too plainely, which
would play Cham his part in discouering
their nakednesse.Cen. 9. yet we read them, note
them, admire them, quoate them, profite
by them, praise God for them, refuse them
not in any Romish controuersie, rest not
on them, but, imitate that wisedome of
trauailers in Plutarke his iudgement,Plutar. 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     . who
passing by many goodly cities, view them
& take delight in them, yet settle thēselues
in one principall, where they may haue
more certaine profite, with lesse daunger.
For should not a people enquire at their
God?Es. 8. 19 saith Esay; whose oracle is the Scriptures.
which Christ cōmaunds to search
Ioh. 5.Ioh. 5. they being that more certaine word
of prophesie,2. Pet. 1. to which, we doe well if we
attend, saith Peter: yea, by their owne cō
                  fession,
vltima resolutio fidei, the last repose

of our 
                     •
                  aith,Can 
                        •
                      3 c. 8. must not be either vppon the
church, that is too generall; nor vpon the
Fathers, that is more rusticall then diuine,
(iustici 
                        •
                     otius quàm Theologi videamur) for so
do the Saracens vppon their maisters,
                     
                        〈…〉
                     
                   the
Iewes on their Rabbins, the Gentiles on
their Philosophers; much lesse vpon the
Pope, that were too Pythagoricall, Ipse dixit;
                  
                     
                        〈…〉
                     . & 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                   (according to the Prouerbe)
too Poetlike, who, when in their
Tragedies they are come to an exigent,
                     
                        〈…〉
                     
                     ▪
                  
which they cannot extricate, they haue a
God in an engine, whome they turne
downe with a deuice to make vp the matter.
The last and safest refuge is therefore,
which Esay prescribeth,Es. 8, 20 
                  ad legem & testimonium.
Esay. 8. 20. to the law and to the
testimony; for whether shall we goe, saith
Peter,Ioh. 6, 68 here are the wordes of eternall life?
that so wee may say of the Fathers and
Councels, as the Samaritans to that woman
Iohn 4.Ioh. 4. 42 Now we beleue, not because
of thy saying, for wee haue heard him our
selues, and know that this is indeede the
Christ the Sauiour of the world. But here

is the question, who shall interprete them?
S. Iohn will answeare, you neede not that
any man teach you the annointing within
you,1, Ioh, 
                        •
                     , 27 teacheth you all thinges. 1. Ioh. 2.
But this is priuate exposition? nothing lesse;
a sw
                     •
                  rne Notary, though a priuate man,
yet his hand and testimony alone, passeth
for authenticall and publike: The holy
Gho
                     •
                  t, the principall Register of the Trinitie,
Exod, 32 the hand of God wherewith the Law
was grauen;Es, 53 Math, 12 the Lordes arme wherwith
the Gospell is made powerfull; the finger
of God which wrought all miracles warranted;
the penne-guide of the Euangelists;
the tongue of the Apostles;Act. 2 Ioh 14 the suggestor
of trueth vnto the faithfull; though he be,
as S. Austen cals him,August. 
                  internus magister, and
speaketh within vs, yet beeing the Spirite
of trueth,
                  Es, 11, 2 and knowledge, and counsell. Es. 11.
2. his sole testimony counteruailes the authoritie
of all outward and ministeriall
witnesses. The Church, Councels, Fathers,
are no better then the Apostles; who confesse
themselues to bee but ministers, per
quos credimus.
                  1
                        •
                      Cor, 3. 5 1. Cor. 3. he is the Doctor c
                        •
                     i

credimus.
                  Eph. 1. 13 Ephes. 1. 13. and fides in infusa, by cō
                  fession
of schoolemen, which is the operation
of the spirite, must preuent fidem acquisitam,
                  Rom. 10 which commeth by hearing, and
the ministerie of men; for Lydias hart must
be opened, before shee can profite by hearing.
Act. 16 Act. 16. and he which hath the Key
of Dauid,Apoc. 3. 7 Apoc. 3. 7. hath this prerogatiue,
before them that haue the keyes of knowledge.
Luc. 11. 52 Luc. 11. 52. and therefore the order
of the holy Ghost, is by some of them obserued,
in saying: The people beleeued God,
and his seruant Moses.
                  Exo. 14. 31. Exod. 14. 31. not Moses
before, but first the Lord
                     •
                  , and then his
minister. The principall act of faith, is assent
to those things that are credibilia,
                  22 quaest. 6. con
                        •
                     lus. saith
Aquin. all which amounting the reach of
mans reason naturall, it must be wrought
by a supernaturall cause within, and that
is Gods spirite alone; not our selues, that
is gentilisme, and denied by S. Paul. Eph. 2.
not party perpale,
                  Eph. 2. first, our selues, and then
God, that is Pelagianisme, and confuted
by S. Austen;Aug. 
                        〈◊〉
                     . not by a miracle seene,
or men perswading, those are outward inducementes,

                  22. Aqu, rbi sup. no sufficient inforcementes▪
and yet we say with Paule, that faith commeth
by hearing Rom. 10.Rom. 10. that is by Fathers,
Councels, and Church testimony,
distinguishing,Gorr
                        •
                     m ib. as Gorram one of their own
doth, by them praeparatiué, by God effectiué.
& therefore no reason we should build onr
faith vpon them, beeing but mediate witnesses,
not immediate causes. And so wee
cōclude with Aquin as in his own words,
Innititur fides nostra reuelationi Apostolis &
Prophetis facta,
                  Aq. 1. q. 1. a
                        •
                     t. 8. ad. 2 Our faith is built vpon the doctrine
of the Prophets and Apostles.Lib. 2. c. 1. And
with Canus (alludinge to that speeche of
Quintilian for grammer) that the Canonicall
writ,Quintilian is that foundation, on which
vnlesse we build our faith, quicquid superstruxeris
corru
                        •
                     t, whatsoeuer we reare will fall.
And now his syllogisme is concluded, his
article might haue ended,
                     
                        •
                     ull. de Or
                        ••
                     . but his after wit
telling him, that his reasons examined,
would proue but scopae dissolutae: the article
and the argument not agreeing; that, proclayming
only the Learned Protestantes Infidels:
this, cōcluding that all Protestants are so,

and the reason of both, because they refuse
the Fathers expositions;
                     
                        〈…〉
                     
                   he now turnes Zenoes
fist into a palme, and leaues his Logike for
a figure in Rhetorike, which they call
Correctio dicti.
                  
                     
                        〈…〉
                     
                   Campian belike hauing rubd
him by the elbow, and telling him, that
            
            
               Some Protestantes allowe the Fathers
and their expositions; so farre forth as
they agree with Gods worde, and no
further; but this is nothing but to
delude the world.
            
            
               Aunsweare
               In deede Thucydides neuer spake it
more truly,lib▪ 2 then we may 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                   herehence
haue risen both the mortall spite of
Rome against vs; and also this title of Infidelitie,
because we make rectum to be Iudex
sui & obliqui;
                  
                     
                        〈◊〉
                     
                     ▪
                   for vsing the Scriptures as a
fanne for the Fathers, to winnow their
chaffe from their graine; for vrging that
place of the Prophet Esa 8.Es. 8, 20 of all writers
both auncient and moderne, if they speake
not according to this rule, there is no light in

them. which is no other thinge then the
Fathers themselues wish, and require
Tertullian reiects any mans arbitrium suum,
                  Ter
                        ••
                     llian.
vnlesse it bee according to the doctrine
taught by Christ and preached by the
Apostles;Cyprian. Cyprian regardes not quid hic
aut ille,
                  Ieron. in but what Christ did or spake;
it was not parentum or maiorum authoritas
which made S. Ierome to stoope,Ier. 9. but
onely Dei docentis imperinm. Not to speake
of Nazianz.Nazian. who peremptorily avoweth
that our doctrine is Pythagoricall dixit dominus,
                  
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     . without reason naturall, or Fathers
a
                     •
                  thoritie; but Austen cries away with
our papers,August. in Psal. 57. 
                  codex domini pr
                        •
                     cedat in medium.
and excellently to this present purpose els
where,Cont. Cres. lib. 2. there are bookes, saith he, quos non
licet iudicare, sed secundum quos alij iudicandi.
videlicet, the bookes Canonicall, which
we are not to iudge, but according to which
other Doctors are to be censured; no other
thing then the sounder schoolemen doe auouch,
in admitting onely that to bee the
church doctrine,Aq. 22. q. 
                        •
                     
                   
                  quae procedit ex veritate prima
in sacris literis manifestata. No other,

briefly, but what the Apostle inforceth,
that if we receiue the witnesse of men,1. Ioh. 5. 9 the
witnesse of God is greater.R
                        •
                     m. 3. For, let God be
true and euery man a liar. Rom. 3. Neither
is this a delusion of the world, but a religiō
to our God, & our reuerence to his word;
an appeale from men subiect to ouersights
and affection, vnto the holy spirite perfect
and vnpartiall; in making the Scriptures
the touchstone of their writings; especially
hauing to deale with such Romish impostors,
Basil. S. Basill cals them 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , corrupting
all the Fathers,
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     . and counterfayting
many of them: dealing in the first, as Procrustes
with his guestes in his bed,Plut. T
                        •
                     es. eyther
hacking them off, or racking them out, as
may fit their fancies; in the other as Caligula
with Iupiters idole,S
                        •
                     eto
                        •
                     . tooke off the
Gods head, & set his owne in place thereof,
citing Fathers that were neuer extant:
but as the Poet saide, Nil mihi vis, & vis
cuncta licere tibi:
                  Martial. our reuoking the Fathers
to Scriptures touch, is delusion, but when
some of their own say, that the Fathers are
no Fathers if they swa
                     •
                  ue from the church

doctrine,fol. 140. that is Rome, or the Pope, as Duraeus
doth; and others, that both the church
and Pope haue authoritie aboue Fathers,
and against scriptures,Lib. 2. c▪ 16. & 16. as Canus discourseth
at large (an opinion which is the verie
male-engine of all sound diuinitie) this is
plaine dealing & allowable Marrie, Saint
Chrysostome is so farre from counting it a
delusion,Chrys. in 2. ad Cor. hom. 1
                        •
                     . the course we take, that he thinkes
it a grosse absurditie among Christians to
be so warie, that in paiment of monie we
will not credite men, but numero & calculo
committere, tell it after them, cast the sums,
number the poundes, weigh the golde;
& yet in the grand pointes of faith, we wil
rest vpon the bare sentence of Fathers simplie,
without due triall, especiallie hauing
so perfect a touch and ballance as the word
is to trie them by. And now from arguments
he falles to questions, 4. in number.
            
            
               1 For what meane they when they say,
they will allow them so farre forth as
they agree with Scripture?
            
            
               
               Answere.
               If in this question hee aske what hee
knowes, it is ironicall hypocrisie; if not, it
is ignorant follie: our meaning hath bin
oft expressed, to be that of Saint Austens, to
preferre Saint Paul himselfe before all, and
aboue al Doctors (his expositors) not concording
with the text;August. epist. 19. that as we are not

                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                   so peremptorie and selfe louing, to
take vp that olde verse, Nostra haec sunt,
veteres migrate coloni, vtterly to omit the fathers;
Canus. so we admit of them, as Canus himselfe
doth, reade them and alledge them
with reuerence, yet with choyce & iudgement
(their soundnesse making vs more
learned, their corruptions more wary)
least taking the chaffe with the wheate, as
the Prophet speaketh,Ie
                        •
                     . 23. that of Lyrinensis
prooue true,Ly
                        •
                     i
                        •
                     ensis. 
                  Absoluuntur magist
                        •
                     i, condemnantur
discipuli: whereas if you take the
p
                     •
                  ecious from the vile,le
                        •
                     . 15. 19 you shalbe according
to my word, saith the Lord, Ier. 15.
            
            
               
               2 Meane they perhaps, that if the Fathers
bring Scriptures to prooue any
point of Religion now in controuersy,
to allow that point as true?
            
            
               Aunsweare.
               We doe, with this prouiso of S. Paule,
that they do 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  ,Phil. 3. that they
march in a squadron, agree without difference
in that point. 2. 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , that the Scriptures
they alleage be canonically warranted, regularly
vnderstood, and rightly applyed.
Who shall iudge of this? the prouerbe is,
Lapis aurum probat,
                  Adag Eras. 
                  aurum homines, The stone
tries gold, and gold tries men: so the spirite
of God trieth betweene the Scriptures
Canonicall and Apocryphall, & the Scriptures
trie the Fathers, whether their sence bee
sound or adulterate.
            
            
               3 If so, why reiect they then S. Austen &
other Fathers, who bring Scripture to
proue prayer for the dead? yea and all
controuersies almost in religion, the
Fathers prooue by Scriptures when
they dispute vpon them.
            
            
               
               Answere.
               
                  In promptu ratio est; our answere is readie
and briefe, first to Augustine and the other
fathers in this case,
                     
                        〈…〉
                     . which was Saint Augustines
to Cyprian in the like. We repute not
their writinges as Canonicall, but iudge
them by the Canon; if they accorde, cum
laude corum, to their praise we admit them;
if they dissent, cum pace 
                        •
                     orum, by their leaue
wee refuse them. Which in this point is
true:Epiphanius for Epiphanius though mightily opposite
in this opinion against Aerius, cōfesseth
that this is not praeceptum patris, but institutio
matris, not any precept of Scripture,
(where notwithstanding we reade of solemne
funerals,Gen. 49. Heb. 11 and honourable memorials
of the dead) but a tradition of the Fathers,
Tertu
                        •
                     ian. and Church, which is also Tértullian
his speach. Secondly, for the thing it selfe,
sithence it hath often and impregnably bin
proued, that the praier for the disceased, neither
preuaileth with God, nor auaileth the
dead;Chrys
                        •
                     st. therefore Chrysostome, howsoeuer a

great patron for this point, concludes that
it is but 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , a verie stage-play &
mockerie. But of this poynt more in the
treatie of Purgatorie. For the last clause
if it be true, wee commend it as an excellent
precedent and paterne, desiring that
they which so much glorie of the fathers,
would therin imitate them. For this word
the Scriptures is that tower of Dauid, wherin
are a 1000. shields and tota armatura
fortium, all weapons both defensiue and
expugnatorie for all conflicts of controuersie,
Cant. 4. 4 
                  Cant. 4. 4.
            
            
               4 Or perhaps they meane to admitt the
Fathers when they alleage Scripture,
but such as euery Protestant shall allow
of: so it be conformable to their
fancies, & fit their new coyned Gospell:
and in this sence, who seeth not
that euery paltrie companion will
make himselfe not onely the true expositor
of Christes word, but also will
preferre his exposition before all auncient
Fathers, when they daunce not
after his pipe, and consent not with
their heresies.
            
            
               
               Aunsweare.
               These hick scorning termes of new coyned
Gospell, paltry companion, dauncing after his
pipe: and those wordes also of fie
                     •
                  ie element,
fancies, and heresies, beeing but the issues
of a filthie braine, and loathsome stomacke,
we returne into his throate, with
the aunsweare of the Philosopher, 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  ,

                     
                        〈…〉
                     . a fennel
stalke will not make a speare, nor such
wordes sound proofes; onely they argue
an impatience, with a badde cause, and a
worse conscience. The substaunce of this
demaund is, if a priuate man may discerne of
Scriptures, whether truely or falsly alleaged by
the Fathers? an answeare hee receiues in the
rifling of his Minor: if that cōtent him not,
S Paule will tell him that there is discretio
spirituum a gift of the holy Ghost,1. Cor. 12 
                        〈◊〉
                     . 7. not tyed
onely to the Church and Churchmen, but
imparted 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , to euery man illumined by
the spirite, imploring Gods direction, and
conferring Scriptu
                     •
                  es: and therefore elswhere
hee wisheth eueryman abundance

                  in suo sensu.
                  Rom. 14▪
                   Rom. 14. Wherein as he giueth
libertie for euerie man to haue his owne
sense, so withall 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                   to assure his conscience
that this his meaning is rectified;
which certainty is wrought by prayer to
God,Ber
                        •
                     . ad patres in monte. diligent cōference, serious studies, often
meditation, & the like; all which beeing
euident arguments of a spiritual man,
his power is warranted, by saint Paule, to
discerne al things,1. Cor. 2. euen profunda Dei. Whervpon
Canus inf
                     •
                  rs,Lib. 2. ca. 8. that vnicuique praestan
                     
                        ••
                     
quod in se est, to euery man vsing the means
before named, God giues vnderstāding sufficient
in all matters of saluation: for the
eare trieth wordes, as the mouth tasteth
meate,Iob. 34. 
                        •
                     . saith Iob As therefore the palate, if
it be well affected, can discerne perfitely of
the sapours which touch it, if infected, it
cannot: so, saith he, the affection of a mind
well disposed,Canus vbi sup paulô post. is able to distinguish a truth
frō an er
                     •
                  our. So true is that of the Philosopher,
Qualis vnusquis
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      erit, tale etiam iudicium
proferet.
                  Aristot. Notwithstanding herein we verifie
not that prouerbe to bring Saul among
the 
                     •
                  rophets,1. Sam. 19. not to make men deuoide of

Gods spirit, though otherwise acutely witted,
or excellent
                     •
                  ie learned, discerners
of spirituall thinges; wee knowe that
the sha
                     •
                  pest Philosophers comming to
these mysteries, haue fared as the Sodomites
at Lots doore;Gen. 19. Nazianzen. August as Nazianzene speaketh

                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                   as saint Augustin, acut
                        •
                      obtusi,
and as Gerson obserueth, disputers in these
poynts,Gerson tract de caus
                        •
                     s. Iohn. 3. 
                  vt caeci de coloribus: but knowing
with all that the Spirit bloweth where it
listeth Ioh. 3. we, with the Apostle, grant
this prerogatiue of true exposition, not to
euerie man pelly melly, but to euery spirituall
man, whom, because it so pleaseth
this Libeller, he entitles a paltry companion:
but what sayth hee to his owne Melchior
Canus?
                  Lib. 2. ca. 6. who giues this power simplici mulierculae,
to a silly woman, assigning his reason,
quia ab vnctione docetur, because shee is annoynted
with the Spirit. And here I might
nd, but that you sh
                     •
                  ll see either the impud
                     •
                  ncie,
or the ignorance, as I gesse it, of this
mate, for 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                   according to the Prouerbe
as Saint Paul sayd of clergie marriage,
1, Cor, 9. 1. Cor. 9. haue not I power to leade

about a sister a wife? so, say I, haue not we
Protestants as good authoritie to refuse
the fathers vnsound expositions of Scriptures,
as well as the greasie shauelings among
the Papists, who reiect their soundest
interpretations, crossing their proiects?
In Mat. 16. Pigh
                        •
                     us. Bernard▪ Durius. The Rhemists renounce Saint Austen
as an vnskilfull interpreter of super
hanc petram, Math. 16 Pigh
                        •
                     us abiures him
in the tract of o
                     •
                  iginall sinne. Aug. Steuc.
barkes at saint 
                     •
                  erome in Nomb. and Deu.
and Bernardinus at both of them with a
triuiall prouerbe of dormitat Homerus: and
Duraeus the Scot turnes off Saint Ieroms opinion
of Baruch his book with a quid tum
postea? thus these transam-eyed hypocrites
can spie small motes in vs, not feeling their
owne beames. The summe of this article,
and the drift of this rennagate is, that fides
i
                        •
                     plicita; to driue vs to the streights which
the Philistines forced Israel vnto,1. Sam. 13
                        •
                     
                   the sharpning
our instruments, and the fetching our
weapons frō their forge: that is, to beleeue
as their Church beleeues, without any triall
or examination, and then wee should

not bee Infidels: but that is stopped by S.
Peter, who willes euerie one to bee readie
in giuing an account of that fayth hee professeth,1 Pet 3. 1
                        •
                     .
1. Pet. 3. 10. fayth it is not which
is not certaine, nor aunswere cannot bee
made,Aq 
                        •
                     . q. 
                        •
                     . 
                        〈◊〉
                     . 8. 
                        〈…〉
                      3. but by him which is assured; but
both Aquinas and Canus conclude, that
the authoritie of Doctours and Fathers
make fidem probabilem, nō certam, perswade
fayth, but assure it not: and thus endes
this second Article.
            
         
         
            The third Article.
            All Protestants who are ignorant
of the Greeke & Latine tongue
are Infidels.
            
               Whosoeuer relieth his faith &c.
            
            
               Aunsweare.
               
                  IT is the propertie of Sophisters,August. saith S. Augustine, grandi
cothurno incedere, to make
stately paces, & great shewes
to vphold an ill cause, vel
moram faciendo, if with nothing els, yet

with standing vpon it: faine would this
disputer with his sylly-iesticall method conclude
vs all to be infidels, but he cannot find
a medium to inforce that conclusion; therefore
as Ixion lying with a cloud in stead of
Iuno begot a Centaure,Plut. Ag. & Cleo. neyther man nor
beast: so his malice, breeding with a conceit,
in steed of learning, brings forth Syllogismes,
neyther sound nor acute, his arte
beeing not sufficient to shape him a Logician,
nor his subtilty sharp inough to make
him a Sophister. So that his methode is, as
one of their own 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                   once spake in a like
case,Sir Thom. Moore▪
                   
                  Take it among you, and this it is.
            
            
               Whosoeuer relieth his faith vpon the ministers
credite and fidelitie is an Infidell,
hath no faith at all.
               But all Protestantes in England ignorant
of the Greeke and Hebrue tongues relie
their faith vppon the ministe
                     •
                  s credite.
Ergo
               All those in Englande ignoraunt of the
Greeke aud Hebrue tongues h
                     •
                  ae no
faith at all.
            
            
               
               Answere.
               It is verie base Logicke where the argument
may bee returned vpon the replier,
                     
                        〈◊〉
                     . as
the Maior here may, the Papistes beeing
bound to relie their faith vpon the meere authoritie
of the Church without deniall or
triall, which therefore they call fidem implicitam,
a faith inuolued and folded within
the Church beleefe.A
                        •
                     stot. And it is verie meane
Sophistrie where there is mendatium manifestum
as in the Minor is euident, and a ridiculous
syllogisme, where according to
the prouerbe, aliud Leucon, aliud portat illius
Asinus.
                  Eras. ex Zen
                        •
                     d. The propositiō to be proued being
that all Protestants ignorant of the Greeke and Latine
tongues are infidels, his conclusion inferring
this is, that all ignoraunt of the Greeke and
Hebrew tongues are infidels, as if the Latin and
Hebrew were all one idiom. But bee it as
it is, the Maior was cut off by mee in the
precedent article, the summe whereof is,
that where faith is, there cannot be infidelitie;
The Minor is there also answered by his

owne assumption, for if we builde our faith
vpon our owne exposition, as there hee saieth,
then this is false, that we relie our faith vpon
the ministers credite, which here he assumeth:
and therfore a briefe answere might be that
of Epimenides in S. Paule,Tit. 1. Quint. li. 4. 
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  
Heretikes are euer liers; and Mendacem Opor
                        •
                     et
esse memorem, that prouerbe in Quintilian.
But let vs view his proofes.
            
            
               The Maior is manifest: becauseCal. l
                        •
                     b 4 instit. cap 9 Luth. li. de concil. pag. 14, &c. they
themselues confesse that euery man
may erre and doth erre, neyther haue
they any warrant why the Ministers do
not erre, since they constantly doe defend,
that whole generall Councels,
yea & the vniuersall Catholike church
may erre, and hath erred.
            
            
               Aunsweare
               We deny the argumēt, the force wherof
is, that they which belieue men that
may erre, are Infidels. For, not to dispute
with the Schoolemen, whether the Infide
                     •
                  itie
of Heretikes or Pagans is the worse,
a knowne trueth resisted,H
                        •
                     b. 6. aggrauating the

sinne against the conscience, more then against
him which knowes it not: yet Saint
Augustine makes this difference betweene
an heretike, and him that beleeues an heretike.Aug 
                        〈◊〉
                     .
The first begets or followes an errour
pertinaciously, either for primacie or
glorie: but haeretico credens, is onely caried
away imaginatione veritatis: so, this mistaking
a falshood for a truth, is Satans mockerie,2. Cor. 7.
in his angelical illusion, not the parties
infidelitie, in crediting a sinister perswaswasion.
For learners caried away by their
teachers, though 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                   lying in ambush
to seduce them,Ephes. 4. Ephes. 4. in their assent
are not Infidels, the Apostle calling this
leuitie, a credulitie childish, not infidelitie
which is euer peeuish: and therefore Aquinas
saith, that the teachers and masters
of the Church, failing in any truth diuine,
non praeiudicant fidei simplicium,
                  
                     
                        〈…〉
                     . doe no way
preiudice the faith of the vnlearned, quieos
rectam fidem habere credunt, who still suppose
that they will teach them nothing
but truth. And is it any monster of opinion
either in Caluin or Luther, to say that eyther

men in seuerall, or councels in assembly,
or church in generall may erre? did
not Dauid in an hasty passion,Psal. 116. Rom. 4. and S. Paul
with due premeditation say the same? All
men are lyars. For councels, they said not so
much as Naz.
                  Ephes. 42 who denied his presence
at any Councel, because he saw, as he said,
neither good end, nor happy issue of any
of them; nor more then their owne men,
who affirme that the sentēce of any councell,
is but as aliue mans testament,Nacl Clug. 
                  ambulatoria,
that is, alterable at the pleasure either
of Pope, or succeeding coūcell. Yea they &
we confesse with S. Augustine,Ep. 118 that religious
Councels haue saluberrimam authoritatem
their soueraigne authoritie, yet not absolute
integritie; because, as he elsewhere
noteth,Li
                        •
                     . de ba. the later haue oft times controled
the former; not in circumstances accidentall,
as Martin the Mar-testament in his
Rhemish annotations would shake it oft,in Act. 15
but in essentiall points & capitall, euē touching
the Pope his triple crowne, two
councels crossing each other, about the
primacie and supremacie of the Romish

Bishop; & other for baptising of heretikes,
for Priestes marriage, for worshipping of
Images, for distinctions of bookes Canonicall
and Apocrypha, for humane traditions,
all matters of high controuersie. And
as for the Church erring, the Reader may obserue
how this Pamphleter, shewing himselfe
more busie then intelligent, takes vpon
him to epitomize those controuersies,
which he cannot anatomize: for, first,
we do not say, that the vniuersall Catholike
Church may erre, because that parte triumphant
in heauen, hath no spotte in her for
manners, nor wrinckle for doctrine, but is
euery way glorious and perfect.Eph. 5. 2. 7 Ephes 5.
ma
                     •
                  ry that which is heere militant on
earth, being but marching on to perfectiō,
Heb. 6.Heb 6. 1 & going from strength to strength
Psalm. 84,Psal. 84. 6 cannot as yet sound out that

                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                   and triumphant song of victory against
all errours, vntill shee come to that
day of perfection as Salomon cals it. Prou.
4. 18;Pro
                        •
                     . 4. 18 and Dauid calling the Saintes generationem
qu
                        •
                     rentium Psal. 24. 6.
                     
                        〈◊〉
                     . 24 6 and the Apostle
vi
                        •
                     tores trauailers Heb. 11. 14.Heb. 11. 14 whose

perfectiō, at the best, ius bt a iourny, ambulatoria
per fidem, non per aspectum, walking
by faith not by sight 2. Cor. 5.2. Cor. 5. 7 2. Tim. 4. 8 
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                   Phil.
3. 14. not 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                   vers. 12: in inquisition
not acquisition, tending and attending to
that absolutenesse, both for knowledge &
life, but not attayning it, no not then whē
they come to Paule his consummaui cursum,
                  2. Tim. 4. 8
2. Tim. 4. therefore argue them subiect to
errours fatales, nō lethales,
                  Bernar. such as follow the
nature of man continually, not such as separate
from God finally;Eccles. 1, 13 this sore trauaile
is layd vpon men to humble them therby.
Secondly, if a man in this question of erring,
should aske this companion (beeing
himselfe both errans and erro, a wanderer
in true religion, and a runnagate from his
natiue countrie) what difference between
these two positions, The generall Councels
may erre, and The Church may erre? The learneder
Papistes say, that when they auerre
the Church cannot erre, they meane that
Church which the Schoolemen call Ecclesiam
repraesentatiuam, of which our Sauiour
speaketh, when he saith, Dic ecclesiae,
                  
Math. 18.Mat
                        •
                      1
                        •
                     . 
                  viz. the Bishops and Prelates of
the church, representing the whole church
in generall Councels; and so these controuersies
are Identicall: for wee, saying that
the Councels may erre, therein with all implie
(and that by their owne confession)
that the Churche may erre; therefore thys
Libeller, affectinge such breuitie, mighte
haue spared this last clause: but bold ignonorance
is like Salomon his guilt potsheard,Pro. 26. 23
Prou. 26. it will bewray it selfe shew it neuer
so glorious. But of this controuersie
more hereafter in the fift article;Art, 
                        •
                     . As for our
Ministers, neither themselues doe affect, nor
any of ours defend their immunitie from
possibilitie to erre, as Pighius dooth in the
Apology of his Popes; who, as CanusCanus witnesseth,
to rid Anastasius from the brand of
heresie, for which he was anathematized,
reuileth Gratian most
                     
                        •
                     ontume 
                        〈◊〉
                     
                   spitefully, raileth
vpon the Canonists mostturp
                        •
                     ssime. filthily; and
to salue Honorius his credite that way, calleth
into questiō the authority of both the
6. and 7.P
                        •
                     g. ib. 4. 
                        〈…〉
                     . cap 8. Councels. Yea, wee say of our
selues to our Auditors, as the Apostles to

them of Lystra.Act. 14. 15 Act. 14, Wee are euen men
subiect to the like passions that yee bee. But
what of this? are they infidels therefore
which beleue vs teaching the truth? Why?
Peter halted, and erred in the right track of
the Gospell Gal. 2.Gal. 2 Iohn would haue worshipped
an Aungell twise.Apoc. 19 & 22. Apoc. 19. & 22.
The Apostles & brethrē in Iudaea thought
that the word of God was not to be preached
to the Gentiles,Act 11 Act. 11. (all grosse
errours) is therefore the assent of the whole
church to their doctrine in other pointes,
though heerein taineted, infidelitie? God
forbid. In one word, to trusse vp this Maior
with a short aunsweare, if this proposition
be true, that the relying of a mans faith
vpō the ministers credite, is infidelitie, the whole
crue of Lay Papistes, is but a rout of Infidels;
for, by their owne rules, the onely and all
sufficient faith of the Laitie, must bee nothing
els,Molanus de pract. Theolog. but praescriptum pastorum, that
which their shauelinges teach and limit
them, which faith thus scanteled, this
fellow accomptes infidelitie, and therefore
the argument rather concernes them then

vs, who denie our faith to be lyable vpon
the credite of any mortall man, albeit hee
auowes it in his Minor, and thus would
prooue it.
            
            
               The Minor I prooue; for all such Protestantes
ground their faith vpon the
Bible trāslated into English, the which
translation, they know not whether it
be true or false, whether the Minister
Tindall, for example, erred or no, eyther
vppon ignorance, asWherein he desireth the LL, of the Councell to procure speedil
                        •
                      a new trā
                     slation, because that which now is in vse in England is 
                        〈…〉
                     . Broughton,
one of the greatest Linguists among
the Precisians affirmeth, in an Epistle
dedicated to the LL. of the Councell:
or vpon malice to induce the people
to Protestancie, and to cause them to
leaue the Catholike religion, as Gregory
Martin in his discouerie most pregnantly
prooueth. These errors, I say,
they know not, & consequently cannot
discerne a true translation from a
false, and therefore must needes relie
their faith vppon the silly Ministers
faithlesse fidelitie, which co
                     •
                  uinceth
that they haue no faith at all.
            
            
               Aunsweare.
               Thinke you this fellow meaneth what
Moses would? that as hee vppon zeale, to

quell Ioshuaes enuie, wished that all the
Lordes people could prophesy,Nomb. 1128. Nomb. 11▪
So this mate, vpon compassion of the Laities
ignorance,1. Cor. 14 desireth with S. Paule, that
all sortes were skillfull in the originall languages?
First that were not conuenient,
as agreeing neither with that 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  ,
that multi-varietie of Gods wisedome,
Eph. 3. 10.Eph. 3. 10 in disposing his guiftes, not the
same to all, nor to all alike 1. Cor. 12.1. Cor. 12 but
to some aboue others, as this guift of tongues:
nor with the church gouernement,
for orders beeing appointed in the church,
some to be pastours and teachers, other to
heare and learne; the first haue receyued
that key of knowledge, to open and shut,Luc. 11
Luc. 11. such guiftes whereby they are enabled
to bee both 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                   & 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                   sufficient
to instruct, & forcible to con
                     •
                  ute. 2. Tim.
3.2, Tim. 
                        •
                     
                   as the skill in tongues, the helpe of artes,
the dexteritie of interpretation, the intelligence
of mysteries, the vse and varietie of
bookes, that so they may bee, as Salomon
entitles them, Masters of the assemblies
Eccles. 1
                     •
                  .Eccles. 12 all which, or most of them, God

hath denied to the meany, beeing prone inough
of themselues, ignorant as they are,
to controll the priest,Hos▪ 4, 4 Hos. 4. and would
much more, if they had this panoplie of learning.
Nether is it probable, that they, whiche
apply our Sauiour his Prouerbe to the
commonaltie,Hard. art 
                        •
                     5 sect, 6 Math. 7 
                  ne margaritas porcis, making
them but swine; and thinke as basely of
the Laitie, as the Phariseis, Ioh. 7. this rude
people is accursed,
                  Hosius de 
                        〈◊〉
                     . ve
                        •
                     na. such great patrones of
Scripture-ignoraunce, should eyther haue
Elias his zeale for the Lord of Hostes glory,
1. Reg. 19.1▪ 
                     
                        •
                     eg▪ 19 or Christes compassion for the
peoples want of instruction,Math▪ 9 Math. 9. or S.
Peters care of the words synceritie,1. Pet. 2 
                  
                     •
                  . Pet. 2:
nor that thēselues, the best of them being
bound, vnder the pain of anathema, to fetch
water from that cistern of the vulgar latine,
which they haue canonized authenticall
in their Tridentine conuenticle,Conc. Trid Se
                        •
                     . 4 would
turne the people to the pure fountaines of
the Greeke and Hebrew; nothing lesse. For
to a contrary purpose, as the Spartans enacted,
Plut▪ Lycur. that none should walke by night
with lanterne, torch, or any light; so haue

they forbidden the scriptures to bee vulgarly
translated, least the light being put into
a lanterne Psal. 119 or set on a candlesticke,

                     
                        〈…〉
                     . Math▪ 5.Math. 5 15. to giue light to all that are
in the house indefinitely, the peoples vnderstanding
might prooue the discouerie
of those errours, wherewith be
                     •
                  fore they
were by their owne ignorance mizeled, or
by their blinde guides miss-led: so that
their drift is in this their quarrell & mislike
of trāslation, not that the scriptures should
keepe their 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                   1. Pet. 2.1. Pet. 2. 2, without mixture
or blēding; but that they might haue

                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , an vncouth, and vnperfect voyce
without vnderstanding,1. Cor. 1
                        •
                     . 8 1. Corint. 14. For
would they in sooth, the vulgar sort should
haue knowledge? meanes they must prescribe,
it being not bonum innatum, but seminatum
saith Bernar:Bernard. because faith cometh
by hearing, Rom. 10.Rom 10. (those immediate
knowledges of reuelation and prophesy,
the one a sodaine infusion, the other a successiue
instinct, being long since antiquated)
the meanes therfore is, saith Aquinas,
either a mans owne studie and industry,

Eccles. 1. 13.Eccles. 1. 13. which knowledge he calleth
Scientia, or other mens labor in preaching,
and that hee cals doctrina,
                  
                     
                        〈◊〉
                     . Co
                        •
                     . 1
                        •
                     . 6. 1. Cor. 14. 6. to
the attayning whereof there are required,
saith he else-where,
                     
                        〈◊〉
                     . 2 Cor. 1
                        •
                     . both vis mentalis, the
vigour of the mind, which is vnderstanding;
and corporalis, the aptitude of the body,
which are the sences, two in number,
of the eare and the eye, which both Philosophers,
and diuines call sensus disciplinarios,
                  Schol in. 
                        •
                     . Iohn. 
                        〈◊〉
                      &. A
                        •
                     st. metaph 
                        •
                     
                   beecause knowledge accreweth vnto
men ether by hearing or reading. In which
case God hath excellently prouided to his
people,1. cor. 14. 10 for the eare viuam vocem, 1. Cor. 14.
10▪ the preacher to instruct, for how can
they heare without a preacher?Ro. 10 14. Rom. 10.
14. & for the eye viuum sermonem, Heb. 4. 12.Heb. 4. 12.
written for our learning, Rom. 15. 4. which
all promiscuously are enioyned to read,Rom. 15. 4.
both to accomplish his desire, who would
that all men should be saued, and come to
the knowledge of his trueth.1. Tim, 2. 4 1. Tim. 2. 4 &
for the atchiuing our owne happinesse,
which then is greatest, when wee are likest
to him; which likenesse saith Basil

without knowledge is not effected,Bas despit. sanct cap: 1. nor
knowledge without doctrine, nor doctrine
without speech, nor speech without
his partes, woordes, and syllables; so
that all are commaunded, if it be possibel,
to reade, if not, to heare: Now then the
old rule holding true, Oportet discentem credere,
the learner must beleeue, here ariseth
the question, what if his doctrine bee vnsound?
Es. 28. a remedy is prescribed by Esay his
direction,Act. 17 by the Beraeans practise Act. 17.
trie it by the word written: but that perchance
is vntruely trāslated, either through
ignorance or malice, and so the vnlearned
may be deceaued? doth a Papist make this
supposition,Terent. 
                  & Tute Lepus es? who, presenting
to the idiotes the Bible in a straunge
tongue, neither mooue the eare, nor outward
sence, vnlesse it bee with ratling in
the aire,1. Cor. 14. 8. 1. Cor. 14. 8. nor affect the vnderstanding,
leauing it without fruite, vers. 14
but why should ignoraunce or malice bee
more feared in our English editions, or rather
preiudice our peoples assent thereunto,
then either the Greeke translation of

the 70. interpreters, so diuinely magnified
especially by S. Augustine and Epiphanius:
                     
                        〈…〉
                     
                  
or those of Aquila, Symmachus, Theodotion,
so oft cited by S. Ierome, and a relique
whereof yet remaines in the Romish
bibles; and that of Lucian the martyr in
the Church of Antioch remembred by
Athanasius.
                     
                        〈…〉
                     
                   Or if some of them, which
Theodoretus affirmeth, were translated

                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , peruersely and guilefullye,
yet the vulgar translation, the authour
whereof is vncertaine, and S. Ieromes both
into the Latine and into the
                     
                        〈…〉
                     
                   
                  Sclauonian language;
as also that of Vlphilas into the Gottish
tongue, and Chrysostomes into the Armenian,
besides that famous worke of Origen
his exaplus, are as lyable to these imputations;
the most of these interpretors being
tainted with some errours, and therefore,
by this Pamphl
                     •
                  tors rule, their translations
are subiect either to ignorance or malice,
as well as ours: or admit we, that they
were more exquisite in the tongues then
we, yet, not to speake of the Brittish translations,

                     
                        〈…〉
                     . & English also in the time of Beda,

what should hinder Tindals, or the Geneua
translation into the English, not to
deserue as much credite with our Laitie,
as that Rhemish ridiculous version into
the same idiome, with their Catholike
idiots? his aunsweare is with a witnesse,
because Broughton auoucheth ignoraunce, and
Gregory Martin findeth malice in our vernaculer
translations.Eras
                        •
                     us ex Plutar
                        •
                     h. 
                  Accipit & glebam erro according
to the prouerb, he is neere driuen that hath
no better choise. For want of Kinges and
Queenes, he trumps about with the short-skirts
a Precision and a Papist, mali thripes
mali ipes,
                  Diogenian. saith Diogenian, a woorthy couple,
the one growne mad with his selfe-louing
phrensy, the other possessed with a
Popish lunacie, both of them runnagates
from their naturall countrey. For that
worthy martyr, and learned man Tindall,
in this respect, we say, as some of theirs of
S. Bernard, non vidi
                        •
                      omnia: and he of himselfe
to his readers, as S. Origen in the like,
Medicente quod sentio,
                  Orig, in 
                        ••
                     sh. I speak what I think,
vos decernite, doe you iudge and examine,
whether it be right or no: and for all our

translations we obtrude them not vppon
the church,
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      4 as the Trentish councell doth
that vulgar edition, as scripture authentike
as Sybyllaes leaues, not any time to bee examined,
not any part to be disauowed (both
these argumentes of ignorance and malice, for
Lex, quae probari se non vult, suspecta est, sayth
Tertullian.Tertullian.) nor make them as Sixtus V.
the Pope his Vatican edition 89.Sixtus V. in epist. ad editionem 
                        •
                     atican. 89 
                  vinculum
pacis, fidei vnitatem, charitatis nexum &c. the
bond of peace, the vnitie of fayth, the knotte
of loue, the rule of trueth, the loadstone in
errours, the irrefragable compounder of controuersies.
Onelye wee, by them doe
cracke the shell▪ that the kernell may lie
open to the sight, & taste of any, that haue
appetite thereunto. Indeede Gregory Martin
hath, in his Pharisaicall discouerie,
compassed sea and land, trauersed much
grounde mounted himselfe vppon euery
molehill, ransackt all corners, to descry
our translatours ignorance and malice, and
when all is doone, it is but the suruay of
dronken zebull,
                     
                        〈◊〉
                     . 9. 36 Iud. 9. a shadow of moū
                  taines
for a band of souldiers: like the African

tumult about S. Ieromes escape,Ieron. epist, 89. & Aug. 
                  
                     
                        •
                     edera
for cucurbita Iona. 4. so that any Collatour
indifferent and learned in the Originals,
comparing ours with theirs, wil borrow
Moses his speech,Deu 32. 31. Bellarm. 1. cont
                        •
                     rou. general. pag. 170. and apply it more
truely then Bellarmin doth, Their editions
are not like ours, euen our enemies beeinge
iudges. For not to speake of SS. Ierome,
Augustine, and Hilary, who complayned
of many wantes and escapes in that translation,
called by some of thē
                  Ieron. 
                  vulgata, by
othersAugust. Gregor. 
                  Itala, by Gregory vetus: euē among
themseluesepist. ad Clem. S
                        •
                     pt. 
                  Pagnine for the olde,annotat. 1. in Pand. 
                  Budaeus
for the new,defens. 
                        •
                     id. 
                        〈◊〉
                     . lib. 4 
                  Andradius, andTh
                        •
                     s. 8. in praef. eg. Bibl. 
                  Arias Montanus
for both the testamentes, haue acknowledged
and found therein, not onely
wordes, but sententiam etiam, euen the right
sense▪ & meaning of the holy Ghost to be
peruerted. yea Sixtus aboue named, in his
preface prefixed before his Bible, intituled
ad perpetuam rei memoriam, saith that, before
his Vatican edition, which was but
anno 1589. this vete of theirs,Sixtus V. vbisupr. their vulgar
translation had prooued schismatis & haeresis
inductio, dubitationum fluctus, inuolutio

quaestionum, discordiarum seges, & pia
                        •
                     um
mentium implicatio, the occasion of heresies,
the sea of dou
                        •
                     tes, the Labyrinth of questions,
the seede of contentions, and a snare for religious
minds. So then this imputation scommaticall
of faithlesse fidelitie, fastened vpon
our translatours by this Libeller, may,
in their owne mens censure, bee branded
vppon themselues, and this whole argument
returned vpon this articler, hâc formâ
                  
                     Whosoeuer relieth his faith vpon a corrupt
and vncertaine edition,This is the Maior of this Arti
                              •
                           ler is an
Infidell.
                     But all Papistes are bound to relie their
faith vpon a corrupt edition.Ses
                              •
                           . Trid. binds the
                              •
                           r, and they confesse it to be corrupt. 
                        ergô
All Papistes are Infidels, haue no faith
at all.
                  
               
               And this for his third Article.
            
         
         
            
            The Fourth Article.
            The Protestantes know not what they
beleeue.
            
               The Protestantes know not what they beleeue,
nor why they beleeue.
            
            
               Aunsweare.
               
                  THe white of an egge, without
salt, is flash, and vnsauery,Iob. 6. 4
sayth Iob, and malice
without arte, is vnarmed
bitternesse, and a distempered
folly: and therefore as those iangling
rudesbies,1. Tim. 1. 7 titular Doctors in S. Paules
time, knew not what they spake, nor
whereof they affirmed;Hierom. so saith Ierō. Heretikes
cum disputare nesciant, tamen litigare non
desinunt, though they cannot reason, yet
they will wrangle, and for want of Logicke,
they will chop Logicke. His syllogismes
are wasted, now hee comes to profound
diuisions of why, and what, and the
Protestantes ignorance in both, which he inforceth
by a double reuiew.
            
            
               
               That they know not why they beleeue,
                     
                        〈…〉
                     
                   I
haue shewed before,
               For that the ground of their belefe,
                     
                        〈…〉
                     
                   i
                     •
                   not
the authoritie of the Sc
                     •
                  ipture, of
Councels, of Doctours, nor of the
Church, but their owne fancie.
            
            
               Aunsweare.
               Both these reuiewes 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                   are returned
with a remaund semblable, the first,
where he hath shewed it,
                     
                        〈…〉
                     
                   I haue aunsweared,
and there let him search it: the second,
with Nazian.Nazian. that Tautology is no meanes
of breuitie,
                     
                        •
                     n epist. which hee so affectes in pretence,
and request. But what diuinitie is
this, to call a Christians beliefe to a why?
vid
                     •
                  licet, to calculate the mysteries of faith
by proofe of reason, a thing countercheckt
by all the Fathers,Clem. 
                        〈◊〉
                     . especially Clement Alex.
in generall and particularly by Eusebius in
the Antemonistes,
                     
                        〈…〉
                     
                   who weighed all the
articles of Fa
                     •
                  th by Logicall Syllogismes.
For some, which haue faith, saith S. Augustine,
haue not copiam defendendi fidem,
                  
                     
                        〈…〉
                     
                   not
the skill to apologize their faith, or render

reason thereof; and hee which hath this
skill, doctior est, non fidelior, is the greater
clerke, not the 
                     •
                  ounder Christian: & therfore
his rule elsewher is, not to discusse the
diuine mysteries,S
                        •
                     r
                        •
                     . 131 but to beleeue them; non
rationem requirere, sed fidem simpliciter exhibere.
And the Apostle S. Peter,1. Pet 3. 15 when he wils
vs to be ready to satisfie euery man poscenti
rationem des
                        •
                     e, that asketh a reason of our
hope, meaneth, that neither we should be
ashamed of our faith in our publike confession,
nor to shame it by a depraued conuersation.
For to giue a reason of matters
of faith is not possible, they beeing supernaturall,
and mans reason in that knowledge
but a beast,Ierem. 1
                        •
                      Aqu. 
                        〈◊〉
                      locum Petri. saith Ieremy. neyther,
were it so, is it a faculty generall, but sapientum
tantum saith Aquinas. And they which
desire, by questiōs; to be resolued in the
deepe mysteries of faith, doe it not as An
                  
                     •
                  elme
speaketh, vt per rationem ad fidem acceda
                        •
                     t,
that by reasons or resolutions, they
might be induced to beleeue,
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      
                     
                        •
                     u
                        •
                     d deus homo. 
                        〈◊〉
                     . 
                  sed vt 
                        •
                     orum,
qu
                        •
                      credunt, ontemplatione delectentur. For articles
of faith, are the obiectes of admi
                     •
                  ing

contemplation, not of Logicall demonstration,
saith Basil.
                     
                        〈…〉
                     
                   yet to follow this fellow
his absurde methode, wee can shew
him a t
                     •
                  iple why, three reasons of our beliefe,
the cause why, the meanes why, and
the ende why: the procatarcticall, or first
moouing cause, the grace and power of
the spirite inclining our hartes to beleeue:
                     
                        〈…〉
                     
                  
the demiurgical,
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      10 or instrumentall meanes,
the word of God read or preached. the teleioticall
or finall cause eternall life, which
wee by faith expect;2 Cor. 
                        •
                     
                   the first, for this purpose
called spiritus fidei,
                  2. Co
                        •
                     . 4. 13 2. Cor. 4. 13. the second,
verbum fidei, 1. Tim. 4. 6.1. 
                        〈◊〉
                      4. 6 the last, finis
fidei.
                  1. 
                        •
                     et. 1. 9
1. Pet. 1. 9. so then, the Protestants why,
is that which the Schoolemen call, sufficiens
inducti
                        •
                     um, not onely doctrina diuina,
the holy scripture, sed quod plus est, saith Aquinas,
                     
                        〈…〉
                     
                  
                  interior instinctus dei inuitantis, the inward
inspiration, & motiō of the spirite.
Let the case be in that article of our belefe,
the incarnatiō of Christ, demand of a Christiā
why he belieues this, his answere wil be,
because the Scripture recordes it but reply
vpon him, why he beleeues the Scripture? his

reason exceedes a why, it is the finger of
God opening his hart; els, when S. Peter
handeled those great mysteries in his sermon,
Act. 2.Act. 2. 3 why had some of them compunctionem
spiritus, vers. 
                     •
                  7. the pricking of
the spirite, whereby their hartes were moued
to beleeue? but others of them, spiritum
compunctionis Rom. 11.Rom. 11 their hartes pricking
against the spirite, resisting it partly
by doubting vers. 12.vers. 12. partly by scoffinge
vers. 13.13 the same Scripture opened to thē
all, but the same spirite, not working alike
in all. If any aske a why of this beliefe? S.
Paule will crie out, not aunsweare, O altitudo.
                  Rom. 11. 33 Rom. 11. non est disputationis, sed stuporis,
saith Ambrose,Ambros. it is a matter of amazemēt,
not of argument.Aq. 22. 
                        •
                     . 2 And therfore the scholemen
define credere, to be an acte of the vnderstanding,
assenting to the diuine trueth, ex imperio
voluntat is, a deo motae, per gratiam, at the
commaund of the will, so mooued by the
grace and spirite of God: a resemblance
familiar will make this euident. There are
in euery man three parts.1. The. 5. 23 1. Thes. 5. 23. flesh
soule, and spirite, or rather three men in

one man,1. Cor. 2. 1. Cor. 2. the carnall, naturall, &
the spirituall man; and each of these hath
his seuerall eye. that Chrystalline humor
for the body, the reason for the soule, and
faith for the spirite. Now, then as the eie of
the body, thogh it be the cādle of the body
Math. 622.Math 622. 
                        〈◊〉
                     
                   yet the apple in the eie, is the
eie of that eie, saith Philo; and as the eie
of the minde is reason,
                     
                        〈◊〉
                     . 2. 14. Eccles. 2. 14. yet the
eie of that eie, is the vnderstandinge, sayth
Aquinas:Aquin. so the eie of the part regenerate,
is faith, but the eie of that eie, is the spirite
of God, for in his lighte, doe wee see
light,Psal. 36. 9. Psal. 36. 9. therefore as in the bodily
sight, shine the Sunne neuer so glorious,
be the aire neuer so cleere, and the medium
neuer so transparent, yet if the apple in the
eie be vnsound, the sight will faile, and deceiue
(for he that lookes through a miste,
saith Basil,
                     
                        〈◊〉
                     
                   seeth a misse) so be the media of
our beliefe, optimé disposita, the Scripture
perspicuous, the church testimonie euidēt,
the torrent of Fathers euery way concurrent,
the decrees of Councels vnalterably
constant; yet if the spirite of God, qui &

sensum dat, & assensum mouet, saith Bernar.Barnard.
worke not vpon the wil forcing the assent
thereto, all the other are in vaine. Wherefore,
if wee bee asked why we beleeue? our
aunsweare is, that we ascribe the cause to
Gods inspiration, and the meanes, to the
words ministration. As for this Cuckowlike
Palinodie of Councels, Doctours, and
Church, beeing the fa-burden of euery article
hetherto, it argueth the barrennesse of
his conceite, and the badnesse of his cause,
but deserues no other aunsweare then hee
hath receiued before. And now wee must
come to his second profunditie, of what we
beleeue.
            
            
               And that they knowe not what they beleeue
is manifest, beecause they haue
no rule, wherby to know what is matter
of faith, and what is not. Some
will limit their beleefe to theire Creed,
saying, that nothing ought to be beleued
which is not in the Apostles
Creede: But then I would demande
of them whether wee ought to beeleeue
that the Scripture is the word of
God? that Baptisme is a Sacrament?
that in the Eucharist is the bodie of
Christ by faith? to what article should
these be reduced, seeing they are not
contained in the Creede? or how
shall wee know infallibly, how these
be matters of faith, since they are not
contained in the Creede?
            
            
               
               Aunsweare.
               Were the Law of India and Persiagenerally
infortiat,A
                        •
                     ex. ab. Alex. that he which was thrise
taken in a lie, might be perpetually silēced,
this fourth article had perished in the Libellers
lunges, the three former beeing
shamelesly false: but sithence he is of his
nature, whome the poet describes 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  ,
that hath neither grace to
speake trueth, nor power to holde in his
chatt; Artoxerxes law will fitte him better,Plutarch
as hee punished a liar with fastening
three nailes into his tounge, so to choke
him with three argumentes conuincing
him of manifest vntrueth, in saying that it
is manifest we haue no rule to know what is matter
of faith. First, the holy Ghost praescript, haec

scriptasunt vt credamus,
                  Iohn. 20. Ioh. 20. Secondly,
our writers indesinent challenge prouoking,
with the Prophet Esa. 8,Es. 8. 20. 
                  ad legem &
testimonium. Thirdly, their owne continuall
clamours,Vide prae caet. Stapl. crying out vppon vs, for
making the Scripture alone, the rule of life
& beliefe, & the sole iudge in cōtrouersies.
Therfore let him know, that we know our
selues to bee citizens, subiect to a prince,
by whose law we are directed, which as
the great Philosopher in humane policie,Aristot.
we, with Tertullian,Tertull. call regulam veritatis,
the 
                     〈◊〉
                   of trueth; with Cyprian,Cyprian. 
                  regulam
doctrin
                        ••
                     um, the rule of all learning; with
Basil,Basil. 
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , the rule of right; with Aquinas
regulā intellectus nostri,
                  Tho. Aqui. in Tim. the rule of our
vnderstāding;Dionys. with Carthusian regulā credendorum
& agendorum,
                  Carthus. the rule of contemplation
and action. For doctrine, wee say
with Esay,Esa. 8. 20 If any speake not according to
this rule, it is, beecause there is no light in
them;Gal. 6. 11 for manners, with S. Paul, as many
as walke after this rule, peace be vpō them,
and mercy: and so conclude with Cyrill,Cyrill.
that our faith is not deriued 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                   frō
                  
the inuention of man; 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  
but from the demōstration of Gods writ.
It is their dunsticall glossary that prescribeth,
G
                        •
                     oss. disti. 3. 
                        •
                     . veter. in the discord of the foure Doctours,
to take Augustins rule in disputationibus; Ieromes
in translationibus; Gregories immoralibus;
forgetting S. Ambrose, and therfore
Ambrosius Spiera (for names sake) preferre
his rule in iudicijs.
                  Spi
                        •
                     ra serm. 37 But we say with S. Augustine,
Augusti
                        •
                     . 
                  Sacra Scriptura doctrinae nostrae regulam
figit, the holy Scripture frames the rule for
our faith and profession. This is their torment,
that we will not say to their Pope in
sooth, which S. Augustine spake to Faustus
the Manichee in a scoffe,Aug. contr. Faust. 
                  ergo tu es regula
veritatis; and so acknowledge his definitiue
to be the why and what; the forme and
matter, the rule and frame of our faith and
beliefe. That which followeth of confining
our beleefe to the Creede, and accompting
all other thinges extrauagant from faith, not combined
within the Apostles Symbole, is this Tatlers
fancie, not our practise. For, first wee
doubt not, but it is an Apostolicall collection,
agreeing with, and deriued from

their doctrine, yet resolue not that it was
the Apostles frame. Secondly, wee acknowledge
it Canonlike, but not Canonicall,
squared according to that rule the
holy Scriptures, but not the rule it selfe.
Thirdly, we vse it, being Christs souldiers,
as the Romanes their Tessera communis in
warres,Tacitus as a short placard, wherin is comprehended
the summe of our profession,
for that cause called, as S. Austen writeth,
Symbolum,
                  August. de Symb. either in respect of the Authors,
arguing their vnitie in faith, euery one casting
in his seuerall share; or of vs, it being
the Christians Shibboleth distinguishing
Gilead from Ephraim,
                  Iudg. 12. Ruffin. in expo
                        •
                     it. a true trained souldiour
from a rude nouice, or counterfaite
intruder, or open pagan. And, giue, that
wee made it either the Limitation of our faith,
it is no more then the Fathers haue done;Ambros, serm. 38
Ambrose calles it S. Peters key, strong inough
to open and shut the gates of heauen.
August. serm. 18 Leoser. 11 Austen cals it certam regulam fidei, an
vnfallible rule of faith. And so doth Leo in
his sermons de passione. or, if wee call it the
perfection of all faith, it is no other then the

same Augustine hath done, who intitles it
the abridgement of both testaments totum
continens com pendio breuitatis;
                  Aug. se. 131 id
                        •
                      se
                        •
                     . 
                        •
                     15. and els where
comprehensionem fidei nostrae & perfectionē, the
simplicitie thereof, helping the rudenesse;
the shortnesse, assisting the memory; the
fulnesse, perfecting the doctrine of the professours:
Hieron, ad Pamma. nor then S. Hierome, who accomptes
it the absolute breuiary Christiani
dogmatis; no more then the Schoolemen
who call it summam credendorum, containing
in it the whole matter of faith, vel explicitè
vel implicit, éeither directly, or respectiuely;
for, whatsoeuer thinges are credenda, saith
Aquinas,Aquin. 
                        〈◊〉
                      q. 1. art. 8. are referred either ad esse naturae,
and so respecte the whole story of the
creation, and consequently the articles of
the three persons, each of them hauing an
hand in that great worke,Basil. 
                        〈◊〉
                     . as Basil elegantly
obserueth: or ad esse gratiae, which the
Creede presentes vnto vs in the articles of
our redemption: or ad esse gloriae, which
we expect by beleeuing the bodies resurrection,
and the eternitie of life. Briefly, our
faith resting vpon that double couenant of

God vnto his chosen,Apoc. 21. 3 the first, I will bee thy
God, is dilated in the former and larger part
of the Creede, teaching his omnipotency
in the creation; his mercy in our redemption
by his Sonne; and the assistance of
the holy spirite: the other, and they shall be
my people, in the last part, from the Catholike
church vnto the ende. And yet for all
these glorious prerogatiues of this Apostolicall
abstract, none of our writers haue
made it the non vltrá of our faith, or the listes
of our beleefe. But did wee so, what followes?
an horrible sacriledge insues, and
threefold, that is, There is no article to make vs
beleeue the Scripture to be Gods woord. that is
fals, for beleuing in God the Father, we acknowledge
both his essence, & his prouidence;
Aqui. 
                        •
                     bi supr. 
                  in esse diuino, saith Aquine, are included
all those properties which wee beleue
to be in God eternally, wheron dependeth
vita beatitudinis, and amongst them his
trueth: infide prouidentiae, all those thinges
are comprised, which he hath temporally
dispensed for mans saluation, which leade
him in via beatitudinis, among these is the

dispensation of his woord, which in our
Creede wee acknowledge to be his, in professing
him to be a God, and therfore true,
for God is not as man, that hee can lie.
Nomb. 23Nomb. 23. but himselfe hath testified, 1.
of the law, that it was the writing of his
own finger,Exod. 32 Exo. 32. 2. of all the Prophets,
as he said to Moyses os tuum sed verba mea,
their mouth but his wordes Exod. 4.Exod. 4 for
no prophecie is of priuate motion 2. Pet. 1.
3.2. Pet 1 of the whole Scripture, that euery addition,
or substraction is hie treason against
his maiestie, as counterfaiting his Pattents
Apoc. 22. 18.Apo. 22. 18. and therefore the Fathers expound
the first Credo,
                  August. 
                        •
                     erm. 181 
                  Deum for the vnitie
of essence; Deo, for the veritie of his woord:
and in Deum, for the assurance of his loue.
Secondly, the Creede proues not Baptisme to be
a Sacrament, yea but Augustin is of opinion,
that whatsoeuer concernes omne Sacramentum
suscipiendum,
                  Idem. ibid. is therein contained. S.
Hierome thinkes,Hiero
                        •
                     . in Pamma. that euen in that one article
of the resurrection of the flesh, omne Sacramentum
Christiani dogmatis concluditur
                        •
                     
                   and
in trueth the Sacramentes are, as I may

so speake, a reall Creede, acting that which
the other enacteth, performing in deede,
which in the Symbole we professe in word,
and are rather seales, then articles of faith.
For Baptisme, whether by immersion or
aspersion,Rom. 6. exemplifieth Christes death, &
confirmes that article of remission of sins;
and the Eucharist presenteth the effusion
of his bloud, ratifieng that article of his
death and passion. Summarily, for Baptisme,
August. serm. 131 S. Augustine concludes, omne Sacramentum
Baptismi in hoc constat, vt credamus resurrectionem
corporum & remissionem peccatorum
nobis a Deo pr
                        •
                     estanda, and so it is reduced
to two articles. But whether will we reduce,
or how can we proue, by the Creede, the presence
of Christ by faith in the Eucharist 
                     •
                   Surely much
more easily, then they which defend his
bodily carnall presence; for this crosseth
both the whole Creede, beecause corporall
presence must needes bee visible and
palpable Luc. 24. 39,Luc. 24. 39. and so the obiect of
the eie, not of faith (for fides est eo
                        •
                     um quae
non vides) and, speciallyo, ne principall article
of his ascent into heauen, there 
                     •
                  itting

at the right hand of his father. Wherefore
S. Bernard,Dionvs. Ca
                        ••
                     hus. as they write, tooke another
course, for when one of his monkes could
not bee perswaded either by the Creede or
the word, that Christes body should be in
the Eucharist really, and carnally, so forbore
a long space the communion; at last the
good Abbot cals him, and I charge thee,
quoth hee, vpon vertue of thy sworne obedience,
vt mea fide vadas & communices. and
thus, not the Apostles Creede, but S. Bern.
faith must inforce that presence. As for the
Sacramentall presence by faith, it may be reduced
to all those articles which acknowledge
Christ in his two formes,Phil. 2. 7 as Paule
speaketh; for he willeth vs so ofte as wee
do celebrate,Math 26. to doe it in remembraunce of
him, videlicet, of him, in the forme of a seruant,
incarnate, iudged, crucified, & dead:
and of him, in the forme of God, in assurance
of his comming to iudge both quick
and deade. Lastly, for the Creede it selfe, we
are no otherwise tied vnto it, then the Fathers,
who vsed other as well as this, both
the Nicene, which is called Symbolum patrū,
                  
& Athanasius Creede more large thē that,
and S. Basils in words differing from them
all.Basil. We vse it as the epitome of our profession,
not as the perfect rule of faith,
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     . which
title we appropriate to the written word
onely, by which all mattere of faith are to
be tried and squared, as the quadrant stones
of Salomons building 1. Reg 6;1. Reg. 6 Euseb Eccl. hist. lib. 7 Hosius. and conclude
with Eusebius, that 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  
either the leauing of this rule; or abusing it
with Hosius, as a Lesbian leaden rule, hath
caused so many ruinous and deformed
heapes, such heresies and schismes in the
church of God. But now doubting to preuaile
this way, he shewes how this rule is
cut short by fiue inches.
            
            
               Others deny some articles of their Crede
also; for the Protestantes denie three
articles of our Creede, and the Puritans
fiue.
            
            
               Aunsweare.
               This diuision of Protestantes and Puritans,
as it argueth the bitternesse of his malice;

so it maketh good that parable of our
Sauiour, that Gods fielde wi
                     •
                  l haue both
tares and wheate Math. 13;Math. 13 that position
of ours, the church militant hath her rebellious
members, as the perfectest bodie
noxious humours;Bern
                        •
                     rd. in Ca
                        •
                     t. that speech of S. Bernard,
velis nolis habitabit intra fines tuos Iebusoeus,
the 
                     •
                  ebusite will dwell in the land, to
be thornes in our sides, and prickes in our
eies Nomb. 33.Nomb. 33 
                        ••
                     eronym. yet this is our comfort, that
we may truely say with S. Ierome, Ostendimus
tales discipulos, non fecimus. But this slanderous
challenge, of our denying some articles
of the Creede, reueales a conscience sea
                     •
                  ed
with impudency, and a tongue set on fire
with hell,
                     
                        〈◊〉
                     
                   as Iames speaketh. What true
Protestantes deny hath hetherto and shall bee
still maintained against the whole rout of
Pseudocatholikes: as for the Puritans, if hee
meane such as haue made either Corah his
separation from vs,Nomb. 16 in contempt of authoritie:
Luc. 18 or a Pharisaicall secession in maiorem
puritatis erenium,
                  Bernard. as Bernard speaketh, in opinion
of greater integritie; saying in the
spirite of pride,Esa 6
                        •
                     . 
                        •
                     
                   
                  Stand a part, for I am holier

then thou, Esa▪ 65. Iob his builders in desolate
places Iob 15.Iob. 15. 
                        •
                     8 taking themselues to be
the oracles of wisedome Prou. 26.Prou. 26. 
                        〈◊〉
                     
                   as if the
word of God had come onely to them, or
should proceede from them alone 1. Cor.
14 such as the Puritano-papist
                        •
                     ,
                  1. Co. 14. 36 Loyala his
schollers, among them, the Iesuites, yesterdaies
vpstartes, who preferre themselues
both for diuinitie and puritie, farre aboue
all the Romish clergie, regular & secular;
for these, I say, as the parents of the blinde
man Ioh. 9.Iohn 9. 
                  aetatem habent, let them speake
for themselues; I meane not to be their aduocate
Martial. yet as the Poet said, Improbé facit,
qui in alieno libro ingeniosus est, it is a leaud
part to miscontrue mens writings, a diuelish
thing to belie them: but were it so? I
doubt not, but that wee haue as good authoritie
to abridge the Creede of some articles,
as any of their sideto enlarge it with
more; which to be lawfull, not only their
schoolemen dispute, and conclude that the
Pope,Aqu. 22. art. 1. q. 10 
                  de iure, may doe it, but, de facto, they
haue doone it, one of their Popes,Alphons. de h
                        •
                     res. hauing
framed a third article of Transubstantiation

                  annexuit Symbolo saith Alphōsus, hath
foisted it into the Creede. And now let vs
see what articles we denie.
            
            
               1 The first is the Catholike church, Credo
Ecclesiam sanctam Catholicam, I beeleeue
the holy Catholike church, the
which in verie deede they do not beeleeue.
            
            
               Aunsweare
               Which of the Protestantes beleeue it
not? I am assured that we all professe there
is a Catholike church of Christ, not a Platonicall
vtopia, no where extant, but a company
of Gods chosen euery where scattered;
not a Cyclopicall anarchy, which the Poet
describes,
                     
                        •
                     uripid. 
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  ; but as an absolute
monarchy in respect of one head,
Christ; so a policie Aristocraticall administred
by select gouernours: no pompous
synagogue aspectable, in grosse, to mortall
eies, because God onely knoweth all that
are his, 2. Tim. 2.2. Tim. 2. 19 for he is not a lew, which

is one outward Rom. 2.Rom. 2. 
                        〈◊〉
                     . neither are all Israell,
which are of Israell, Rom. 9;Rom. 9. 6. not as
Noahs familie with a Shem and a Cham,
or as his Arke with a crow and a doue,
(though this bee true in visible particular
churches, where are some straglers not yet
called, some weakelinges not fully confirmed;
some hypocrites not easely discerned;
some wicked ones not to bee auoided)
but as Clem. Alex.Clem. Ale
                        •
                     . defines it, au elect
company into which are gathered the faithfull
and iust, predestinate by God, beefore
the worldes creation; for this cause called an
holy assembly, while millitant on earth,
holy in affection; when triumphant in
heauen, holy in perfection; in both states
holy by Christes imputation. This is the
harmony of our profession, and the true
sence of this article:Aqu. p. 3. q. 2. art. 3 which euen Aquine
their Angelicall doctor con
                     ••
                  meth, concluding
that infidels are not members of
the Catholike church, whereof Christ is the
head, in acte, but inpossibilitie; no
                     •
                   so neither,
except they be predestinate to life, before
the worlds foundation: and all their

Catechistes insinuate so much,Vide Canis. in making
the Catholike church, and the communion
of saintes all one article: But heare his reason
of our deniall.
            
            
               Because Catholike is vniuersall (a profound
note) & so the Church of Christ
which we are bound to beleeue, must
bee vniuersall for allMath. 16 time comprehending
all ages, andPsa 60 vniuersall for
Psal. 
                        •
                     
                   place, comprehending all nations:
but that Church which the Protestantes
beleeue was interrupted, all the
ages beetwixt the Apostles and Luther,
which was 1400. yeares, or, in very
deede was neuer seene before Luthers
dayes, therefore that Church
they beleeue cannot be Catholike.
            
            
               Aunsweare.
               A fit aunsweare to this, would cause
the reader crie out,
                     
                        •
                     rasm. ex S
                        •
                     uda. with that prouerb, Date
mihi peluim, this tedious iteration rather
prouoking a vomit, then edging the appetite;
it being the full scope of his first article,
where he receiued his aunsweare: therfore,

since he requestes breuitie, heere onely
obserue in this phrase (interrupted) either
his blasphemous vntrueth, if he meane of
the existence of the Catholike church, which
wee beleue to bee perpetuall; for the head
neuer wanted his bodie, nor the Sunne his
beames, nor the bridegroome his spouse,
nor Christ his church;I
                        •
                     en. lib. 4 but, as Irenaeus obserueth
ab initio assistens plasmati suo filius, reuelat
omnibus patrem; it begunne 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                   at
the first foundation, and shall not ende

                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                   at the finall dissolution of the
worlde. The church beefore Christ incarnate,
and this since he was glorified, being
one & the same cōsanguinitate doctrinae saith
Tertullian:Tertull. Ioh. 12 or els his Caiphas-like veritie,
speaking the trueth against his will, if hee
meane that the glorious conspicuitie, or
sincere professiō of the Catholike church was
of long interrupted; for that is true, in the
olde testament by the worldes deluge the
Aegyptian bondage, the Idole groues, and
the Babilonish captiuitie: in the new, at
the aduent of Christ by the worlds blindnesse,
the Phariseis pride, the Iewes obstinacie,

and the deuils malice; after his ascent,
by that threefold persecution, which
S. Augustine mentioneth,Augustin. violent by tyrantes,
fraudulent by hypocrites and heretikes,
& both those together after the eleuation
of Antichrist. But if interrupted after
Christ and his Apostles, then was it begun by
him, and continued by them, and that is it
which Cyprian said,Cyprian. & we oft repeate, we
neither seeke, nor reke what was doone
ante nos before vs, but what he commands
to be done, which was ante omnia, beefore
all times, and aboue all men; therfore that
church which had the foūdation by Christ,
the source by the Prophets and Apostles,
the frame and iointes by the Scriptures, we
beleeue in that article to bee continually
Catholike, alwayes extant, not alwayes radiant;
euery where dispersed, elsewhere distressed.
pergit nebulo still he goes on.
            
            
               Neither is it vniuersall in place beeing
contayned within the narrow bounds
of England, which is accompted but
as a corner of the world. For the Lutherans
in Germany, the Hugonots in
Fra
                     •
                  nce, and the Guiues in Flaunders
detest there religiō, almost, as much as
the Catholikes, neither will they ioine
issue with thē in diuers especiall poīts.
And therefore the Protestants church
which they beeleeue can no more bee
Catholike and vniuersall, thē England
the vniuersall world; or Kēt the Kingdom
of England, or a pruned bough a
wheate tree; or a dead finger, a man; or
a rotten tooth, the whole head.
            
            
               
               Aunsweare.
               
                  Medusaes ill fauoured countenance turned
men into stones,Athen. dip. and such brasen-faced
ignorance, would make any man astonished.
Who euer said, (except the Romane
proctors, for their Babylon) that a particular
congregation was the Catholike
church? we haue cried it at the crosse, and
recorded it in our bookes, that as the golden
candlesticke was multiplied into many
braunches Exod. 25,Exod. 25 and Aarons rod
burgened into many blossomes Nomb. 17.Nomb. 17
so Christes church was parceled into many
particuler churches, among which, this

of England to the fretting despight of Romish
rennagates, the famous renowne of
our Soueraigne, and the eternall glory of
his name, God hath selected, as among all
flowers, the Lilly; among all fowles the
Doue; of all trees, the Cedar; of all the
nations, Iudea; of all the mountaines, this
Zion, to be a sanctuarie for his chosen, an
oracle for his woord, an habitation for
himselfe: howsoeuer this viperous scorner
in contempt calles it, a corner of the
world; a nooke it is in deede, but such an
one as Aegina to Athens,Plu
                        •
                     . 
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , the eiesore
thereof; so is this to Rome, the hartsoare
thereof. Why? Bethleem was the smallest
among the thousands of I
                     •
                  dah, Mich. 5.Mich. 5. 2
yet the sonne of righteousnes sprong thēce
and the glorious starre directed thether,
Math. 2.Math. 2 The Iewes an handfull in comparison
of the other nations, and yet in Iury
was God knowne, his name was great
in Israell, Psal. 76.Psal. 76. 1 a diamond of true lustre
though set in brasse, is of more accompt &
value, then a counterfaite byrall, or a
Portingall perle fastened in golde. Wee

feare not the Lions paw, the Spanish crueltie;
much lesse the scratch of a strumpet,
the Libellers of Rome; the braine of a Fox,
the schismes of hypocrites wee contemne.
As for this visible church of ours, we acc
                     •
                  mpt
it as the arke of Gods presence, not beleeue
it as an article of our faith; it is the Romish
opinion, and it was well placed among
the extrauagantes, as a position extrauagant
from all learning,Extra de ma
                        •
                     or & obedientis. reason, and
diuinitie, that a particular Synagogue
should be the Catholike church, that a filthy
sincke should be the holy church, yet such a
citie is Rome, and such is the diuinitie of
the Popish clergie; and therefore wee conclude
this article with a Syllogisme inuerted
vpon this Libeller, being his owne.
               
                  Whosoeuer beleueth a particular church
to be the Catholike denyeth that article.
                  But the Papistes avow and beleeue
Rome to be the Church. ergò
The Papistes denie that article.
               
               
                  
But that I promised, at his request, to
aunswere seriously, I might play with him
about his wheate tree, and aske him where
he was borne; and how corne growes? I
haue read in S. Basil,
                     
                        〈…〉
                     
                   that coales readie
burnt,
                     
                        〈…〉
                     
                   haue growne vpon trees, but that
corne hath bulkt into a stemme, and branched
out into armes (non me pudet fateri nescire,
quod nesciam) I neuer heard or read:
but let his folly passe, we will follow him
to the second article denied, as hee saith, by
vs.
            
            
               2 The second article is the Communion
of Saintes, the which they deny many
waies: First by not beleeuing that
Christ hath instituted seuen Sacraments,
wherein the Saintes of his
church communicate.
            
            
               Aunsweare.
               
                  The Protestantes denie that Christ instituted
seauen Sacraments,
                  This is his argument. ergó
They denie the Communion of Saintes.
The argument is denied, as beeing arena

sine calce, an in
                     •
                  erence without any coherence,
there beeing no semblable relation
betweene fiue of those Sacramentes, and
this article of the C
                     •
                  eede. Yet the Anabaptistes
reason more properly, who beecause
we detest their Platonicall communitie,
as accompting Meum & Tuum to be more
consonant to Gods law,Plat. de leg. and all Christian
policie, do thereby inferre, that wee deny
the Communion of Saintes. But to this purpose,
for the article we beleue and confesse,
that among the saintes on earth, though
distant in place, or different in condition,
or aliens by nation, there is an vnitie in religion,
Ephes. 4 Rom. 12 an vnanimitie in affection, a sympathie
in affliction, a mutuall charitie for
reliefe each of other,2. Cor. 9 either comforting the
mind if vexed,1. Pet. 4 or supplying the wantes if
distressed, or supporting the weakenesse if
vnsetled, or reforming the ignorance if
blinded, or praying for deliueraunce if oppressed;
falsifying that Heathenish and vncharitable
prouerbe,Athe. dip. 5 
                  Amici qui degunt procul
non sunt amici: This is our faith, without
breach whereof, notwithstanding, we denie

                  seauen sacramentes to bee Christes ordinaunce
If he meane of them which denie
al the seanen he should say somewhat,
but not touch vs, who acknowledge two,
which ratifie this article most, Baptisme, an
initiation or entrāce into this Communion,1. Cor. 10
and the Lordes Supper which by an 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                   and
speciall priuiledge is intituled by S. Paule

                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                   the communion.Rom. 6 But if the force of this
argument lie in the septenarie nomber, as
it seemeth, by the Tridenrine anathema, it
must, then all the auncient fathers, & some
of their owne doctors, are as obnoxious
to this imputation of denying this article,
as we.
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      Tertullian. August. ad 
                        〈◊〉
                     . The obiections by our men, out of
Iustine Tertullian, and Augustine in diuers
places, are triuiall and stale, but especially
out of Ambrose,Ambros. de sacrament. who of purpose
writing a treatise of the Sacramentes, 
                     •
                  eckons
but two.Is
                        •
                     idor, Gregory. Isidore and Gregory excede
not three, As for the Sacrament of Matrimonie,
grounded vpon an ignorant translation
of 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                   Ephes. 5.Ephes. 5. Canus lib. 8 Canus citeth the
infinite differences, and digladiations of
the schoole doctors there about. & Lombard,Lombard.
                  
the first hammerer of this seuen folde
shield, by a close consequent, denieth it to
be a sacrament, because it conferreth not
grace, as all Sacraments must doe by their
diuinitie.Erasmus. Erasmus constantly affirmeth
that in S. Ieromes time, it was accompted
no sacrament.Durandus. Durandus minceth it with
an vnivocé and stricté, saying that it is a sacrament
after the larger size, not properly.
But Alexander Alensis,Alex. Alens. the ancientst schole
man of credite, concludeth, that Christ instituted
but two sacramentes, which hee
proueth both by Christs side pierced, out of
which issued water and bloud:1. Ioh. 5 and also
by that triple testimonie agreeing in one,
the spirit, water, and bloud; reliqua per ministros
Ecclesiae ordinata, the rest were the inuentions,
or additions of church gouernours.Petrus a Soto.
And Petrus a Soto cōfesseth that the
elementes, woordes, and effectes of foure
sacramentes, cannot be proued by the scripture,
Compend. Theolog. 
                  Compendium Theologiae is forced
to say, that the element (which in all sacraments
is an externall substance and materiall)
is the action and humiliation of

the partie penitent, and the woord adioyned
to make it a full Sacramente, is the
Priestes absolution.Bernard. S. Bernard puts in the
Maundie of Christ for a Sacrament, and so
makes eight, others, and aboue the rest.
Dionys. Areopag.Dionys. Areopag. leaues out matrimonie,
and so finds but sixe. But will you see two
foxes tied by the tailes, and their heades
turned counter? this hood winckt libeller
saith,Duraeus cōt. Whitaker. wee denie seauen, but Duraeus the
Schottish champion for Campian, findes
that Caluin, Beza, and Melancthon agree
vpon the full nomber of seauen: both alike
true, for we denie but fiue, hauing the authoritie,
and precedent of 500. yeares but
for two onely, and none of ours euer allowed
of the whole seauen. And therefore I
conclude this point, first, that if our denial
of iust seauen, bee a blot to that article, wee
are not the first, the Fathers, after the Scriptures,
directing vs, and 
                     •
                  ounder schoole-men
of their owne agreeing with vs. Secondly,
when he shall bring for those fiue
pseudo-sacramentes, either the institution
of Christ, to authorize them, or any commaundement

to vse them, or any promise
of remission annexed to them, or any element
by God appointed for them, we will
with reuerence embrace them, but their
greatest clarkes hauing failed heerein, wee
may not expect it at the hands of this sneaking
atomite. And seeme they neuer so
zealous in defence of their sacramentes, &
Saintes communion, how basely they esteeme
of them, one case in their Cannon law
will demonstrate, which I singled, as concerning
this purpose fitly. It happeneth that
one in iusting and torneament is cast, & his horse
falling vpon him, bruiseth him mortally, it is permitted
vnto him to communicate of the Eucharist,
to be annointed with oile, and to doe pennaunce,
(there are three sacramentes) and yet after
all this,
                  Decreta
                        •
                     . tit. de To
                        •
                     neament. §. accedir. 
                  hee must bee denied Christian buriall.
First note the absurditie, to preferre buriall
aboue the chiefest sacrament: & then
the vncharitablenesse, to forbid his bodie
to sleepe among Christians, who died in
their sight a Christian, which is a kind of
deniall of this article, Christian buriall bein
some respect, a communion of Saintes.
            
            
               
               And specially the true and reall presence
of our Sauiour Christ in the Eucharist,
by which1. Cor. 10 
                        〈◊〉
                     . 17. all the faithfull members
participating of one and the selfesame
body, are made one bodie, as all
the partes of a mans bodie are made
one liuing thing, by participating of
one soule.
            
            
               Aunsweare.
               To discourse of this double controuersy
de modo essendi & edendi, of the manner
of Christes beeing, and our eating him in
the sacramente, consideringe, how their
schoolemen, leauing the simple trueth of
Gods word, haue verified that prouerbe,
Mendacij multiplex est diuortium;
                  Eras. Adag. and are at
daggers drawing among thēselues, would
aske more time, then I vouchsafe to spend
in aunsweare of so base a pamphlet as this:
the soundest and acutest of them, hauing
descanted whether he be there, as quantum,
or quantitas; or if so, whether locally, or if
so, whether circumscriptiuely, in the ende
are driuen to say,Thom. p. 3. quest. 75 that he is there secundum

quendam modum huic sacramento proprium, qui
est sacramentalis. Indeede, if Christes naturall
bloud were as properly ours, as euery
mans owne bloud is his own, some shew
there were of this reall and carnall communion
of which he speakes, but sithence his
bloud,Can. lib. 12. saith Canus, is no otherwise ours,
but as the light of the sunne is, by participation,
as of those beams, so of his graces;
that as the 
                     〈◊〉
                  , keeping his certaine tabernacle
in the heauens.Psal. 19 Psal. 19. doth nourish
and cherrish with his heate & brightnesse
these inferiour & sublunary bodies,
so Christ sitting there, as hee must doe, till
his comming in maiestie Act. 3. 21.Act. 3. 21 without
locall motion, or carnall application,
communicateth with his saintes, in that
holy sacrament, the forcible power of his
bodie & bloud, which worketh so mightily
in faithfull hartes, that both it settleth
the kingdome of God within thē,Luc. 17. 21. Luc. 17.
& lifteth them into heauenly places Eph. 2
faith being that Eagles eie,Eph. 2. 6 Iob. 39. 33 which, spying
the pray a farre off, as Iob speaketh, maketh
the saintes resort thether, where the

carcasse is,Math. 24. 
                        •
                     8 Math. 24. And for the second,
great difference there is, perchance, not obserued
by many, betweene our eating of
Christ, and our vniting with him. Wee are
vnited vnto him vt viuenti, as our liuing
head, & nos viuificanti and making vs his
liuelie members. We eate him as our Passeouer
2. Cor. 5;2. Cor. 5 that as the Israelites, eate the
one mortuum & assum, deade and roasted,
Exod. 12,Exod. 12. 9 so wee him crucifixum & passum,
dead and slaine, and so that speech of Austen
is true,August. that we haue him here in pabu,
lo, as he was in patibulo torne and rent; as
himselfe ordained the sacra
                     •
                  ent in 
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   
                  fracto
not integro,
                  Lue. 22. 19. the bread broken, not the
whole loafe, therby signifying, yea saying,
that in doing it wee must remember him
not as liuing among vs, but as dying for
vs; vt in cruce, non in caelo, as hee was crucified,
not as hee is glorified, whereby wee
conclude, first, for his presence that his
body is so farre foorth there quatenus editur,
as it is eaten, but his bodie is eaten as dead
and slaine, so himselfe appointed it, This
is my bodie, and stayeth not there, but addes

withall,Math. 26 which is giuen for you: and his
bloud is droncke, not as remayning in his
vaines, but as shed; so himselfe speaketh,
This is my bloud of the new testament shed for
many. Now his bodie bruised & his bloud
poured out can no otherwise be present in
the Eucharist, but by a representation
therof in the bread broken, & in the wine
effused, of the one side; and on the communicantes
part, by a grateful recordation
of the benefites, a reuerent valuation of
the sacrifice, a faithfull application of his
merites in his whole passion; and therfore
his presence must be sacramentall, and our
eating spirituall,August. de verb. 1 om. serm. 33 for, non quod videtur, séd
quod creditur pascit, saith S. Augustin. Secondly
for the vnion. It is true which Christ
saith that hee which eateth my flesh abideth in
me and I in him.
                  Ioh. 6. 1
                        •
                     . Ioh. 6. 56. not that this vnion
is first begun in the participation of that
holy supper (for none can truely eate the
bodie of Christ, vnlesse hee bee first vnited
with him, and ingrafted into him, nec veré
edit corpus Christi, qui non est de corpore Christi,
saith S. August) because prima vnio,
                  August. saith Aquinas,

                  Aqu. 12. quest. 66 the first vnion betweene God and
man, is begunne in Baptisme by one spirite,
into one bodie, as the Apostle speaketh 1. Cor
12.1. Cor. 12. & continued by faith, hope, and charitie,
all these the operation of the spirite.
But if we truely eate the bodie, and drinke
the bloud of Christ, then by the power of
the holy Ghost, and faith cooperating, this
vnion is strengthened, the vigour and effectes
whereof, after a true participation,
we shall feele in our selues more forcible
and liuely. An vnion more stronge and
neere, then that which he 
                     〈◊〉
                   speakes of
the bodie and soule: for the soule may be
separated from the bodie,Eccles. 12 but the elect mē
                  bers
of Christ cā neuer be disiointed from
him; and therefore the whole bodie of his
church is sometimes called, by his owne
name,Act. 11. 26 not as the Antiochians, Christians,
but Christ, so Ambrose reades that place
Gal. 5.Gal. 5. 24 
                  Qui sunt Christi, They which are Christs
in the nominatiue plurall, not in the genitiue
singular. Briefly, for both I aske, is not
Christ as present in Baptisme as in the Eucharist,
for in them both wee communicate

with him, bredd a new in the one, fed
a new in the other, and yet Christes reall
presence is not challenged for Baptisme? if
they say, no, beecause of the Eucharist it
was said,Gal. 3 
                  This is my bodie and bloud, not so of
Baptisme; I aunsweare, as much, if not
more was spokē by the Apostle, They which
are baptized haue put on Christ, put him on
we cannot vnlesse hee bee present, and the
putting him on, is euen the very same,
which he els where calleth Christs dwelling
in vs.
                  Eph. 3 Eph. 3, namely, that in Baptisme we
are so transformed, as now not wee, but
Christ alone doth liue within vs, Gal. 2.Gal. 2 as
neere an vnitie as may.August. ad infant. & de conseer, distinct. 2. And in trueth S.
Augustin is out of doubt, that in Baptisme
the true member of Christ corporis & sanguinis
Domini particeps fit, is partaker of the
bodie and bloud of the Lord, and therfore
no reason withstandes, but that he should
be really present in both, or in neither. Againe,
is it wee, or they which denie the
communion of Saintes in this sacrament? we,
keeping Christes institution, and commā
                  dement,
participating it to all, which by S.

Paule his rule,1. Cor. 1
                        •
                     
                   haue first tried and examined
themselues, and in both kindes, the bread &
the cup: or they, which by their 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  ,
as the Apostle speaketh; their priuate masse
as they terme it, haue turned coenam in scenam,
the supper into a spectacle, and this
blessed sacrament into an heaue offering,
feeding the peoples eyes with the priestes
eleuation, and sole mastucation? or, if once
in a yeare they vouchsafe them the communion,
they defalke on halfe, denying them
the cup,Lombard. li. 4. dist 11 Ambros. in 1. Cor 11 which by Lombards collection,
out of S. Ambrose, is to denie the redemption
of the soule; for the bodie, saith hee,
was broken for the freedome of our bodies,
and the bloud was shed, for the redeming
of the soule, as it was prefigured in
Moses law. Thus they maki
                     •
                  g their lai
                     •
                  ie
but Easter Saintes, suffering them no other
time to communicate with them, and thē
also denying them that cōmunion which
assures them to bee saintes, in bereauing
them of the cuppe, to which that blessi
                     •
                  g
was added, which was not to the bread,
videlicet,
                     
                        〈…〉
                     
                   shed for many in remissionem peecatorum
                  
for remission of sinnes, and so making
them demi-saintes, are more guiltie
of annihilating this article of the Communion
of Saints then we, which exclude none,
and giue the whole. But to conclude, if
the real and carnall presence of Christ, be the
onely cause of the Saintes vnion vnto him,
and their communion among themselues,
what then doth S. Augustine meane when
he saith,August. in. Ioh. tract. 
                        •
                     9. that, in receiuing of the sacramēt,
some do eate panem domini, and other some
panem dominum? if it be bread, then it is not
transubstantiated into his bodie; if some
do eate the bread of the Lord, & other the
bread the Lord, what makes the difference?
if it be his bodie really, then is it alike
to all; for Christes bodie cannot bee
changed: if to some it be bread, and to others
Christ, the difference is in the receiuer,
not in the sacrament: summarilie, in
the holy supper, there is sacramentum, & res
sacramenti,
                  idem 
                        〈◊〉
                     . tract. 26. the first, the twoo elementes,
the second, Christ himselfe: they are tasted
with the mouth, and chewed in the
teeth; this must haue, as Basil calleth it,

                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                   the mouth of the inward man,
                     
                        〈…〉
                     
                  
which is faith. The sacrament is receiued
by some to life, by others to perdition; but
the thing it selfe,
                     
                        〈…〉
                     
                   
                  Omni homini ad vitam, nulli
ad mortem, saith S. Austen. If therfore Christ
be there carnally present, then indefinitely,
quicunque eius particeps fuerit, whosoeuer,
good or bad, shall participate, eateth vndoubtedly
his owne saluation, and so becomes
one with Christ, a consequent necessary,
but most impious.
            
            
               Seondly they deny the Communion of the
church militant & triumphant, by exclaming

                     
                        〈…〉
                     
                   against inuocatiō of Saints;
by which holy exercise, those blessed
Saintes in heauen, and wee in earth
communicate, wee by prayer glorifiing
them, and they byMediation. meditation
obtayning our requests.
            
            
               Aunsweare.
               This distinction of saintes into militant
and triumphant we allow, that there is but
one tribe and 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                   of them both wee acknowlegeEph. 3.
                  
Eph. 3. We on earth sub pellibus,
lying in campe vnder sold & pay, fighting
as souldiers 2. Tim. 2.2. Tim. 2. 3. the celestiall in rest
and glory, hauing coronam repositam, impositam
2. Tim. 4,2. Tim. 4. 8. the crowne laid vp for thē,
put vpon them,Apoc. 1. 5. raigning as kinges, Apo. 1.
That communion with them wee maintaine,
which the primitiue church allowed,
both by imitation of their vertues, in
our conuersation,Epist. Smyr. 
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  ,
by celebration of their praises in panegyricall
orations, by the example of the Apostle
Heb. 11;Heb. 11. in reuolution of their annuall
memories, at solemne feastes authorized
by the church.Epiphan. We detest the Cainans, and
Eunomians, for contemning the Saintes
departed, accounting a liuing dog, better
then a dead lion Eccles. 9.Eccles 9. Aug de 
                        〈◊〉
                     . with S. Augustine,
we honor them, charitate, non seruitute,
hauing receiued prohibition to be seruants
of mē 1. Cor. 7,1 Cor. 
                        •
                     . with loue, not feare;
in admiration of their liues, not adoration
of their images: nec templa sicut dijs, sed memorias
vt hominibus dicamus,
                  
                     
                        〈…〉
                     
                   saith Austen, we
reare not temples vnto them as Gods, but

record their memories as of holy mē; there
being a difference betweene sepulchra aedificare
Math. 23,Mat. 
                        •
                     3. & simal
                        •
                     chracolere, betwene
dignifieng them as Saints by celebration,
& Deifieng them as Gods by inuocation:
this comb
                     •
                  ning of heauen and earth together,
by prayer to them, being rather a mutinous
rebellion and conspiracy against
God, then a mutuall communion or societie
of saintes; grounded vpon an heathenish superstition,

                     
                        〈…〉
                     
                   the chiefe authors beeing Plato
and Apuleius, who formed mediators Doemonicall,
and Heroicall, both, those spiritual
essences which they call Doemones, and the
soules departed, which they called Heroes,
(as the popish clergie, Angels and Saintes)
continued by supposed aparitions of walking
ghostes, and miracles wrought at
martyrs monumentes; and confirmed by
some ambiguous irresolutions of a few fathers:
for whether they procure vs any
good,
                     
                        〈…〉
                      2. euen Origen makes it a question, &
thinkes it not to bee chartulae mysterium, a
written veritie, but an vnknowne secrete;
and they which were that way, in such affections,

most passionate, slaked their heat
in this case,Basil. with a Si, or a Qnasi, as S. Basil:
with an 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                   as Nazianz.Nazians as I thinke
& am perswaded: not resolued by the scholemen
what their knowledge, or their power
is, whether their knowledge be matutina or
vespertina; and whether they procure vs any,
Aquinas. good either impetratiuè by mediation of
their prayers, or interpretatiuè by valuation
of their merits. No where, euen by the confessiō
of Eckius,Eckius in Enchirid. authorized in scripture by
any example or precept; not in the old testament,
Exod. 32. 4. because the people were to prone to
Idolatrie, as in the Calfe was seene; & the
saints were thē in Limbo, not glorified: not
in the new, least the Gentils couerted shold
returne and worship men for Gods, as the
Lycaonians did Paul and Barnabas Act. 14.Act. 14.
not in the writinges, or preachinges of the
Euangelists and Apostles, least they might
be suspected of arrogancy, as purueyors of
their owne prayses, in proclayming themselus
an 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , a future glory among mē,
after their decease;Durae cant, Wh
                        •
                     ttak. this saith Eckius, although
both Duraeus will needes fetch it

from the very crosse of Christ, in this manner;

                     
                        〈…〉
                     
                   
                  Our Sauiour, in his passion, cried out Eli, Eli,
and the people thought hee had called for Elias,
ergo Inuocation of Saintes was vsed among the
Iewes. and this pamphletor, as you see, wil
haue it an article of faith, which cānot be,
whether we look vnto the matter of faith,
which is the word, or the obiect of faith,
which is Christ. For nothing may bee an
article of faith which is not squired by the
rule of faith, the scripture: Neither is prayer
to be made vnto any, but on whome
we beleeue, Rom. 10.Rom. 10. & no Christian dare
say that wee must beleeue in Saintes. It was
said of Cesar,
                     
                        〈…〉
                     
                   that in the renewing Pompey
his statues which were ruinated, he erected
his owne: here it is contrary, for this glori
                     •
                  eng
of the Saintes, is the disparagement
of the whole Trinitie; of God the father,
beeing the principall obiect of our prayers
by his owne precept Psal. 50,
                     
                        〈…〉
                     
                   
                  Call vpon mee.
by Christes auaunt to Sathan, Math. 4,
                     
                        〈…〉
                     . 
                  Eisoli,
him only thou shalt serue; by his soueraigntie
of place beeing our king of olde,
Psal. 74. 12.
                     
                        〈…〉
                     
                   
                  nec benè cum socijs regna-manent,
                  
saith the Poet. Of the Sonne, beeing the
vnus mediator, the alone mediator betweene
God and man 1. Tim. 2. 5.1. Tim. 2. 5. the still suruiuing
priest making intercession for vs
Heb. 7. 25,Heb. 7. 25. without whome there is no
accesse vnto the Father Ioh. 14.Ioh. 14. 6. who onely,
as Ambrose saith,Ambros. hath that double office
of a mediatour, imperare vt deus, & visitare
vt homo, as man compassionating our infirmities,
Heb. 2,Heb. 2. as God supplying our
wants, as man dying for our sinnes, as God
risen for our iustification Rom. 4.Rom. 4. vit. as both
God and man, sitting at the right hand, requesting
for vs, Rom. 8. 34.Rom. 8. 34. Of the Holy
Ghost, the life & breath of our praye
                     •
                  s, for
we know not what to pray as wee ought,
but the spirit it selfe maketh request for vs
within vs, Rom. 8. 26.Vers. 26. so that the establishing
of prayer to Saintes were to subiect
the spirite of God to the deuotion of men,
for postulare minoris est, saith Aquinas,
                  
                     
                        〈…〉
                     
                   it is the
inferior his part to sue. Wherefore the Apostle
concludeth, that the searcher of the
hearts knoweth the meaning of the spirit,
qui postulat prosanctis, vers. 27.Vers. 27. for the Saints

not to the Saints. Briefly, whereas euerie
prayer must be made in the name of Christ
Ioh. 16.Ioh. 16. (the sweetest In nomine we can sing)
and euerie praier not so made, non solùm non
delet peccatum,
                  Aug. in 
                        〈…〉
                     . 
                  sed fit ipsa peccatum saith S.
Austen, surely the prayer to saintes must
needes be sinne, because we must not pray
to them, per Iesum Christum for Christs sake,
for that were to make him inferiour to
them: and that is no maruaile in Rome,
for in their Canon of the masse,Canon. Miss. the greasie
priest, requestes God the Father, that hee
would vouchsafe to heare his son Christ;
as if his orizon were more preualent with
God, then Christes intercession.
            
            
               3 They denie the Communion of the
church militant, & the soules
                     
                        〈…〉
                     
                   in Purgatory,
bereauing them of that Christian
charitie, which charitable compassion,
and mercifull pittie requireth,
and by mutuall affection the members
of one bodie helpe one another.
            
            
               Aunsweare.
               It must needes prooue syncere religion,

which frames diuinitie of poetrie, and fetcheth
Virgils Aeneids into the Apostles
creede, & maketh the Popes kitchē-stuffe
(the furnace & fuell of Purgatorie) an article
of faith: but heerein is that speech of
Tertullian properly instified,Tertull
                        •
                      Apoll. 
                  That Philosophers
are the Patriarkes of heretickes. This
fancie of Purgatorie being imagined,Home: Odiss. Plat. Phaed. Virgill. Enerd. 6. first in
the dreame of Homer, Plato, and Virgill,
vpon a foolish pittie (which this melting
boweld traytor) calleth charitable compassion)
that those, who died in their sins
which wer 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                   venial & curable, though
they were not woorthy to flie to heauen
immediately, yet not so cruelly to bee censured,
as to be throwne downe into Ta
                  
                     •
                  arus,
or Hell: the iudge who ballaunced
the weight of the Painims sinnes was in.
exorable Radamanthus, but of the Catholike
ghostes, the indulgent Pope. Among
the Christians, the principall founders
thereof,Clem. Alex. either Clem. Alexand. who was
so enamored of Philosophy, that hee concluded,
the Grecians might be thereby saued:
Origen. or his scholler Origen, of whome it is

no maruell, he should thinke the soules departed
might bee freed from torment, sithens
hee also helde, that euen the damned
spirites, and Lucifer himselfe should in
the ende bee saued. The scriptures for
this place,
                     
                        〈◊〉
                     
                   by their owne confession, none
or obscure; the Fathers in this pointe to
themselues contradictorie; the greatest patrones
among themselues vnresolued;
first, of the place, whether in the aire, or
vnder the earth, or the brim of hell; Secondly,
for the scite, whether extensiue as
a couer ouer hell, in latitude; or collaterall
with hell, seuered by a partition, in longitude;
or circular about hell, in seuerall
celles, as the spottes of an apple about the
quore: Thirdly, for the nature of the place
to some it shall not be fire, but tanquam ignis,
                  1. Co
                        •
                     . 3. as it were fire, as out of S. Paul they
collect: to other it shall bee both fire and
water,P
                        •
                     al. 66. as out of the Psalmes they inferre;
to other it shall bee a lake and no water, as
they cite Zachary to that purpose.
                     
                        〈◊〉
                     
                   Fourthly,
for the parties tormented, the most wil
haue them a middle sorte betweene saintes

and sinners; this fellow, as it seemes, accomptes
them saintes, els why brings hee
thē within compasse of this article? Therefore
we, refusing to build vpon sand, leaue
them to their vnletled coniectures, & out
of the Scriptures acknowledge no Purgatorie
but one,1. Iohn. 1. 
                  the bloud of Iesus Christ purging
vs from all our sinnes: wherein the garments
of the saintes are washed white.Apoc. 7. 14. Apoc. 7.
no other clensing but that which Aquinas
mētioneth,Aq
                        •
                     inas. Pa. 3. q. 27. art. 3. 
                  velper gratiam a culpa, vel per lumen
doctrinae a nescíentia; either frō the guilt
of sinnes by his grace, or the drosse of ignorance
by his word. For which he hath appointed
a double fire; for doctrine, the fire
of the spirite, 1. Cor. 3.1. Cor. 3. to trie timber from
stubble, pearles from strawes: for the other,
1. Petr. 4. 
                        〈◊〉
                     
                   that which Peter calleth the fierie triall,
videlicet, the afflictions of this life, which
are as fire to golde,
                     
                        〈…〉
                     . as the flaile to corne,
saith Gregorie. But two sortes of vessels, of
wrath and sauour, either for honour or
contumelie, Rom. 9.Rom. 
                        •
                      Mat. 25. sheepe or goates for
the right or left hande. A double state of
saintes,2. Cor. 5. which S. Paul resembleth to a gargarment,

in this world 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , the vesture of
this flesh in the other 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , their inuestiture
with immortalitie; either 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , a peregrination
from God here, or 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , a presence
with him in heauē. For both which
there is allotted a seueral burden, 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  
Gal. 6.Augustine. 
                        〈…〉
                     
                   in this life, that which S. Austen
calleth onus mutuae charitatis, mutuall affection
and compassion in supporting each
other vers 2. in the next life, onus reddendae
rationis, the render of accompt, which euery
one must beare himselfe vers. 5.Vers. 5. But two
places of resort,Luk. 16. Abrahams bosome, & the
lake of brimstone;Apoc. 20. two wayes thereunto,
the one 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                   a straightened path, hardly
passable, the other 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                   a broadway, a
roadway with trauailers innumerable,
Math. 7.Math. 7. Two rewardes in the ende, the
crowne of righteousnesse, eternall life. 2.
Tim. 4.Tim. 4. the wages of sinne, euerlasting
death,Rom. 6. August. 
                        〈◊〉
                     . Rom. 6. which S. Austen calleth
ignem aeternum and regnum aeternum. Cyprian
refrigerium iusti, supplicium iniusti; the atchieuement
of both in this life, in the other
neither remission, nor redemption

saith Austen, this beeing the time of working
that of reward,Nazian
                        •
                     
                   saith Nazianz, this of
striuing,Chrysost. that of crowning saith Chrisostome.
            
            
               The 3. Article is Remission of sinnes, for
they acknowledg no such effect in the
Sacrament of Baptisme, but onely accoumpt
it as externall signe of a praereceiued
grace of fauour of God, by
his eternall predestination, against the
expres word of God: which therfore
calleth the Sacrament theTit. 3. lauer of regeneration,
for that in it the soule deade
by sinne, is newly regenerated by
grace.
            
            
               Aunsweare.
               This fellow purposed from the beginning
Asellius his profession,A. G
                        •
                     l. Lib. 7. which P. Africanus
said was malitia and nequitia, to bee
not onely a libeller, but a liar; that argues
his mind to bee malitious, this bewrayes
his cause to be bad, both make him shame
lesse, and all spring from ignorance, either
making report his ground, or partiall reading
his best intelligence, neglecting our

writers, and cleauing onely to his owne
side, whose fashion it is to fasten opinions
vppon vs, neither conceiued by vs, nor receiued
among vs. The concent of our church
is, that Baptisme is the indument of Christ,
Gal. 3.Gal. 3. Rom. 6. an insition into Christ, Rom. 6. as
the arke of Noe, in the deluge, to saue vs. 1.
Pet. 3. the lauer of regeneration to wash vs,
Tit. 3.
                     
                        〈…〉
                     
                   working a double effect, priuatiuely
remissa culpa in washing vs;
                     
                        〈…〉
                     
                   positiuely data
iustitia in sanctifieng vs. 1. Cor. 6. 11.1 Cor. 
                        •
                     . 11. whether
wee vse it as the water of Iordan by
immersion, Math. 3.Math. 3. or as the holy water in
the law by aspersiō Nōb. 19.Numer. 
                        •
                     9. not regarding
the heathenish distinctiō, betwene diuing
& sprinckling in Macro.Macrob 
                        〈…〉
                      Clem. Alex. & therefore with
Clem. Alexand. we account it, 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  
the soueraigne counterpoison against originall
venim;
                  
                     
                        〈…〉
                     
                   with Nazianz. the deluge of
sinne; with Basil, the mother of adoption;
with Chrysostome,Chrysostom the purgatorie of life.
Ezechiel his aqua munda, cleansing vs from
all our pollutions,Ezechiel. 36 Ezech. 36. Notwithstā
                  ding,
we ascribe not this power either ad
clementum, or momentum, not to the element

of water,Aquine. as though it had vim ablutiuam,
as Aquine speaketh, this skouring force; or
regeneratiuam this renewing power, as
Lombard termes it;Lombard. but vnto the bloud of
Christ working inuisibly by the power of
the spirite, Tit. 3. non enim aqua lauat animam,
sed ipsa prius lauatur a spiritu, vt lauare possit
spiritualiter,
                  Hierom. saith Ierome. Hereupon the Fathers
resemble it to the diuing poole of Bethesda,
Iohn 5. Ioh. 5. as that being moued by the
Angell, had an healing power: so this cō
                  secrated
by the word and sanctified by the
spirite, hath a soueraigne effect and operation;
and for that purpose, somtimes they
call the water, in Baptisme, rubram aquam
red water, the bloud of Christ, hauing ther
his inuisible working. Why? but the Protestants
accoumpt it onely an externall seale of a
prereceiued grace in Gods predestination: hee
names none,Cam. 
                        •
                     at 8. yet Campian, whose ape hee
is,Duraeus. contra Whit. lib. 8 quoates Caluin, but cites him not; Duraeus
cites him, but vnderstandes him not;
that word onely is not the first he hee hath
coyned; the father of lies, as the Fathers obserue
in Math 4. hauing taught them all a

to adde or defalke from a text to serue their
turne.Cal
                        •
                     . instit. lib. 4. The first fruit, which master Caluin,
among three principall effectes, noteth in
this sacrament is, that it is Symbolum nostrae
purgationis, the very wordes of the Greeke
Scholiast.Schol. in 1. Pet. 3. Pighius in 1. Pet. 3. 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  
yea of Pighius a grosse papist, baptsmus a
peccatis ablutionis signum est. & instar signati
diplomatis saith Caluin, and as the kinges

                     •
                  etters pattents vnder seale confirmeth our
commission: that as a prince, hauing purposed
a fauour to his subiectes, graunts it
by his patentes of meere indulgence, and
ratifies it by his seale for more assurance;
so God, hauing purposed in his eternall
counsell to saue some, which hee cannot
doe before hee haue remitted their sinnes,
therefore in Baptisme he both conferres this
grace, & confirmes it vnto them; for which
cause the scriptures and fathers do call it sigillum
promissionis & remissionis; conferres it, I
say,Camp. vbi sup. as Campian confesseth it, veluti per canalem,
deriuatiuely, not originally; effectually,
not effectiuely; as by a brooke not as
from a spring; for this is Christes bloud,

                  quia latus Christi est latex sacramenti saith S.
Austen:Allen de Sacra. chap. 3. as Allen the Cardinall speaketh,
grace is wrought in Baptisme as a man
writeth with a penne, powerfully, yet instrumentally▪
confirmes it visibly, se
                     •
                  ling
that which concealed; so, that which was
in his secrete counsell, propositum, the purpose
of his will by predestination, in Baptisme
hee makes it depositum, the pledge of
our saluation, and onely to the elect, for
in solis electis sacramenta efficiunt quod figurant
saith S. Augustine,August. de bap. contra Donat. & citat. a Lomb. lib. 4. dist. 4 in the elect onely, the sacraments
performe really, which they present
figuratiuely: and therefore that is no
heresie nor fancie to call it the seale of a praereceiued
grace. For iustificatiō by faith, which
oftentimes, in those which are adulti, preuents
Baptisme, is a praeaccepted grace, and
cannot stand without a perfect remission
of their sinnes which are so iustifyed. What
fruite then bringes Baptisme to them? euē
this saith Lombard, beecause hee who
thus iustified commeth to Baptisme,Lomb. vbi sup. F. is as
the branch brought by the doue in to Noe
his arke,Gen. 8. Gen. 8. qui ante intus erat iudicio

Dei sed nunc etiam iudicio Ecclesiae, who beefore
was iustified, & fully remitted in gods
secrete iudgement, but now by Baptisme
is made a visible member of the Church,
the 
                     •
                  acrament being the euidence of Gods
prouidence and this was Cornelius his
case Act. 10.Act. 10. Also
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      lib. 4. contr. Apol. Iesuit. we vrge the necessitie
of Baptisme, especially to infantes, least
they should seeme either naturally innocent,
or generally sanctified without it; yet
not simply, but with a reseruation, first, of
Gods omnipotencie, who beeing agens liberrimum,
as the schoolemen speake, hath
not tied his power to the sacraments, saith
Lombard;Lomb. vbi sup. secondly, of preeminence to
Christes Baptisme, wherein, not hee, but
we were washed, the waters drenching
him, but cleansing vs: which made S. Augustine
to crie out Omisericordia,
                  August. de temp. serm. 30. ô the mercie,
and withall, the power of God, Nec
dum eramus in mūdo, et iam abluebamur in Baptismo.
Thirdly, with a dispensation of
that which the scholemen call articulum necessitatis,
there beeing no contempt of religion,
but either extremitie disappointing;

or death suddenly preuenting, as infantes,
and the theefe crucified Luc. 23.Luc. 23. Fourthly,
with a distinction of Baptismus voti, when
there 
                     〈…〉
                   in the parties, but no oportunitie
for the action, volentes non valentes
saith Lombard, as in the case of Valentinian
in S. Ambrose:Ambros. orat 
                        •
                     uneb. Valentin. briefly, we so highly
extoll the dignitie, necessitie, and efficacie
of Baptisme, that Duraeus pleaseth himselfe
triumphantly,Duraeus de Paradox. contr. Whita
                        •
                     . in hope that some of
our writers are prooued, in this opinion,
Romanistes, sauing, hee misliketh our detestation
of that magicall conceite of opus
operatum, videlicet, that the very act of Baptisme,
without either the parties faith, or
the spirites power, should confime grace
of it selfe. To conclude, whether wee or
they acknowledge more power and effic
                     •
                  cie
in this sacramēt, let the world iudge:
wee, with the Apostle ascribe the effectes
of grace, of cleansing, of remission, of
sanctification vnto this holy Baptisme. 1.
Cor. 6. 11.1. Cor. 6. 11 euen as it was instituted by our
Sauiour, without any slibber-sauced ceremonies;
or they, who, as if it were not of

it selfe effectuall inough, adde exorcismes,
and exufflations, and lights, and oile, and
spittle, and durt, with which neither the
riuer Iordan, nor the 
                     〈…〉
                  ,
and Infantes were euer consorted or acquainted.
And now from ablution, hee
comes to absolution.
            
            
               Moreouer, they allow not the Sacrament
of penance, wherein all actuallIoh. 20. sinns,
committed after Baptisme are cancelled.
            
            
               Answeare.
               The Apostle willing vs to offer vp our
bodies sacrifices,Rom. 12. we vse pennance or repentance,
as the Priestes sacrificing kniues,
to mortifie our earthly members. Colos. 3.Colos. 3.
to kill those beastlike passions and affections
which rage within vs: applying it
as an wholesome chastisement, not vsing
it as an holy sacrament, it hauing neither visible
signe, nor diuine institution. The
Trentish conuenticle confesseth, that it
was no sacrament in the olde testamente,

whereby we inferre that it is no sacrament
at all;Act. 10. & 26. for Peter Act. 10, and Paul Act. 26
professe, that they preach no other doctrine
of repentance, then that which the
Fathers and rophets beefore had taught.
Neither was it, 
                     •
                  ay the Trentistes, a sacrament
before Christes resurrection, but after
it was: then first, the repētance which
Iohn Baptist preached,Math. 3. & 4. Math. 3. and our
Sauiour published, Math. 4. (both which
places the Rhemistes haue translated Doe
pennance) was no sacrament. Secondly, it
crosseth an other assertion of their owne,
when they say that Pennance is no sacramēt
beefore Baptisme; put the case in those
which beeing conuerted, and hauing repented
vpon Peter his sermon Act. 2.Act. 2. were
after baptized, which was after Christ
was risen and ascended; by the first opinion
then it was a sacrament; it was beefore
their Baptisme, by their second rule then it
was no sacrament. Lastly by this concession
of theirs, all the examples, and testimonies,
which they inforce for satisfaction
our of the olde testament, either of Miriam

Dauid, or Manasses are friuolous and superfluous.
And therefore the glosse of their
Canon law concludes,Glos. de poenit dist. 5. it is better to say,
that it was rather an vniuersall tradition of
the church, then any scripture institution:
and one of their great schoolemen is peremptorie,Bon
                        ••
                     en.
that the agnizing of the fault &
desert of punishment, together with the
recognizing of Gods mercie and fauour,
causeth remission of the sinne, as for confessiō
and satisfaction, it is the church imposition.
Trueth it is, loth they are to giue too
much to Gods grace, therefore, because in
Baptisme wee receiue remission of our sins
freely, without our worke concurring,
they haue inuēted for falles after Baptisme
Pennance, wherein temporarie satisfactiōs
shalbe meritorious. As for vs, we confesse
ingenuously, that, by reason both of that
originall taint,Cipria
                        •
                     
                   which Cyprian calleth virus
paternum, Adams guilt: & our naturall
corruption, which Dauid calleth virus maternum,
our mothers conception. Psal. 51.Psal. 51.
and the reliques thereof, which S. Paul clepeth
the law of the emembers, Rom. 7.Rom. 7. 
                  
                     •
                  eueling

in our bodies, & rebelling against
the spirite, till it haue gotten from peccatum
babitans to peccatum regnans, Ro
                     •
                  . 6. as S.Rom. 6. 12.
Iames saith,Iac. 3. in many thinges, wee euery
one offend, euen the iustest man, seauen
times a day. Prou. 24.Pro. 24. 26 the treacheries of
the deuill, the lustes of theflesh, the allu rements
of the world, working vppon that
corrupt inclination,G
                        ••
                     . 6. sometimes praeoccupate
vs, with slips of ignorance, through
infirmitie;Psal. 19. oft-times th
                     •
                  ough malice precipitate
vs into hainous enormities, euen
those which the schoolemen call vastantia
conscientiam, which without repentance &
faith, cannot be remitted. And therefore
we detest the Anabaptistes, who establish
a perfection after Baptisme, more absolute
then Adams was in his integritie. For as
Augustine noteth,August. his was posse non peccare,
a libertie, if hee would, not to sinne: but
they will haue it coelestiall, non posse peccare,
to haue no possibilitie to sinne, this is
Pharisaicall arrogancie: much more the
Nouatians, who denie to those that relapse
after Baptisme, any hope of remissiō
                  
frō God, or intromission into the church;
this is the gulfe of dispaire. And to them
we 
                     〈◊〉
                   the Enthusiastes, who thinke
God will be reconciled 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                   without mediatiō
by prayer, or ministerie of the word,
or assuraunce of faith, or sorrow by repentance,
this is Epicurish securitie: but in defiance
of them all, we preach with S. Augustine,August.
repentance to be arra pacis, the earnest
of our peace with God;Basil with S. Basil,
that it is the physicke of the soule;Plut. de 
                        •
                     olert. animal. and as in
Phisicke there are three partes, 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                   surgerie
by incision, 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                   by purgation;

                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                   by diet; so herein, first, contrition,
which is the phlebotomie, yea the cutting
of the very hart-stringes. Act. 2.Act. 2. which Dauid
calleth the acceptable sacrifice. Ps. 51.Psal. 51 secōd
confession, as the vomit casting out before
God and men, to our confusion, and their
example, the filthinesse of our sinnes: as
the Scolopendra turneth her entrailes outward
to scoure them;Plutar. pleading,Grego. in Iob as Gregorie
speaketh, nostras causas apud Deum, &.
causam Domini aduersus nos, acknowledging
our sinnes against our selues Psal. 32.Psal. 32. with

shame of countenance, with remorse of
conscience: priuately, if we be burdened;
publikely, if we be inioyned. Thirdly, fasting
and weeping, Ioel. 2.Ioel. 2. which is the
diet to keepe the bodie vnder, and tame it
by subiection 1. Cor. 9.1. Cor. 9. not onely as a preuention
of sinne, but as a punishment for
sinne. Psal. 69. 1
                     •
                  .Psal. 69. 10. which repentaunce, or
penaunce, notwithstanding, wee doe not
say with the Pseudocatholikes to bee a second
plancke to saue vs, a new meanes of
our remission, eleuating thereby, or annihilating
the vigour and force of Baptisme,
the effect whereof, I said beefore, wee tied
notSect. 1. huius arti, 
                  ad momentum to the very instant of the
celebration, as if any sinne after ensuing
might abolishit; for, that were too much
to weaken the efficacie of so mightie a sacrament,
and to repeale too sodeinely the
force of so strong a couenant, and to deiect
most basely the authoritie of so great a
seale, especially the holy Ghost hauing called
it, an aeternall mercie, an vnmoueable
league, Esa. 54.Esa. 54 and as a continuall current
for all times: saluos fecit, for the time past,

he hath saued vs by the l
                     •
                  uer, Tit 3.Tit. 3. 
                  saluos facit,
it doth saue vs for the present state, 1.
Pet. 3.1. Pet. 3. and for the time to come, he that beleeueth
and is baptized saluabitur shall bee
saued. Mar. 16.Mar. 16.
               
            
            
               And that which passeth all in absurdity, is
to denie that our sinnes are perfectly
forgiuen, but onely not imputed, and
as it were veyled or couered with the
passion of Christ, all the botches and
biles, the filth and abomination of
sinne still remaining, and as it were exhaling
a most pestiferous sent in the
sight of God.
            
            
               Aunsweare.
               Dauid seemes mad,
                     
                        〈…〉
                     
                   but to whome?
saith Austen, regi Achis, id est, stultis & ignorantibus,
to king Achis, that is, to fooles &
rudesbies: so to Pharisaicall Catholiques
destroying grace, to reare vp merites, the
diuinitie both of the greatest Prophet, and
the chiefest Apostle will seme absurditie. To
the point, Blessed he cannot bee, which is
not fully remitted, but Dauid pronounceth

him blessed, to whome sinne is not imputed
Psal. 32.Psal. 32. 1. Christes righteousnesse imputed is
the perfect remission of sinnes, saith Ambrose
in Rom. 8.Ambr in Rom. 8. Oecum. in Rom. 3. for our iustification is nothing
els, but our sinnes remission saith Oecumenius:
because whome he hath called, them
he hath iustified, scilicet, remissionepeccatorū,
as the Glosse expoundes that place,Gloss. in Rom. 8. Gorram. Rom. 4. 11. Pighius sae
                        ••
                     . to
which agreeth Gorram. in Rom. 4. and Pighius
often in his controuersie de fide & iustificatione.
But where Christes righteousnesse
is imputed, there is true iustification,
which cannot bee perfect, without full
remission saith Paul. Roman. 3.Rom. 3. 24. 25. Wherefore
in saying, that wee denie a perfect remission,
is to deceiue the reader, and to abusevs:
and to accompt this doctrine, that the
not imputing of sinnes, is a perfect forgiuenesse,
as an absurditie, is the disgrace of the scriptures,
not of vs, which are so taught by
the Scriptures. Sinnes are debtes Math. 18.Math. 18.
the creditor beeing satisfied, the bond is
cancelled, the debt remitted. God is reconciled
to vs by his sonne, the price of whose
bloud hath satisfied him I. Pet. 1.1. Pet. 1. the vertue

thereof hath washed vs, Apocal. 1.Apoc. 1. 5. the
hand-writing is fastened to the crosse,
Colos. 2.Coloss. 2. 14 the sinne forgiuen vnto vs: yet stil
we remaine debters, otherwise wee neede
not dailie pray, forgiue vs our debtes Mat.
6.Mat. 6. 12. therefore they are remitted, because not
exacted extreamely, not beecause they are
taken away radically, for Dauid did not
pronounce him blessed saith S. Augustine,August. in Psal. 31.
                  in quo non inuenta &c. in whome sinne was
not found at all, but to whome God impuleth
not sinne. Who hath had what hee
could require, death for the transgression
of the precept Gen. 3.Gen. 3. our Sauiour hath suffered
it. Phil. 
                     •
                  .Phil. 2. a curse for the breach of the
law, he hath borne it, Gal. 3.Gal. 3. the hugenes
of our sinnes cannot prouoke him, the
price hath sufficed him; the lothsomnes
cannot offend him, his bloud hath purged
them. No doubt the corruption thereof
exhaleth, as hee speaketh, of themselues, a
noysome sauour and stench, which Dauid
confesseth, Psal. 38,Psal. 38. 5. yet the sonne of righteousnesse
hath dispersed the fogge, that it
cannot ascend to his father, and the sweet

smelling sauour of his sacrifice,Ephes. 5. 2. Ephes. 5.
hath taken away the sent thereof, that it cā
                  not
annoy him. and this is that which
Dauid calleth the couering of our sinnes.
Psal. 32.Psal. 32. 
                        •
                     . vpon which both S. Augustine diuinely
descanteth,August. ibid. 
                  If hee haue couered them,
noluit aduertere, hee would not marke, them;
if hee would not note thē, noluit animaduertere,
he would not straightly examine them; if not
sift them narrowly, noluir punire, hee would
not punish them; noluit agnoscere, maluit ignoscere,
he would not acknowledge them, he had
rather forgiue them: and one of their owne,
Flaminius in his paraphrase vppon the
Psalmes dedicated to Cardinall Farnesius,Flam. in Psal. 32.
excellētly saith. Blessed are they whose vnrighteousnes
is forgiuen; it is woorth the notíng saith
he, how the Prophet pronounceth them blessed,
not which are free from sinne, & cleane without
all spot, for there is none such liuing, but them to
whome Gods mercy forgiueth sinnes, and them it
forgiueth who cōfesse and beleeue that the bloud
of Christ is the perfect expiation for their sinnes
and offences. Who is it then which can lay
any thing to the charge of Gods chosen, &

accuse them,Rom. 8. saith Paule? if none can conuince
them, they are perfectly iustifyed, if
so, then fully remitted, so it is, saith the Apostle,
it is God that iustifieth. How? one
of their owne doctors shall expound it,Gor
                        •
                     an. in
forbearing the punishment, beecause hee
hath said nolo mortem peccatoris,
                  Ezech. 18 a sinner hee
is, but I will not that he shal die. And that
which the schoolemen say, that, formale
peccati is abolished,Aqui. p. 3. but the materiale remaineth,
is nothing els, but that which we say,
the guilt is remooued, because God is pacified
in his beloued, yet the reliques of sinne
still remaine and dwell within vs, euen
being regenerate, Rom. 7.Rom. 7. 17. for if we say we
haue no sinne, we deceiue our selues, but if
we confesse thē, hee is faithfull and iust to
forgiue thē, I. Ioh. 1.
                     
                        •
                      Iohn. 1. Now in their opiniō,
how are sinnes forgiuen?Conc. Trid. by charitie infused,
which expelleth sin, as the light doth
darkenes. This is the bountie of Gods larges,
no remissiō of the trespasse; for, thogh
a creditor giue his debtor a stocke to set
him vp, this new donation cuts not off the
former arrerages, which when he pleaseth

he may exact: so that by this doctrine, not
the almightie recōciled, but mā qualified;
not Christ patient, but a qualitie inherent;
not god by grace pardōing, but an instilled
vertue expelling sinne, is the cause of remission;
which S. Hilarie manifestly crosseth,
in saying, that the forgiuenesse of
sinnes is not probitatis meritum, any desert of
qualitie within vs,Hilar. in Psal. 66. but it consisteth in miserendo,
& miserando, in the free indulgence
of Gods affection, compassionating our
condition; and exuberans bonitas, the ouerflowing
of his grace abounding to the act
of remission; which in Iustine Martyr his
glosse in Psal. 32.Iusti. in dialog. 
                        •
                     ryph. is the not imputing of sinne,
Blessed, saith the Prophet, is 
                        •
                     hee to whome the
Lord imputeth not sinne, that is, saith Iustine,
to whome, repenting, God doth forgiue his sinne.
Which not imputing, how meanely soeuer
they esteeme thereof, yet Origen makes the
highest step of forgiuenesse: the first being
dimissio peccati, God not obseruing our sin,
but passing by it, as not regarding it; the
second tectio,
                  Orig. lib. 
                        •
                      ad Rom. the couering thereof by his
grace; the third and highest, non imputatio,
                  
the not imputing them. So that the perfect remission
of sinnes by Dauid his gradation,
and Origen his glosse, is onely the not imputing
of sinne. By which assertion neither
these Fathers, nor wee, doe any way attenuate
the burden of sinne, as beeing thus
easely remitted, nor bolster it out, as presuming
of this indulgent fauour: and therefore
his flaunt of vanity, which followeth,
might well haue beene spared, especially
since he laboureth to be an Epitomist.
            
            
               For let them shift themselues as they list,
and scarfe their soares according to
their fancies; yet no veile nor mantle
can couer the deformity of sinne from
the piercing eies of Gods perfect vnderstanding,
from which nothing can
be concealed.
            
            
               Aunsweare.
               — Bullatis vt mihi nugis Pagina turgescit?
                  
                     
                        •
                     ersius
saith the poet: these are the trappinges of
Balaams beast, a vaine rhetoricall flourish,
the displayed streamer of a dastard spirite,
either distrusting his cause, for which hee
hath entred the field; or the weakenesse of

his argumentes, wherewith hee should
maintaine it. His conscience knoweth it,
because our writinges declare, & our preachinges
declame,Abac. 1. 
                        •
                     3. that with Abacuck wee
confesse, that as Gods eies are pure,Psal. 7. 9. not induring
to see euill, or to behold iniquitie;
so they are piercing, searching the very hart
and reines:Horat. that he detesteth a sinner-cane
peius & angue, worse then a serpent, for vnto
the dragons he said, Praise the Lord ye serpents,
Psal. 148,Psal. 148. but vnto the sinner he saith,
Why doest thou preach my law,
                  Psal. 50 
                  and takest my couenant
in thy mouth? that the filthy leprosie
of our sinnes, make him loath vs, and vs
also loth to looke vp to him, facies peccatorum,
as Dauid calles it, Psal. 38,Psal. 38. 3. beeing so
Medusalike horribly deformed, that, in
beholding therof, it both strikes a terrour
into our conscience, and a shame ouer our
countenance, confessing with Daniel,Dan. 9. 7 that
in respect thereof, there beelongeth to vs
nothing but confusion of face. Wee scarifie
them, we scarfe them not, we wish mē
to discusse them, not to excuse them, with
Bernard,Bernard. wee will them to lay open their

sinnes,Luc. 16. as Lazarus his soares, to mooue the
more compassion. We say, with Ieremy,
it is the Lordes mercies that wee are not
all consumed,Lam. 3. 32. Lam. 3. For if hee shoulde
marke extremely what were done amisse,
none could stand, Psal. 130.Psal. 130. 3. so farre we are
frō iustifieng our selues, that we say with
the Prophet Esa. 64.Esa. 64. that all our righteousnesse
is as a menstruous cloth;August. with S. Augustine,
Vae iustitiae nostrae, si rēmota iustitia
iudicetur. They are the mē who haue made
scarfes, and veiles, and rebaters for sinnes,
in saying that concupiscence, (which the
Apostle plainely tearmeth sinne,Rom. 7. 7 Rom. 7.
which beeing the diuels concubine, is the
damme of all actuall sinnes Iac. 1.)Iac. 1. 15 either to
be no sinne, but only fomes, the allumettes,
or sulphurated fuell, by which sinne is easely
kindled; or to bee sinne abusiuely, as
Christ is called sinne, 2. Cor. 5.2 Cor. 5. 21. or metonymically,
either because it accrueth of sinne,
or prouoketh vs to sinne. Secondly, in denying
the workes of infidels, and vnregenerate
persons, to bee sinnes, crossing the
Apostle, concluding euery action without

faith to bee sinne, Rom. 14.Rom. 14. 23 August. in Ioh. and S. Austen
who saith, Quicquid in te est sine Christo Satan
est. Thirdly in coyning a distinction of
veniall and mortall sinnes, contradicted
by S. Paul, who awardeth death for sinne,
as the proper reward, Rom. 6.Rom. 6. 23 Nazian. and by Nazian-who
elegantly saith, that euery sinne
is 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , the life of death,
and the death of the soule: Fourthly, in
applying such facile lenatiues, & remedies
for sinnes, as the sprinckling of holy water;
the largesse of a rich Almner; the indulgence
of a bribed Pope; at the most, the
lash of a whip in penaunce, or the flash of
the fire in purgatorie, these are the scarfes,
and plasters inuented by them for sinnes;
of which more heereafter in the second
part concerning manners.2. part. 2. art And now from
the sinnes of man, we must follow him to
the sonne of God.
            
            
               4 The Puritans in effect denie that
Christ is the sonne of God; for they
peremptorily affirme,Ioh. 8. 42. that Christ is
God him selfe and not God of God.
So that hee receiued not his diuinitie
from his father. The which position
flatly taketh away the nature of a son,Ioh. 16. 13.
for the nature of a sonne is to receiue
his substance of his father, and it implyeth
contradiction: that the sonne
receiueth his person of his father, and
not his substance and essence, for the
substance of God is essentiall to euerie
person in Trinity.
            
            
               
               Aunsweare.
               It is well obserued by Aelianus, that
prei
                     •
                  dice neither heareth nor seeth any
thing acurately,Aelian. li. 1, cap. 4. 
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , wherevpon
it commeth to passe, that it oft times
iudgeth amisse: this obiection he hath receiued
by tradition from their owne, not
reading our writers: yet had hee read Bellarmine
& not trusted too much to Campians
credite, this section might haue bene
cut off:
                     
                        〈…〉
                     
                   For Bellarmine thinkes that master
Caluin (whom this pamphleter woū
                  deth
through the Puritans sides) is wrongfully
challenged in this point, by Genebrard:
and that when the worst is made
of it, it will prooue but a brandishing of

wordes,lib. co. c. 19. no controuersy of substance, saith
the Iesuite elswhere. So farre then from being
an heresie,Ieron. in Gal. which, Ierome saith, is in sensu,
non in verbis, in the meaning not in the
wordes: that it is not to be accompted a
fault,Hilar. de Trin. lib. 
                        •
                     . for sensus, non sermo fit crimen, in Hilary
his iudgement, the sence, not the speech
makes a crime. And yet euen the woords,
to a sound and charitable diuine, are no
way faultie, videlicet, that Christ is Deus
de Deo,
                  contr. Gentilem. 
                  Deus ex sese, God of God, God of
himselfe, which seemeth, say they, to implay
a contradiction, for him to be God of
himselfe, which is God of God. (not to discours
of this point in this short abstract of aunsweare)
Basil reconciles them,
                     
                        •
                     asil. contr. Eun. lib. 4. he is God of
God, as he is the Sonne, he is God of himself,
as he is an Essence. For the Sonne, saith hee,
was begotten 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                   not as hee is a substance,

                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , but so farre foorth as
he is a sonne, that is, as S. Austen speaketh,
secundum relatiuum, relatiuely as the one is
the father, the other the sonne. because
Essentia non est illud quod generat,
                  dist. 4. lib. 1. saith I ombard,
it is not the Essence which begetteth.

Neither must we beleue, quoth his Epitomist
Spinaeus,Spin. ibid. 
                  quòd Pater genuit diuinam esē
                     tiam,
that the Father begat the diuine essence:
Bern. lib. 5. de consid. which is also S: Bernard his opiniō,
Quòd alter ex altero, & alter ad alterum est, &
veracissimè dicitur, this relatiō, that one is of
the other, personarum designatio est, non vnitatis
diuisio, is the designemēt of the persons,
not the distracting of the vnitie; and this
is Caluin his drift against Gētilis, in saying
that Christ was 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                   God of him selfe: beecause
that blasphemer his opinion was,
that the Father was Essentiator filij, and the
sonne Essentiatus: that the deitie of Christ
was but a portion 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                   as a cantell cut
out of Gods essence, by a dependance, and
leaue, not originally: so that his meaning
is,vbi supra. as Bellarmine confesseth, that Christ as
God, borrowed not his essence from the
Father, but communicated from all eternitie
of the same essence with him, there being
as Cyril speaketh,Cyrill. 
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , the same
identitie of substāce in al the three persons;
else were not Christ God equall with his
Father: and so should commit a robbery

in making himselfe so, Phi. 2.Phil. 2. 
                        •
                     . for whatsoeuer
incipit esse ex aliquo, or per aliquod, is not
idem illi, the same with it, by which & of
which it hath his being,Ansel. Monol. c. 18 August. in psal. 68. saith Anselmus.
Therefore Austen concludeth, that hee is
called the sonne respectiuely to his father,
but Deus ad seipsum, correspondent to that
of Cyrill,Cyri. in Ioh. that the Father and Sonne respecting
the substance, are vnum principium, for
that he, which was in the beginning with
God, was God, Ioh. 1. 1.Ioh. 1. 1 so that, those speaches
of the Fathers, of Ignatius,Ignat. that the essence
of the Sonne is genita, begotten: of
Denis,Dionys. Areop. Hilar. that in the Father is 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , the
fountaine of the Deitie: of Hilarie, that
the Son hath nothing nisi natum, but to be
borne; of Augustine,August. that the Father hath

                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , his essence of himselfe, the Sonne 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , his
essence frō another: these (I say) are to bee
vnderstood hypostatically, in regard of the
persons, not essentially, which is Caluins
opinion & no errour,Bella
                        •
                     mi vbi super. from which Bellarmine
rids him by this distinctiō. In which
positiō if ther be either Arrianisme, as Genebrard
wil haue it; or Puritanism, as this

mate scornes it;Durae. or Mahumetisme, as Duraeus
will inferre it; or Manicheisme, to
which Canisius referres it,Canis. then euen Genebrard
himselfe is that way guiltie, who
oft so distinguisheth; then was Pope Innocentius
a Puritane, who definitiuely
concludeth, for Lombard against Ioachimus
the Abbat, with authoritie and consent
of the Councell of Lateran,Extr, de S. Tri
                        ••
                     t. c. damnamus wee belieue
and confesse that there is vna quaedam res,
one certaine thing incomprehensible
and ineffable, which truely is the Father,
Sonne; and holy Ghost, and euerie of these
three persons is illa res, that thing, viz. the
substance, essence, and nature diuine: and
illa res, that thing is neither generans, nec genita,
neque procedens, neither ingendreth, nor
is begotten, nor doth proceed: but it is the
Father which begetteth, the Sonne is begotten,
& the holy Ghost proceedeth, that
so distinctio sit in personis, vnitas in natura,
there may be a distinction of the persons,
but an vnitie in essence: thē is Bellarmine
a Puritan,Simler. epist. ad Pol
                        ••
                     o
                        •
                     . for he alleadging Simlerus his
confession, non negamus filium habere essentiam

à Deo patre, sed essentiam genitam negamus,
wee denie not the sonne to haue his
essence of the Father, but we deny that the
essence is begotten (the very opinion for
which the Puritans are challenged) seeth
no reason,Bellar. vbi supra. 
                  cur haec sententia catholica dicenda
non sit, why this position should not bee
catholike and orthodoxall. Then is Epiphanius
a Catharist, who calleth Christ,

                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , perfect of himselfe, God
of himselfe.Epiph. haeres. 69. and Origen also, who calleth
him 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                   life of himselfe: which is all
one,Orig. in Iob. for idem est Deo esse & viuere, say the
schoolemen, it is all one in God, to be &
to liue. Briefly, the mystery is intricate, in
quo humanum laborat ingenium,
                  Aug de Tri. saith S. Augustine,
intangling the wit, & exceeding the
speech of any man: this obiection no controuersie,
but a slaunder, long since vnaunswearably
rebutted by vs into their teeth,
sauing that, with the poet, their malice so
either delighteth or deceiueth them, that
they had rather continue a cauill vainely, &
contumeliously,Horat ep. li. 1. 
                  Quàm sapere & ring
                        •
                     
                  —And
now from heauen, like Lncifer, hee glides
to hell.
            
            
               
               5 Finally, they denie the d
                     •
                  scention of
Christ into hell, and desperately defend,
that he suffered the paines of hell vpon
the crosse, whereby they blaspheme
most horribly that sacred humanitie:
as if Christ had despaired of his saluation,

                     
                        〈◊〉
                      66 24. as if God had hated him, and hee
had hated God;Ma
                        •
                     . 9. 48. as if he had beene afflicted
and tormented with anguish of
mind for his offences,Mat. 25. 41. for which hee
was depriued of the sight of God, and
eternally to bee depriued: all which
horrible punishmentes are included
in the paines of hell, and whosoeuer
ascribeth them to Christ, blasphemeth
more horribly then Arrius, who denyed
him to bee God: for lesse absurditie
were it to deny him to bee God,
then to make God, the enemy of God.
            
            
               Aunsweare.
               What Puritans denie or affirme, the
Church of England, whome this libell
principally attainteth, meaneth not to defend,
which, to cut off all factions in opinions
about religion, hath ioyntly concluded
the whole summe of her profession
within the compasse of forty articles, the
third whereof is this, As Christ died for vs,

& was buried,Art. 3. 156
                           •
                        . so, withall, it is to be beleeued that
he went downe into hell: which it inioyneth
vs to beleeue, not so much beecause it is an
article in the Apostles Symbole, so called,
(for it is notorious that this article was
not admitted into the Creede 300 yeares
after Christ, neither by the East nor West
churches:Aqui. 22. q. 1. ar 9. omitted also in the Nicene
Creede; nor any where extant, as Aquinas
confesseth, in Symbolo patrum, in the articles
which the auncient fathers doe recompt)
but as being grounded vpon manifest scripture
Psal. 16. and Act. 2.Psal 16. Act. 2. The exposition
thereof not onely in moderne times, but
euen presently after the admitting thereof,
diuers and different; euery part of the proposition,
hauing a diuerse acceptation in
the scriptures. For the proposition beeing
this, Christ descended into hell; the subiect,
Christ, is sometimes put for his person;
sometimes for the efficacy of his death: his
person somwhere for his Diuine, elswhere
for his humane nature; his humanitie in
some places, for his body onely; in other
for his soule alone; and sometimes, for

both his person and his office. The copula,
descended, signifieth either a locall motion,
from a higher to a lower place: or some
more speciall pre
                     •
                  ence, and effectuall power,
shewed more in one place then another;
as God, saying in Genesis, that he wil
go downe:Gen. 18. and the holy Ghost descending in
the Baptisme of Christ,Math. 3. Math. 3. The praedicate,
Inferos Hell, either the graue; or the
place of the damned; or the miserablest
state, which may befall a man, either by
imminēt perils pursuing him, which was
Dauids Hell Psal. 18.Psal. 18. 5. or anxietie of mind
tormenting him, which was Annaes He
                     •
                  l
1. Sam. 2. 6.1
                        •
                      Sam. 2. 6. or both ioyned together which
was Ionas Hell, in his bodie distressed, being
deuouted of a whale, in the deepe sea:
in his mind feeling Gods high displeasure
vppon him,Ion. 
                        •
                      2. for his disobedience, Ion. 2.
From which varietie of sence, there issue
fiue seuerall interpretations of this article,
none of them exorbitant from the scriptures
tracke, or erring from the analogy of
faith.
               
                  
                  1 That Christ his bodie was laid in
the graue.
                  2 His soule, separate from the bodie,
went to the place where were the
soules departed.
                  3 His Deitie exhibited it selfe, as it
were present, in the lowest pit, to the
terrour of the deuils, and further
despaire of the reprobate.
                  4 That the efficacie and power of his
death, did euen thether stretch it
selfe.
                  5 That Christ suffered those extreme
anguishes and torments, which, for
our sakes, by his father appointed he
was to endure.
               
               There is also a sixth, which passeth most
rife among th
                     •
                   Fathers, who, taking Inferi
for Abrahams bosome,August. & Hieron. et
                        •
                     . expound it, that
Christ wēt thether ad liber andum liberandos
to conuay the Fathers, deceased before his
resurrection, into the place where nowe
they are: but not returning, as the grosse
Papistes expresse him, like another Hercules
& Thoseus, with a flagge and a crosse.

Saint Austen confesseth he could not satisfie
himselfe with any exposition thereof,
August. ad Euod. especially of that place of Saint Peter,1. pet. 3.
which seemes most to confirme it. Cyprian,
or Ruffinus approue the first, that hee
lay in his graue. The schoolmen mightilie
trouble their heades, 1. into what place of
hell hee went? Thomas includes all the
parts of hell, as they haue diuided it: that
as an haruenger he scowred Limbus patrum,
                  Aquinas. p. 3. q. 52.
and rid all from thence: as a conqueror he
presented himselfe in Tartarus, for the terror
of the damned; as a visitor he surueyed
Purgatory, promising them remission;
2. Howe hee descended, and was there?
Caietan standes to it, that hee was there
secundum effectum,
                  Ca
                        ••
                     t. in 3. powerfully, not personally.
Durande, that his soule was in
Paradise secundum essentiam,
                  Vide Mi
                     
                        •
                     and. substantially,
but in Hell ad effectum. Their Apollo
Aquinas, that hee was in Limbo patrum
in the first manner, in the other partes of
hell, onely, in power and effect. 3. Whether
he endured the paines of hell, or were

                  in loco paenae sine paena,
                  Bonauent. as Bonauenture wil? or
in paine & torment,Caietan. as Caietan collecteth
out of Psal. 16? 4. What fruit and profite
his descention wrought, whether he conferred
any essentiall blessednes on the
saints, which makes against Augustine: or
increase thereof onely by hope of euasion
from Purgatorie in time. 5. Whether the
soules in Abrahams bosome only, or other
besides them were manumitted;Ni
                        •
                     et. in Naz. Isa
                        •
                     , and among
the rest, yea (one legend will haue it)
before the rest, Plato his soule had the preheminence,
hauing the grace first to receiue
the faith. These curious quaerees, and fabulous
eliminations of hels secrets, which
S. Iohn properly calleth the deepnes of Sathan,
Apoc. 2. haue made men of zeale and iudgement
to recourse to the scriptures, if there
they may find a more full, certain & Theologicall
sence of that article. Nowe then
if the Puritanes (as this scorner tearmes
them) among these Hydraheaded expositions,
one suppullulating after another, admit
of the last, viz. his extreme agonie, and
feare in the garden, and on the crosse, induced

thereunto, respectiuely, considering, 1.
the basenesse of that nature, wherein hee
was vilified, despicatissimi vernaculi, imó vermiculi,
                  Bernard saith S. Bernard. 2. The cause he vndertooke,
our sinnes: 3. The punishment
for them, an accursed death. Besides the
phrases in scripture, expressing those anguished
of mind: in the ingresse of this abissus,
his soule heauie euen vnto the death,
Mat. 26,Math. 26. with that strong crie and teares
to bee deliuered,Heb. 5. Hebr. 5: in the progresse
therin, those grumi sanguinis, clots of bloud
breking from him Luc. 22:Luk. 22. 
                  in recessu intimo,
when he was deepest in, that dreadful clamor,
expressing a most horrible passion,
My God, my God, why hast thou forsaken mee?
Math. 27:Math. 27 with-all, his triumphes ouer the
powers of hell,Colos. 2. 
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                   or 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , admitt which
you please, either the first, referring it to his
crosse,Origen. as Origen 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , vpō the tree, where
he did 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , traduce them openly,
videlicet, those spoiles which by conquest
hee had recouered from the strong man,
Math. 12.Math. 12. or the second, 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , in himselfe,
which must be referred to bodie and soule

both together, which could not be in hell
locally, his bodie neuer descēding thether,
therefore to bee referred to his suffering,
which for that cause Bernard calleth actio
passiua,
                  Bernard. & passio actiua; if vpon these inducements,
hauing, as they thinke, more pregnant
proofe in scripture, then any the rest,
they sticke to this (put case the exposition
be not the most proper) yet are they not to
be accused of denying the article, for misse-interpretation
is no deniall: perhaps, to expresse
more liuely, and impresse in our
thoughtes more deepely, that direfull conflict,
Math. 27 which for vs wretches it pleased him
to endure, they haue vsed woordes somewhat
hyperbolicall, as despairing and forsaken:
yet if first we consider our Sauiour in
his meere humane nature, the deity, as it were,
sequestring it selfe for a time, to lay him
more open to this dreadfull combate; secondly,
that both some of the Fathers, and
also their owne writers, haue vsed almost
the very same woordes of extremitie,Hieronym. S. Ierome,
that he did trepidanter renuere, with
trēbling refuse,Damase. libro. 
                        •
                     . Damascene, 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  ,

that he was truely and vnfainedly affrighted,
Athanas. citing Athanasius for his authoritie;
Rabanus,Rabanus. per Thom. that his humane nature was derelicta;
for
                     •
                  orne, forsaken; and therefore c
                     •
                  ied
out, as we do in extreame daungers and
agonies, qui deseri nos putamus, thinking and
saying with Dauid,Psal. 31. 24. wee are cast out of the
sight of Gods eyes; and Canus, that being
derelictus à deo,
                  Canus. lib. 1
                        •
                     . 
                  omni
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      penitùs solatio destitutus,
forsaken of God, & left void of all cōfort
frō him, he culd not but sorrow; surely thē
this accusatiō of denying this article, & of blasphemous
Arrianisme, allightes vpō these
fathers, & themselues, as vpō the Puritans.
But whōsoeuer this imputation toucheth,
it no way concerneth, as at first said, our
English professors, who establish that article,
inioyning it to be accepted as an article
of faith, the exposition whereof, as it is generally
receiued in England, that right reuerende
Father the B.B. Bilson. of Winchester hath
set downe. And so at last wee haue found
an end of this long article, consisting of so
ma
                     •
                  y branches. Whereof wee may say
with the Greeke Philosopher,
                     
                        •
                     lutarch. 
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  ,

it hath had many lies, & as many
contumelies.
            
         
         
            The Fifth Article.
            The Protestantes haue no meane to determine
controuersies, and abolish
heresies.
            
               As the Protestantes neither know what
they beleeue, nor why they beleeue:
so haue they no means in their church
to settle them in vnitie of beleefe, no
                     •
                  
to determine controuersies, nor to
abolish heresies, as hath the Catholike
church:
            
            
               Aunsweare.
               
                  THis is like the Sophister,
who hauing spent all his argumentes
beefore his houre,
cries out, repetamus omnia breuiter,
& rotundè, let vs goe ouer
them againe briefly and roundly: hee
wanted matter to fill vp his odde nomber
of fi
                        •
                     ue, therfore he botcheth it vp with the
second, third, and fourth articles, bringing
vs backe to his why, & what, making

                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  
                  
                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  
                  
vs worse then emperikes and quackesaluers:
Arist. Met. for they know, 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , that such a salue
is good for such a wound, but not the 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  
the reason thereof: as for vs, we know neither
why, nor what we beleue. The great Philosopher
thought that orators, which would
demonstrate their coniectures;Idem ad Theod. & Geometricians
which would perswade their
principles, were very foolish; because neither
thinges probable could be ratified by
demonstrations, nor thinges necessary are
to be induced by perswasion. The grounds
of our faith are supernaturall and diuine,
the cause spirituall and inward, and therefore
not to be examined, nor aunsweared
by why and what, that is humane reason; yet
we say as before,Art. 4. Sect. 1. that the what, the matter
of our faith, is the holy scripture, written,
that we might beleeue,Ioh
                        •
                      20. saith Iohn; which
without doubting,August. epn st. 112. Rom. 10. we must beleeue saith
Austen. The why, that is, the meanes why
wee beleeue ex auditu, Rom. 10, by the word
preached,Bernar. in Cant. that is oleum effusum in S. Bernard.
The cause why, ex motu, the inward
operation of the spirite, that is oleū infusum.
                  
For magisteria are adiutoria,
                  August. in 1. Iohn. 1. saith Augustine,
the ministerie of the word is a coadiutor
with the spirite, but cathedram in coelo habet,
qui corda docet, he that informeth the heart,
is the doctor of the chaire, not of Moses in
the Synagogues & schooles of Ierusalem,
Math. 23:Math. 23. but in heauen is his chaire, from
whence he teacheth by his spirite. Againe,
he reuoketh vs to Church and Councels,
foure times repeated within foure leaues,
to which, because we will not stand with
out due examination or iust cōtradiction,
therefore hee inferres, that we haue no meanes
to settle faith, to determine controuersies, to abolish
heresies: all which haue beene aunsweared
in the former articles, wherin we
appropriate these especial meanes vnto the
spirite of God, and the holy scriptures; for
the first,Isido
                        •
                     . Pelus 
                        •
                     p. 30. lib. 
                        •
                     
                   the scripture, saith Isidore, worketh
in vs faith, not obliquely, hoouerly, &
ambiguously, but 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , firmely amassed
and compact, deepely setled, qui ne
branle point, as the French speake, not mutable,
not nutable: for that which onely
ingendreth faith, is the principall meanes

to settle faith, which are onely these twoo,
the word and the spirite, because all faith, by
the confession of the schoolemen, is either
acquisita,
                  Aquin. in Rom. 10. which is the effect of the woord
read or preached; or infusa, which is the
operation of the spirite, without which
the word is not effectual; for nunquam Pauli
sensum íngredieris, nisi Pauli spiritum imbiberis,
a man shall neuer vnderstand Paul his
meaning,ad Patres in montem vnlesse hee haue beene touched
with Paule his spirite, saith Bernard: for
which cause, both the Gospell is called the
ground and stablishment of faith.Colos. 1. 23. Colos. 1.
and the Apostles and Prophets, the foundation
of our beleefe Ephes. 2.Ephes. 2. 20. which was
not spoken personally,Aqui. ibid. but as Aquinas well
interprets it, of their doctrine & writings,
this being no derogation to Christ his priuiledge,
who is the principall fundament,
beecause, as the Apostle speaketh of himself,
1. Cor. 
                        •
                     . they hauing sensum Christi, do preach
nothing els but Christ, and him crucified,
1. Cor. 1.1. Cor. 1. so that whereas other writers are
to be read cum iudicandi libertate,
                  Aug. contr. 
                        •
                     aust. li. 11. with libertie
to censure them, as wee please, with

choise whether wee will beleeue them or
no; the scriptures must be read cum credendi
necessitate,
                  Canusli. 
                        •
                     . and therefore Canus confesseth,
that vltima resolutio fidei, the last resolution
of faith, must bee vppon the spirite his inward
operation.Aqui. 1. q. 1. art. 8. And Aquinas, that fides
non debet inniti, our faith must not be settled
vpon any other writinges or decrees, then
the authors of the Canonical bookes haue
set downe.Can. li. 12. Whereupon the Bishop before
named makes this conclusion, proper to
our purpose. Nulla igitur alia &c. no other
principles of diuinitie, no other doctrine
of any diuines except of Christ, the Prophets,
and Apostles, fidem ecclesiae fundat,
doth ground or settle the faith of the church
Secondly, for the determining of controuersies,
wee appeale to the Princes Deputie,
the Vicar generall of Christ; not the Pope,
whome in this case they deifie, wee defie
him,Tertul. de praeser. but Vicarium Domini, as Tertull. calles
him, the holy ghost; and to his sentence,
viz. the scriptures, wherein there is that vicaria
vis Spiritus Sancti,
                  id em de V
                        •
                     g. vel. that power delegate
of the Spirit: and thus put the case with S.

                  Augustine.
                  Aug. de nupt. & concup 
                  Ista controuersia iudicem requir it?
doth this Controuersie require an vmpire?
Iudicet Christus, let Christ be he: which hath
those three perfections required in a Iudge,
(confessed, though ironically, yet truely, by
the Herodians,
                  Math. 22. Math. 22.) giuing a true sentence,
wherein we are assured, there is no
error; absolute, admitting no appeale, vpright;
August. vbi supra. without bias of partialitie: Iudicet
cum illo & Apostolus, and with him ioyne
the arbitrement of the Apostle, because
Christ himselfe speaketh in the Apostle.
Excellent is that place of Optatus,
                  Optat. Mileu. cont. Parmen. are their
Controuersies, in poynts of Christianitie?
Iudges must bee procured to reconcile thē,
not Christians, they will bee partiall on
each side; not Pagans, they are not capable
of these mysteries; not Iewes, they are
sworne enemies against the truth: from
earth wee appeale to heauen; sed quid pulsamus
ad Caelum, but why stand we knocking
there; cum habeamus hic in Euangelio, since
here wee haue him in the Gospel? where
if wee knocke, the doore shall be opened,
by him, whome Theophyl. calleth 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  ,

                  Theo
                        ••
                      l. in Iohn. 10. Basil. ep. 80. the porter of the Scriptures. And so,
for that point, we conclude with S. Basil,

                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , let the holy scripture
determine betweene vs, for there we haue
controuersiarum 
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                   the deuoyement & dissolution
of all controuersies, said the noble
Emperour Constantine,Theod. lib. 1. c. 7. in the Councell
of Nice. For in Gods matters, who more
fit to iudge then God himselfe? Idoneus enim
sibi testis est,
                  Hila. lib. 
                        •
                     . de l'rin
                        ••
                     
                   
                  qui nisi per se cognitus non est.
The same we say of the third, for abolishing
herefies, the scriptures beeing as proper and
sufficient 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                   to confound an heresie,1 Tim. 3. 1
                        •
                     
                  
as it is 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , to found a veritie.
For which cause both the spirite and the
woord are compared to fire. The spirite,
1. Cor. 3.1. Cor. 3. 13 discerning betweene straw and
siluer,Ier. 
                        •
                     3. 2
                        •
                     . stubble and gold: The word, Ier. 23.
disgregans heterogenea, seuering the pretious
from the vile, the mettall from drosse: being
both index & vindex, the discrier of
heresies, & the destroyer of them; the boke
of God, by the power of the spirite, being
as Dauids sling and stones,1 Sam. 
                        •
                     7. able to prostrate
Goliah, and repell the Philistines, &

therefore, though Councels assembled for
confounding heresies, yet the speciall artillerie
wherwith they battered those 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  ,2. Cor. 10.
lofty imaginations of rebellious heretikes,
were fetched from the tower of Dauid,
Cant. 4,Cant. 4. 4. this armory of God. For, if the
high priest discerne not of the leprosie, or
crime secundum legem,
                  Deut. 17. according to the law,
though his authoritie were great, yet his
sentence was frustrate; it beeing not free in
matters of religion for men to determine,
or condemne what they will, but iuxta leges,
so farre forth as the law prescribes thē,
saith a Papist on that place:Hieroni. ab O
                        •
                     e. otherwise it
might proue a tyranny ouer the conscience

                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  ,2. Co
                        •
                     . 1. 
                        •
                     9. to be Lordes ouer the faith of
men, to inforce them without scripture.
So then, we conclude this point with that
precept of the wise mā.
                     
                        〈◊〉
                     . 12. 12 
                  His amplius fili mine
requiras, seeke no farther, nor other meanes
then these, the spirite and the scriptures, for
the true Catholike church admittes of no
other, howsoeuer that Church, thus nick-named,
the whore of Babylon, enamored
with strange louers, doth boast herselfe of
traditions, and councels, and fathers.
            
            
               
               For our Sauiour Christ by his diuine prouidence
did foresee, that heresies were
to arise in his church, as his Apostle S.
Paule1. Cor. 11. doth warne vs: the which as
plagues were to infect his flocke, and
therefore he not onely forewarned vs
of them, but also gaue vs meanes how
to preuent and extinguish them. Hee
willed vs to heare his Church, if wee
would not be accounted as Ethnikes
Math. 
                        •
                     8. 17. and Publicans. He ordained Pastors
andEph. 4. 11. Doctors, least we should be carried
away with euery blast of vaine
doctrine. He promised vnto the churche,
theIoh. 14 17 assistance of the holy Ghost,
in such sorte, asluc. 10. 16. they which would
not heare her, would not heare him.
            
            
               Aunsweare.
               
                  Vmbratilis lucta,
                  Era. Chil. 
                        •
                     . as the prouerbe is, all
this we yeelde, acknowledginge, that 
                     •
                  ruth
must bee planted: that heresie must bee extinguished:
that the teachers and pastours must
bee authorized: that Councels may bee assembled;
that the Church must bee obeyed:
yet with prouisoes, that the trueth bee no
other then the Gospell wee haue receyued.Gal. 1.
                        •
                     .
                  
Nothing counted heresie, which is religion
sincerely professed, Act. 24.Act. 24. 14. that
those Pastors, haue the Vrim & the Thummim.
Deut. 33,Deut. 33. 8. science and conscience, feeding
their flocke diligently and holesomely,
2. Tim. 4.2. Tim. 4 that councels bee lawfull assemblies,
Act. 19,Act. 19. congregated by command
of Princes, not hurried by the Pope;
not a rabble of illiterate Friers; not a banded
rout of preiudiciall priestes; not a factious
bench of partiall vmpieres; not ouer-swaying
the scriptures by authoritie
and nomber, but ouer-awed by the scriptures;
Hila
                        •
                     . lib. 1. de 
                        〈◊〉
                     . admitting that sence quem ex dictis
retulerint, non attulerint, which they can
worke out of them naturally, not inferre
vppon them peruersely. Lastly, that the
Church haue roometh vniuersally extended,
not confined to Rome straightly pynioned.
But that place out of Math. 18. dic
Ecclesiae,
                  Math. 18. Dist. 19. cap. 
                        〈◊〉
                     . is here a guest, though boldly inuited,
yet not lawfully arrayed; that precept
commaunding a reference, and obedience
to church gouernours, in quarrels
personall, not questions Theologicall, for

reconcilement of mutuall offences, not determining
spirituall controuersies. Wherein
if either party be found, auther malitiously
implacable, or vnreuerently obstinate, hee
is to bee cast out as an Ethnike and Publican,
vnfit for the company of Christians
whose character is charitie Ioh. 13.Ioh. 13. 35. whose
duetie is obedience Heb. 13.Heb. 13. 17.
               
            
            
               The Catholikes therefore beleeuing certainely
that the Church cannot erre,
that the generall Councels cannot deliuer
false Doctrine; that the Pastors
and auncient Fathers, with ioynt consent
cannot teach vntruethes, when
heresies spring vp, presently with the
voice of the churchAct. 15 In the first Nicen counsell was cō
                     demned A
                        •••
                     us: in the Councel of Constantinople Macidonius: in the Councel of Ephesus Nestorius: in the Councel of Chaledon Euty
                        •
                     hes. Vide Aug. li. 2. retract. cap. 10. pluck them vp
euen by the rootes; and so euer hath
practised, and after this manner hath
ouerthrowne all encounters, false opinions,
and errours, which the deuill
by his ministers euer planted, or established
in the world, and so they haue
bene freed from all braules and quarrels
in matters of religion.
            
            
               Aunsweare.
               Those verily are the meanes,Vide praeci. pu
                        •
                      Staplet. doctr principi. wherein al
the pseudocatholickes concurre for decision

of controuersies, all which haue before
beene satisfied, therefore the present aunswere
is easie, and not necessarie: easie, for
those meanes are mens, meerely humane:
the practise of the church, the custome of
men; the definition of councels, the iudgemēt
of men; the sentēce of the fathers, the
censure of mē; partiall in affection, preiudiciall
in opinion, changeable by repeale
of a second sentence; challengeable by appeale
to an high iudge, lawfully to bee reuersed
by a sounder, though a lesse nūber:
whereas the arbitrement of the scripture,
which is ours, is the infallible rule of truth,
and uerdict of the holy Ghost; none more
direct, more constant, more absolute. Easie
againe, it hauing beene often shewed,
that both the fathers, of Which they so
vainely bragge, Saepe loquuntur, non quod sentiunt,
sed quod necesse est,
                  Hierony. ad 
                        〈◊〉
                     . ca. 4 sayth Saint Ierome.
That the Church so called by them and the
councelles, which represent that church,
haue verie often beene deceiued. Some
confirming the blasphemie of Arrius,Luseb lib. 7 no
les thē ten in number; others establishing

rebaptization of hereticks,Pamelius in Cypr. in the concurrence
of three councelles, sayth Pamelius;
with the consent of huge assemblies, saith
Eusebius;Euseb. vbi supra. and among the rest, the councell
hee here nameth in the margent, the
first Nicen: some prohibiting second mariage,
as that in Neocaesaria; others disauowing
returne to warre; others rearing vp
Idolatry, and giuing Angels and the soules
of men bodyes, as the second Nicen; and in
this theme might be infinite, but I shut it
vp with that speech of Saint Augustine,
Sed haec humana iudicia deputentur,
                  Aug. 
                        〈◊〉
                     . 167. 
                  & circuuenire,
&c account no otherwise of these,
then of mens iudgements, either circumuenting
by false glosses, or circumuented
by corruptions; for which cause Pelagius
the Pope delt wisely,Dist. 21. ca. Quamuis. who would not
stand to councelles for the prerogatiue of
his place, but fetched it from the Gospel.
Not necessary: this differēce about authoritie
of councelles, and soueraintie of the
church, being but a muster, no skirmish;
no disputation, but a shewe: for when
Bellarmine hath runne himselfe out of

breath, by putting out all his reasons in
the behalfe of Councelles; and Stapleton
ingaged his whole credite with putting in
his 15. Cautiōs, about the iudge of controuersies;
all their Items are at last closed vp
within the Pope his Ephod, or his 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , his
papall soueraigntie, or his sentence peremtorie;
Sext 
                        •
                     . Ab. arbitris. gloss. for hee is lex animata in terris, the liuing
law vpon the earth, containing all
lawes with in the compasse of his breast;ca. de cōstit. licet.
his authoritie by his flatteres proclaimed
to bee greater then the Angelles (Councels
are shadowes) in foure things,Antoninus par. 3 sum. the iurisdiction,
the administration of the sacraments,
in knowledge, and in reward: by whome
not onely the Bookes and writings of all
authours,Ca. si Rom. dist. 19. are to be approoued or disauowed;
but euen generall councelles haue their
efficacie and confirmation:dict. 17. C. Synodum. dict. 
                        〈◊〉
                     . ca. Dec
                        •
                     etales 11. q. 3. c. Quatuor. and the interpretation
of the sayde councelles subiect
to his determination: because the iudgement
of Councels, and persons, beeing
meerely humane,dict. 19. c. Sic. omnes may foure waies be corrupted,
by feare, by fauour, by malice, by
largesse. Onely his sentence is to be admitted

as from Peter his owne mouth.Dist. 19. c. Sic omnes. Hostie c. Quando. de trans. God
himselfe and he, the Pope, hauing but one
consistorie, without whose countenance
and authoritie, the scriptures are but as
Aesops fables, in the opinion of Hermannus
& Hosius; the Councels but conuenticles
Dist. 20. their decrees like liuing mens wils,
and the fathers no body: wherefore as the
orator sayde,
                     
                        •
                      Decret
                        •
                     . that pronuntiation had the
first,Demosth. second, and third place in Rhetorick:
so in definitiues of Religion, the erection
of fayth, the compoundinge of controuersies,
the abandoning of heresies is wholly the
Popes: the rule of fayth, what the Pope
alloweth; the interpretation of the fathers,
which the Pope followeth; the definition
of councelles, which the Pope
confirmeth; the practise of the Church,
what the Pope auoweth. But bee it the
Popes omnipotence, or assembly of councelles,
or consent of Fathers, or tradition
of the Church,Augusti
                        •
                     . wee say with Saint Augustine,
that none of these are to be preferred
before Christ, cum ille semper veraciter iudicet,
sithence his iudgement is alwayes true

and irrefragable, Ecclesiastici autem indices,
sicut homines, plerun
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      falluntur, but ecclesiasticall
iudges, as men, are often deceiued;
whereby we nothing impaire the dignitie
or necessitie of Councels, acknowledging
them with Saint Austen to bee saluberrima,
most soueraigne antidotes against the
poyson of heresies; yet wee subiect them
to the spirit and the scriptures, which alone
haue this priuiledge,Idē ep. 
                        •
                     19 
                  non errare: for
the heresies which the Councels, he specifieth,
did cōdemn, vanished not by their
authoritie personall, but the power of the
word, the principall weeding hooke that
cuts vp the tares,Mat. 13. 
                        •
                     8. Math. 13. so were the patrons
of circumcision confuted, in that
Councell Act. 15 by Moses lawe;Act 15. so the
Arrians,Theod. lib. 1. c. 
                        •
                     . in the Nicen Synod, 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  ,
receiued their deaths wound by
the sword of the spirit, which is the word
of God, Eph. 6.
                     
                        •
                     phes. 6.
               
            
            
               But the Protestants admitting of the sole
Scripture, as Vmpire and Iudge in
matters of controue
                     •
                  sie, and allowing
no infallible interpretor thereof, but
remitting all to euery mans priuate
spirit, and singular exposition, cannot
possibly, without error, winde themselues
out of the Laborinth of so many
controuersies, wherwith th
                     •
                  ey are no
so inueagled and intricated.
            
            
               
               Aunswedre.
               Ignorance ioyned with malice is importunate:
this section concerning the
authoritie and Interpretation of Scriptures,
hath receiued a sufficient answere,Ar
                        •
                     ic 
                        •
                     . ridding
vs from all blame, for admitting that which
Christ commaundeth, whose will is that
we should search the scriptures,Ioh. 
                        •
                     . 3
                        •
                     
                   Iohn 5.
which are not onely witnesses of him,
but Iudges for him: therefore called the
rule of life and beleefe, discerning the crooked
from that which is straight; 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , as saint
Paul termes it, Phil. 3,Phil. 3. 16 the one rule, not partiall,
as Bellarmine calles it, but totall
& perfect.Theop
                        •
                      
                     
                        •
                     bid Else were it no rule, sayth Theophylact,
if it admitted either appositiō or
ablation: the ignorance thereof is the cause
of error, by our Sauiour his iudgement,
Math. 22.Mat. 24. 
                        〈◊〉
                     . the inquirie 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , of a
more exact addition thereuuto, is heresie

in the opinion of Basil:
                  Basil. lib. 1. contr. Eun. it driueth from the
Church as Christ the marchandize out of
the Temple,Iohn. 2. 
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , all iarre which
might engender controuersie, sayth Constantine
the famous Emperour; by it onely
were the Arrians quelled,Theod. li. 
                        •
                     . as Theodoret
witnesseth; & to it, from the Councelles,
Saint Austen reuoketh Maximinus the hereticke,
Aug. co
                        ••
                     . Maxim. li 3. not doubting there to giue him the
ouerthrow; for whether shall wee goe?
sayth Peter,Iohn. 6. 63. Iohn 6 thou hast the wordes
of eternall life: which woord written teacheth
all thinges that concerne both our
faith, the life of this our pilgrimage, 2. Cor.
5.
                     
                        •
                     . Cor. 5. 7. and our saluation, the glory of our purchased
heritage;Damas. li
                        •
                      
                     
                        〈◊〉
                     . 18. working in vs, sayth Damascene,
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  
                  
                     •
                   euerie excellent vertue,

                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , all sincere knowledge, without
spot or error; and as the night extinguisheth
not the starres, it is the comparison
of Zepherinus a Pope:Dist. 38. c. sicut. so no worldly pollution,
no soul heresie cā obscure or infect
the mindes of the faythfull, sacrae scripturae
firmiter inhaerentes, which holde themselues
fast to the holy scriptures. Other testimonies

thou mayst beleeue, or not beleeue,
according as thou shalt trust them
sayth Austen,Augstin. epist. 11
                        •
                     . but these are subiect to no
humane iudgement, beeing the sole and
supreme iudge of all writings, and decreementes,
Contr. Crel. lib. 
                        •
                     . saith hee else where, and so the
fittest Vmpire in all controuersies. The same
wee say of Interpretation, appealing to the
spirite working vppon the heart, and
the Scriptures explaning themselues,
the twoo most infallible interpretours. For
if that rule of the lawyers bee sound and
currant, Eius est interpretari, cuius est condere,
hee may best expound the law, which
made it; surely the speaches in holy writt,
being the motions and dictates of the spirite,
1▪ Pet. 1. 
                        〈◊〉
                     . 2. Pet. 1 no expositor can be so sound
and infallible as himself, who best vnderstandeth
his owne secretes.1. Cor. 2. 11 1. Cor. 2. and
therefore Ierome thinkes,Ier. in Gai. 1 that any sence
which he giueth not, that wrate it, is an
heresie. Where if Bellarmine his obiection
be recōmenced, that the holy Ghost speaketh
not; and that the scriptures are, as the
philosopher said of law bookes,Gellin
                        •
                      lib. 14. c 
                        •
                     
                   
                  Mutimagistri,
                  
dumme schoolemasters; Iudex mortuus,
                  Can. lib. 1. 
                        •
                     . a dead iudge, as Canus cals it; that is
false: for God, saith the Apostle, spake vnto
vs by his prophets, & now by his sonne
Heb. 1,Heb. 1. 
                        •
                     . not viua voce, for they were deade,
but by their writinges: and the word of
exhortation speaketh vnto vs as vnto children.
Heb. 12. 5. Heb. 12, and the law hath a mouth,
Deu. 17.Deut. 17. Chry
                        •
                     ost. homi
                        •
                     . 13. 
                        〈◊〉
                      Gen. & the scripture, saith Chrisostom,
seipsam exponit, expoundes it selfe, not permitting
the auditor to erre, and doth present
Christ vnto vs, being vnderstood and
opened 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , by the holy Ghost,
saith Theophyl.Theophil in Iohn. 10. For the teacher may bee a
latere tuo, but if there bee nullus in corde tuo,
thou canst not vnderstand,August. in 
                        •
                     . Iohn. 
                        •
                     . saith Austen.
But because the holy Ghost appeared sometime
in the forme of a Dooue, therfore they
take it, hee hath that qualitie of dooues:
Aspicis vt fugiant ad candida tecta columbae,
                  O
                        •
                     id. to
delight and reside, only in glorious assemblies,
in general councels, or in the radiant
dooue-cote of the Popes braine; but the
Apostle giues that priuiledge 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , to
euery spirituall,1. Cor. 2. 51 though a priuate man 
                     •
                  .

Cor. 2. For hee respectes not persons, no
                     •
                  
places,1. Iohn. 
                        •
                      20. 27. 
                  nam & vos vnctionem habetis, sayth
S. Iohn, you also haue the annointing, & those
were priuate men. Which annointing, teacheth
you all thinges, neither neede you, vt quis, that any
man, or Angell, or Councell, or Pope,
should teach you: and therefore the scripture,
beeing 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , the rule which cannot
erre, the spirite inwardly, and the woord
outwardly are the most infallible interpreters
for exposition, and by consequent, the
onely arbiter for controuersies; beecause
hee which knowes the trueth, may soone
discerne of a lie,1. Ioh. 2.
                        ••
                     
                   by S. Iohn his rule, for
that no lie, is of the truth. And they which
know the truth,Aqui. ibi
                        •
                     . saith Aquinas, habent sc
                        •
                     ē
                     tiam
discernendi, & agnoscendi haereticos, haue
the perfect vnderstanding to discerne and
know heretikes, and by knowing them to
auoide them:Psal. 119. for that cause, by Dauid,
called a guide to our pathes;
                     
                        •
                     . Pet. 1. by S. Peter,
a light in darken
                     •
                  s;August. de Bap. contr. Don. lib. 2. by S. Austen the ballance
to weigh all opinions, whether light or
heauie; the touchstone to trie the mettall,
whether base or pure, whether currant or

counterfaite,Chryso
                        •
                     t. 
                        •
                      Cor. saith Chrysostome; the only
Ariadnees threed, to extricate our inclosure
within any maze of empestered errors; &
the Alexanders sword, to cut the Gordian
knot of the most inexplicable ambiguities.
Vppon all which premisses wee conclude,
that the scriptures, hauinge such

                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                   sole sufficiencie in themselues, &
authoritie from the spirite, thereby haue
potéstatem decernendi, power to iudge; and
for the exact knowledg they affoord,Aqui
                        •
                     . haue
vim discernendi, faculty to discerne betwene
trueth and falsehood; therefore the Protestantes
to bee commended, for admitting
them the sole Vmpiere in-controue
                     •
                  sies, &
the most certaine interpreters of themselues.
Onely wee pray with Dauid,Psa. 119. 18 renouncing
our owne insight, Open thou our eies, that we
may see the woonders of thy law; viz the assistance
of the spirite, which both giues the
sence thereof, and mooues the assent therevnto
saith Bernard.Bern
                        •
                      in Cāt.
               
            
            
               And the i
                     •
                  reconciliable iarres betwixt
them and the Puritanes, in essentiall
pointes of faith, giue sufficient testimonie,
that they will neuer haue end,
or can haue an ende, holdinge those
groundes of opinion, which they obstinately
defend.
            
            
               
               Aunsweare.
               Hypocrites vse to see extramittendo,Math 7 Math.
7. but if this Lamia,
                  Plut. de. curio
                        •
                     . would keepe his eies in
his head, whē he is at home, as he puts thē
on, going abroad; hee might there behold
the iarres and differences of Thomist and
Scotist; of Franciscan, and Dominican; of
regular, and secular; of Iesuite, and Priest,
among thēselues, in matters very essentiall
& capitall: There he might see Pighius taxed
about Adams fall; Chisamensis censured
about the death of the bodie for sinVide M
                        ••
                     dinam. & Canur
                        •
                     .,
which he denied; Catherinus vexed about
the assurance of grace; Durand snaped, about
originall sinne, and merite in the
workes of grace; Caietan much molested,
about the sufficiencie of scriptures; and so
I might goe on: whereas the iarres among
vs, though vnkinde, yet not in this kinde,

onely for ceremonies externall, no pointes
substantial: that fire 1. Cor 3 hath tried thē
to be but stubble,1. Cor. 3. and straw controuersies;
the word of God, hath appeased them, and
will confound them, if malice and preiudice
make not men irreconciliable. And albeit
some like hedgehogs (as Pliny reports
of them,Pliny 
                        〈◊〉
                     . who beeing loaden with nuts &
fruite, if the least filberd fall off, will fling
downe all the rest, in a pettish humour, and
beat the ground for anger with their bristles)
will so leaue our church and remaine
obstinate for trifles and accidents, things in
themselues indifferent, though the princes
authority haue now made them necessary:
Yet this is our comfort, first, that the Gospell
preached among vs (like that fire in the
mount Hecla,
                     
                        〈◊〉
                     . recorded by Surius, which
drinkes vp all waters, & deuoures al wood
cast vpon it, but cannot consume flax, and
tow) hath dispersed the grosses heresies of
Popery & superstition, though these flaxen
rags of ceremonies & shewes, lie glowing,
in the embers of some malicious and hot
spirits, not consumed. Secondly, that we

make the scriptures the sole iudge, not appealing
to Councelles, nor relying vppon
mens authorities: which hauing doone,
we conclude with Paul, Siquis sec
                        •
                     s, if any
bee otherwise minded 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                   God
will reueale it,Phil. 3. 1
                        •
                     . and pacifie them; and if
obstinately minded,Gal. 5. 13. we wish his 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  
that God will reuenge them, and cut
them off. The truth is, the Puritanes snarling
hath fed the Papists humor, and stuf
                  
                     •••
                  
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   bookes with reproches, who otherwise
had wanted matter to vpbraide
our Church withall, if the other had learned
of the God of peace, to haue kept the
vnitie of the spirite,Eph 4. in the bond of peace.
            
            
               And finally, they haue no argument to
proue, that they haue the true church,
true religion, true faith, which all hereticks
which euer were, will not bring to
condemne the Church of Christ as
well as they. For example, they alleage
scripture, so did the Arrians: they contemne
Councels, the Arrians did not
regard them: they challenge to themselues
the true interpretation, the
same did all the Hereticks to this day:
and to conclude, they call themselues
the little flocke of Christ, to whome
God hath reuealed his truth, and illuminated
thē from aboue, all which the
Donatists with as good reason, & better
arguments, did arrogate vnto thē
                  selues.
The 
                     •
                  ame I say of the Pelagiās,
Nestorians, Eutichians, with all the rable
of the damned hereticks.
            
            
               
               Answere.
               The Church in this land hauing the two
principall notes of a visible particular
Church, the worde diligently preached, the
sacraments duely administred, is more absolutely
perfect, and more gloriously renowned,
then the Romish Synagoge; notwithstanding
that Bozius the strumpets herald,
                     
                        〈…〉
                     
                  
hath charged her eschucheon with a fielde
of 57 coates, and displayed them in his
standard, as the ensignes of Christs Catholicke
Church; for that rule of Saint Ierome
being sounde,
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      in Psal. 
                        ••
                     3. that Ecclesia ibi est vbi
fides vera est, the church is wher true faith is,
which cannot bee planted without the
word, therfore the most certaine note of a
true church, is where the scriptures do sincerely
sound;August. de 
                        〈◊〉
                     . 3. 
                  Ciui
                        •
                     atem enim Dei dicimus, cuius
Scriptura testisest, sayth Austen: the primitiue

church was known by continuing
in the doctrine of the Apostles,Act. 2. 24. Act. 2. the
Lords field distinguished from others by
the good seede sowne in it Math. 13.Math. 13. the
children of the kingdome, that is, of the
church,1. Cor. 4.
                        ••
                     
                   bred and fedde by that seede. 1. Cor. 4
the law of God▪ read and heard among the
Israelites, was the glorie of their vvisedome
ouer all nations, and the speciall note of
Gods church, and his presence among thē,
Deut. 4.Deut. 4. 6. yea, but hereticks also alleadge scriptures:
Tertull. de 
                        〈…〉
                     
                   first that is false, for if hereticks were
brought to that passe, sayth Tertullian, Vt
de solis Scripturis quaestiones suas sisterent, stare
non poterant, to be tryed, for their questions,
by scriptures onely, they were not able to
stand; and therefore they haue principally
indeuoured to abolish, or falsifie them.
Dionysius Bishop of Corinth proues it by
a cōsequēt,E
                        •
                     s
                        •
                     bi. li. 4. that they, which would abuse
and corrupt mens writings (for at his they
had beene nibling,) much more would
depraue and falsifie the Scriptures:
Saint Austen found it in them,
                     
                        〈…〉
                     
                   that they
would deface scriptures prosua libidine, as

themselues list, to serue their lust: pro voluntatis
suae sensu,
                  
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      lib. de Trinit. 
                  non veritatis absolutione,
sayth Hilary. Instances they giue both, in
Mar
                        •
                     io
                        •
                     , Montanus, Photinus, Sabellius, and
others; as for the Manichees, they insisted
more vpon their inspired Manes, then the
authoritie of holy Writte. And Ruffinus
reasoneth thus, (though by a contrary argument)
yet to the same purpose with
Dionysius aboue named, and thinketh it
no maruell for hereticks to abuse the writings
of that famous scholer Origen,Ruffin. in apologia Originis. sithence
they could not withhold impias manus,
theyr prophane hands from the books
of God. Secondly, admit they number and
quote Scriptures, yet it is but either apishly,

                     
                        〈◊〉
                     
                   as Chrysostome compareth it, by fond
imitation of true professors; or peruersely,
by corrupting the alleadged places, mentiuntur,
                  Hilar. ad Constant. O
                        •
                     igen. 
                        〈◊〉
                      Ezech. 
                        〈…〉
                     . sayth Hilary. Origen will tell him
that there is quaedam castitas diaboli, that heretickes
will bee exceeding holy, both in
the deportment of their life, and in the amoncelment
of scripture texts, thereby to
insinuate their errors more plausibly into

the mindes of men:Iden
                        •
                      in Rom. 10. yet else where he will
distinguish to this our purpose properly,
there is a difference betweene Euangelizare
bona & bené (the want of an aduerbe as it
marres a good action,Aristot. so a sound interpretation)
accumulating of scriptures is not
all one with the right vnderstanding, and
the proper applying of them: it being not
in this case,Natal, C
                        •••
                     es. as in Arithmeticke, where two
are more then one, and three more then
two:Iudg. 7. but as in Gedeons army, Iudg. 7 non
numerus, sed virtus, not the coaceruation of
places, but the true alleadging, which
supports the truth, and distinguisheth heretickes
frō sincere professors, 
                     
                        •
                     am de intelligentia
haeresis est,
                  Hilar. lib. 
                        •
                     . de Trin
                        ••
                     . 
                  non de scriptura saith Hilary,
heresie growes, and is grounded vppon a
wrong sence, not from the text and letter
it selfe;Origen. in Luc. and this made Origen to say, that
heretickes vrging scriptures turned stones
into bread, feeding themselues with that
which choaked them, and ouerthrowes
them;Hila
                        •
                     ius de Synodis. the reason is giuen by Hilary, quia
scripturas sine sensu loquuntur, they number,
but misconstrue them, either 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  
                  
Eph. 4.Eph 4. 14. T
                        •
                     rtu
                        •
                     l. de praeser. c. 17. 2. Pet. 3. 16. Math 9. cogging a sence deceitfully, or 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  
rackinge them peruersely; or 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  
with a botch, sewing a newe peece to an
old garment, by adding to the Texte,
that which was not there originally:
the three principall properties noted
by Ruffinus amonge Heretickes.Ruffin in Apolog. 
                        〈◊〉
                     . And
yet as Hilary excellently closeth vp that
point,Hi
                        •
                     ari. 
                        〈◊〉
                      supra 
                  malè sanctis rebus praeiudicatur &c. it
is a bad argument, and a greater iniury against
holy writinges, beecause some men
haue profanely abused them, that therefore
they should not be vsed at all. Yea rather as
else where hee speaketh,Idem lib. 1 de 
                        •
                      
                     
                        •
                     imit. 
                  Vesaniam & ignorantiā
haereticorum properamus expraeconijs propheticis
& Euangelicis confundere; wee make
more speede to confute heretikes by them.
For the deuil encountred our Sauiour with
scripture text Mat. 4,
                     
                        〈…〉
                     
                   but Christ made him
recule, with the same weapō better handled.
The Arrians pretended scripture for
their blasphemy, but the scriptures reioyned
prooued their ouerthrow; the reason
giuē by Theodoret,Theoderet lib. 1. c. 7. their all
                     •
                  gations were
but literall, but the opposition was out

of the scriptures 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , religiously
vnderstood, and faithfully applied. Briefly
for this point of heretikes alleaging scriptures,
the philosopher said excellently,Seneca de benef. 
                  Nihil est
tam manifestae vtilitatis, quin in contrarium transferat
culpa:
                  Psal. 69 and Dauid imprecates it for a
curse, and God inflictes it for a plague vpon
reprobates, that the thinges which
should be for their wealth, proue vnto thē
an occasion of falling. Therfore as healthfull
bodies are not to refuse good meates,
because men discrased,Plut. 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     
                   of ill stomacks, and
worse liuers, tourne the best aliment into
bad humours: so though heretikes tortuously
peruert scriptures, for their owne defence;
yet we must not cease to relie vpon
them, and recourse vnto them, and, as S.
Basil wisheth,Basil. 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                      cap. 
                        〈◊〉
                     
                   to confirme all matters of
faith by their testimony, 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  ,
both for the establishment
of the sincerely affected, and the discomfiture
of the heretically infected. The three other
obiections following are meere cal
                     •
                  mniations;
for, concerning the contempt
of Councels, First there is an ignoraunce in

the comparison betweene the Arrians and
vs, for they regarded and vrged councels,
and so had good cause to doe, their blasphemy
hauing ben supported by so many.
And it seemeth by S. Austen his appeale frō
Councels to scriptures,Aug. contr. Maxim. l 3 that Maximinus
the Arrian much insisted vpon the councel
of Arimine: then a slaunder against our
professors, because, though we make not
Councels the groundcels of our faith, yet
we reuerence & embrace them, except before
excepted. For albeit a priuate man indued
with the spirite of God, and girded
with the sword,
                     
                        〈◊〉
                     . 6. that is, with the word of
the spirit, may confound an hereticke; yet
in a publike assembly the sentence is more
solemne, the consent more weightie, stil
adding this withall, that the iudgement
awarded by them, is but ministeriall, and
instrumentall; but the law, according to
which they iudge, must be the word written.
And thus wee regard Councelles, so
farre forth as they bee directed by the spirit
of Councell Esa. 1
                     •
                  .Esa. 1
                        ••
                     2 for if wee receiue
the writings of men, the testimonie of

God is greater,Ioh. 
                        •
                     . 36. Ioh's. the other for priuate
interpretation, hath had his repulse before,
we challenge it not to our selues, but refer
it to the spirite of God, & say with S. Bernard,
Luc. 24 
                  cognoscite Dominum in fractione panis,
for the bread of life, which we breake vnto
the people,Bern. in Cant. though it be nostris manibus,
yet it is Dei viribus, it is done by our hands,
but with his strength. And for the Laitie
Canus often confesseth,Canus lib. 2. cap. 8 that the anoynting
teacheth euerie priuate man, in whom
he is, easily to vnderstand whatsoeuer is
properly necessarie for his saluation in the
scriptures. If heretickes should not arrogate
the spirite vnto themselues, there
should bee no verie great vse of that excellēt
gift,1. Cor. 1
                        •
                     
                   
                  discretio spirituum, the discerning of
the spirits, to trie whether they be of God
or no. 1. Iohn 4.1. Ioh. 4. 1 As for the third of the little
flocke, it is a fancie of his owne dreame, no
claime of ours. Perhaps against that vaine
flourish of visible vniuersalitie, whereof
the Church of Rome so boasteth, we haue
obiected, that it is no certaine note of
Christs Church,
                     
                        〈◊〉
                     
                   because many, as Vegetius
                  
speaketh, in this militant state march promilite,
which are not milites; nor all are Israell,
Rom. 9 which are of Israell, Rom. 9. that
Christ, in the mustre of his souldiours,
findes many t
                        •
                     multuarios et euocatos, such as
are good for a push and away; many called;
but 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                   a few enrolled & billed,
Apoc. 3.Apoc. 3 Math. 7 that in the suruiew of his heards,
there are many pinfolds, & store of sheepe-skinnes,
Luc. 1
                        •
                     . 32 yet but a little flocke, Luk. 12. that
though there bee many thousandes to bee
saued, yet, in comparison of the millions
damnable,Luc. 13 24. they are but few Luk. 13. that
sullen pride of factious humours, who
will sequester themselues from the multitude,
as the purer, because the fewer, wee
condemne and disauow. Our number we
doubt not, but it is as great as theirs, and
that euen in the Court of Rome, there are
which loath the abominations of Rome.
That bragging vaunt of vniuersalitie, wee
account to bee the raskales reason in the
Poet,Horat. epis. lib. 1. 
                  Nos numeras sumus
                        •
                     
                   which esteeme of
voyces by number, not weight; the Pagans
clamour for Dianaes shrines, whom

all the world worshippeth,Act. 19. 27 Act. 19 Constantius
his argument for Arrius against Athanasius,
Theodor. lib. 
                        •
                     . c. 16 that all the world had receyued
that opinion, and the whore of Babilon,
the Church of Rome, the Chimaera of hethenish
superstition in her ceremonies, of
hereticall positions in her religion, her
challenge, though most false, that her wine
hath been drunke iu all corners of the earth:
what sayth Saint Austen?
                  Luc. 8. 45 August in Euang. 
                  Turba premit Christum,
pauci tangunt, there are many which
croude Christ, there are but fewe touch
him; and for the last clause of thrusting vs
into the number of damned heretickes, if I
should trace his steppes, it were easie to demonstrate,
Plin. n
                        •
                     t. that as the Nabis in Egypt,
hath the shape of diuers beasts; and Hanniballes
armie consisted ex colluuie omnium
gentium,
                  hist. Liui
                        •
                     s. of the very baggage of all nations:
so the whole body of Poperie is nought
else, but a verie amassed lumpe of Pagan
rites, and olde heretickes dregges, as in
their Purgatorie, Idolatry, sacrifice for the
dead, holy water, free will, challenge of
the Church, merite of workes, renouncing

of scriptures, &c is euident to an vnpartiall
scholler; but being not so proper
to the scope of this Article, I conclude the
whole in this manner, that sithence by
Austens confession,August. ecclesiasticall iudges
are but men, and may soone be deceiued;
that Councelles,Hilarius ad Constant. as Hilary excellently noteth,
are oft contrarie to themselues; that
the Pope, their sacra anchora, their Church
Oracle, is like as hee spake of Egypt, a
splitting reede,
                     
                        •
                     sa. 36. 6 Esa. 36. daungerously erronious;
therefore the sole meanes for the
establishing of fayth, and of the minde in
doubts, and against heresies, are the books
of God. for in the deluge of these waters
deepe, deceitfull, wauering, where should
the Doue rest,Gen. 
                        •
                     . but on Noahs Arke, or the
minde of man repose it selse, but on the
word written? quod proficit ad fidem, ad vnitatem,
                  Hilar. vbi supra. 
                  ad salutem, sayth Hilary, which au aileth
for faith, there is the setling of our beleef,
and for vnitie, there is the diuision of controuersies,
and the repulse of heresies, the twoo
speciall breaches of Godly vnitie. And
now I had thought these articles of fayth

had beene ended, but hee had a spare syllogifme,
which hee knevve not vvhere to
marshall, and that he hath annexed to this
Article, like a Goose feather to a Woodcocks
tayle.
            
            
               And to conclude these Articles of fayth, I say
that if the principles of the Protestantes religion
bee true, Saint Paul himselfe exhorteth
vs to infidelitie, which I proue thus.
               Whosoeuer exhorteth vs to doubt of
that which we are bound to beleeue
by fayth, exhorteth vs to infidelitie:
But S. Paul doth exhort vs to doubt
of our saluation (which we are bound
to beleeue by fayth, according to the
protestants Religion, ergò S. Paul exhorteth
vs to infidelitie.
               The maior is plaine: for to doubt of matters in
fayth, is manifest infidelitie, because whosoeuer
doubteth, whether God hath reuealed that
which indeede hee hath reuealed, beeing sufficiently
proposed, as reuealed, virtually doubteth
whether God sayth truth or lieth. The
minor is prooued by the testimony of S. Paul,
1. Cor. 
                        •
                     . Cum timore & tremore salutem vestram operamini,
with feare and trembling worke your
saluation.
               All feare, whether it bee filiall feare, or seruile
feare, includeth doubt, the one of sinne, the other
of punishment.
            
            
               
               Aunsweare.
               The hottest fire cannot consume a dead
mans heart,S
                        •
                     et. Calig. which hath bene poysoned;
nor the spirite of grace allay the blasphemy
of a feared conscience, cauterized with malice,

                     
                        •
                     . Tim. 4. not sparing to accuse euen the greatest
Apostle of infidelitie. Yea but he doth it not
simply, onely vpon condition, that is, if the
principles of the protestants religion be true. Their
principles are, that there is but one God,
and three persons; that Christ is the Sauiour
of the world; that hee was incarnate
and crucified; deade and glorified, &c. Is S.
Paul an infidell, because we lay these groūds
of religion? his meaning is of principles differing
from Popery. First then, that is his
leaudnesse, or his ignorant rashnesse, indefinitely
to attache all the principles, as accessarie
to infidelitie. Secondly, it had beene
plaine dealing to haue named them: for,
because we set down, that there is but one
purgation, and that in this life, the bloud
of Iesus Christ,
                     
                        •
                     . Ioh. 1 no Purgatory after to be expected;
that there is but one sacrifice propitiatory

once offered,Heb. 9 videlicet, the body of
Christ crucified, no masse to be reiterated;
one mediator betweene God and man,
the man Iesus Christ, no Saintes to bee inuocated;
Ephes. 
                        •
                     
                   that faith onely iustifieth, no
workes coadiuuating; these are our principles,
or rather, the scripture positions differing
from the Romanistes, doth S. Paul
therfore exhort vs to infidelitie? I prooue it thus,
saith hee whosoeuer exhorteth vs to doubt &c,
Here is that speech of reuerend Synesius verified,
Synes. epist. ad Anastas. 
                  cùm ex plaustro, quod aiunt, conuicijs sit
insectatus, multa
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      in nos sit vociferatus, when
hee had with full mouth, and open crie,
challenged all the principles of our religion for
infidelitie, at the last, 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  ,
the base sophister, shewes vs a Mouse
for a Lion; and seazeth vppon one onely
principle, namely, the assuraunce of saluation.
Which when it is examined will proue but
the Cyclops out cry, in the Poet, after his
sole and onely eie was stroken out,Hom. Ody
                        •
                     . 
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  ,
no bodie, no bodie. For first, this question,
whether the certainetie bee of hope, or of
faith, is not iointly and generally determined.

among all protestantes. Againe, that
we are to ascertaine our selues therof, euen
by faith, is the opinion of some eminent
Papistes.Med. 
                        〈…〉
                     
                   Durand, is censured by Medina,
and registred in his rew of erroneus Doctors
for it. Catharinus and Gropperus,
mightely oppugned the contrary as
                     •
                  ertion
in the Trentish conuenticle. Lastly, the syllogisme
it selfe, is both fond & false: fond
in the Maior, for doubting may bee in
pointes of faith without infidelitie or heresie,
Art. 2, & 3 as before out of Melchior Canus hath
bene shewed, because infidelitie, is commō
                  ly
lincked with pertinacie: then the probate
of the Maior, in that faith is not tyed
to thinges reuealed alone, beecause multa
creduntur quae in scriptur is non leguntur, saith
Austen many thinges are beleeued,Aug. contr. Max. lib. 3 not reuealed
in scriptures. False in the Minor, because
that text of S. Paul, marginally misalleaged,
Phil 
                        •
                      12 Phil. 2 is no motiue to doubting,
but an exhortation semblable to that duetie
prescribed to euery mā by God himselfe
Mich. 6,Mich. 6. 
                        •
                     
                   
                  sòlicitè ambulare coram Deo, to walk
warely before the Lord, as a sonne before

his father, with feare to sinne, not of sinne,
that is, least by sinning, he should be counted
vnworthy the graces wherewith he is
endowed, and the fauour whereof hee is
vouchsafed; not of sinne, as if it were able
to cast him finally from God, and so make
him either to dispair, or doubt of his saluation;
for being iustified by faith, hee hath
peace with God.Rom. 5. 1 Rom. 5. and hauing semen
manens,
                  
                     
                        •
                     . Ioh. 3. 
                        •
                     . 1. Ioh. 3. he cannot sinne irremissibly:
Lib. 3. de iustifie. c. 1. besides this, Bellarmine himselfe, frō
whome this impious argument is borrowed,
puts a difference betweene feare and
doubting; for, saith he, the receiued opinion
in the church about this certainetie of saluation,
albeit, it remoue not all feare, yet it
vtterly taketh away all anxietie, and haesitation,
Ibid. c. 1
                        •
                     
                   
                  & ipsam etiam dubitationem, and euē
doubting it selfe: and therefore, though the
Apostle will vs to feare, yet hee exhorteth
not to doubt, as this mate inferreth. Certainelie,
if wee consider the state wherein
we stand,2. Cor. 7.
                        •
                     
                   we shall finde, as the said Apostle
speaketh, without terrours, within
feares, & causes of them both euery wher,

by Sathan his pollicie, & malice about vs;
by the lustes and affections, raging or tickling
within vs; by the world, either flattering
or pursuing vs: but if wee looke vp
vnto him that loues vs in his beloued; to
that sacrifice by which wee are reconciled;
that victorie whereby sinne is conquered;
to that spirite wherewith wee are sealed:
we may in a Christian confidence, and assurance
of faith say,Bern. serm. 
                        〈◊〉
                     . in Cant. with S. Bernard, turbatur
conscientia, sed nōperturbatur, quoniam vulnerum
Dei recordabor, my conscience is tossed,
not ouerwhelmed, beecause I call to
minde the woundes of my God. For how
should hee feare, or doubt which hath, as
Bernard else where speaketh, geminum firmissimum
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                     
                  
                  Idē ep. 107 
                  amoris argumentum, the twy-fold
and most sure argument of Gods loue?
both that faithfull witnesse Apocal. 3 Iesus
crucified;Apoca. 3. 14 and the pledge of the spirite iustifying
him, and testifieng vnto him, that he
is the sonne of God.Rom. 8. 16. Rom. 8. a pledge? saith
Aquine,Aquin. in Ephes. 1 yea an earnest 2. Cor. 1. for a pledge
is restored, when the due is paide, but an
earnest is giuen vpon a price, non auferendū
                     
sed complendum, not to bee taken backe, but
to be made vp. For which cause S. Augustine
calles it Maries part Luc. 10 which in
this life augetur is encreased;Luc. 10. 42. in the next perficietur
is fully complete;August. de verb. dom. 
                  nun quam auferetur,
shall neuer bee taken away. This discourse
is ful of comfort for the conscience,
butSee at large in Bern. epist. 107. & serm. in Cant. 68. 69 too full of matter for this briefe aunsweare;
my conclusion therefore, for it is,
that which is an article of faith, is to be certainely
beleeued by faith: but the assurance
to our mindes of our saluation, is an article
of faith, where we say Credo vitam aeternam,
I beleue the life euerlasting. If I say, I beleue
that there is an euerlasting life after death,
so much do the deuils confesse, and the Pagans
haue testified, yet there is certitudo obiecti
assured vnto vs, as beeing promssio Dei,
the promise of God: but when I say, I beleeue
that the eternall life is prepared and
belongeth to me, this is certitudo subiecti, &
this is opus fidei, the worke of faith; which
hath both this powerfull force to tourne
Dauids quorum into S. Paules ego.
                  Psal. 32.
                        ••
                     
                   Blessed
are they, saith the prophet quorum, whose

sinnes are forgiuen;
                     
                        •
                     . Tim. 1. 15 
                  quorum ego, of which I
am the chiefe, saith the Apostle: & also this
skill to make a garmēt of Christ to put him
on Rom. 13.Rom. 13 For that is a great comfort, &
a faithfull saying, that Christ came into
the world to saue sinners; yet, that is
Christ in the broad-cloth, in the whole
peece: now comes faith and cuts it out,
and applies it specially, which loued me,
and gaue himselfe for me Galat. 2,Gal. 
                        •
                     . 20 here is
Christ put on. So then faith assuming a
particular minor, out of the maior generall
proposition, and making that present
which is absent; (for that cause said to bee

                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                   Heb. 11. 1.)Heb. 
                        •
                     1. 1 the assuraunce which it
giues, is not onely spei, of hope in expectation,
but scientie as if it were now in possession,
in so much that with the Apostle
we may say,
                     
                        •
                     . Ioh. 3. 
                        •
                     
                   
                  We know that when hee shall appeare,
we shall also appeare like vnto him in glory.
VVhich assurance worketh in vs, neither
presumption vpon his fauour, whose
maiestie is dreadfull, whose iealousie is a
consuming fire; nor carelesse securitie in
our course of life, whose standing is so

slippery, whose occasiōs to sinne so many.
For the holy man Iob, who looking vnto
his euerliuing redeemer, confidently proclaimed
it, though hee kill mee, yet will I
put my trust in him Iob. 14.Iob. 14. 16. yet viewing
his owne infirmities, and propensity to
sinne,Iob. 9. 28 confesseth of himselfe Iob. 9, Verebar
omnia opera mea, I feared all my workes:
which feare, as also this of feare and trembling
in the text cited, importeth no suspence
of a doubtful, but a reuerent awe of
a carefull mind, sollicitous to please, and
warie to offend: which, both the phrase
of speech, elsewhere vsed, implieth, as in
1. Cor. 2.1. Cor. 2. 3 where the Apostle conuersed and
preached among them in feare and much
trembling. Of what? Doubted hee his calling?
impossible, for he had it ascertained
him, not by mediate instruction, but immediate
reuelation Gal. 1.Gal. 1. 12. or his doctrine?
vnlikely, hee knew it to bee the power of
God vnto saluation Rom. 1.Rom. 1. 16 or their persons?
a base conceite, for if hee sought to
please men, he could not be the seruaunt of
Christ Gal. 1.Gal. 
                        •
                     . 1
                        •
                     
                   but beeing an Embassadour

from God, and to deliuer his message, as
in the presence of God, he carefully looked
both to himselfe, in the deportment of his
life; and to the diuine maiestie of wordes
in the manner of his preaching; that neither
by his prolapsion into any sinne, his
doctrine shuld be scādalized, nor through
vanitie of rhetoricall flourish (the flags and
rags of the false Apostles) the dignitie of
the Gospel should be amoindred & made
frustrate. So the Corinthians intertainement
of Titus, was with feare and trembling,
2. Cor. 7.
                     
                        •
                     . Cor. 7. 15 if they doubted of his function,
they neede not feare, they might haue renounced
him; for intrusion without iust
authoritie, strikes no terrour. It was, as a
Frier expoundes it,Ti
                        •
                     tleman 
                        •
                     bide
                        •
                     . both the reuerend regard
of his person, beeing the dispenser of
Gods mysteries; aud a duetifull obedience
to his doctrine, being the word of life, lest
they should seeme vnworthy of an embassy
so comfortable, of a messenger so diuine.
As also the purport of the Apostle his
counsell in this chapter Phil. 2.Phil. 2. which, sum
marily, is nothing els but 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , that they

should be like minded to Christ vers. 5.Phil 2. ve. 
                        •
                     
                   in
shewing that humilitie and carefulnesse of
vpright behauiour in Paul his absence, as if
he were present vers. 12.12 least liuing in the
midst of a froward and wicked nation
vers. 15.15 the Apostles labour by their carelesse
leuitie, or carnall securitie, should bee
deuoyded & abased vers. 16.16 this solicitous
reuerence,Tittleman ibidem. euē in Tittleman his paraphrase
hauing reference to S. Paule his person and
their profession, with a feare or warinesse
to auoide all scandale, either passiue from
their aduersaries, who obserued their mā
                  ners
preiudicially; or actiue, least thēselues
should cōmit any action offensiue to God
his maiestie, who had called them; or
derogatiue to the Apostles ministery, by
which they were called: so that this feare
and trembling, to which he exhorteth, is for
ordering their conuersation, a cautele most
profitable; not diffidence of saluation,
a motiue most discomfortable. For, questionlesse
that mind, which cannot rest ascertained
of his future happinesse, is most
vnsetled, and miserable, euen in the reach

of philosophy.Seneca. epi. lib. 1. 
                  Quid 
                        〈◊〉
                      refert qualis status
tuus sit, si tibi videtur malus? what profite or
comfort is it, for a mā to know, that the
                     •
                  e
is a kingdome prepa
                     •
                  ed, Math. 25, and yet
he must doubt whether doome hee shall
recei
                     •
                  e,Math. 25. either ite, or venite, goe yee accursed,
or come ye blessed? this beeing the very
dictate of nature, in the Comicall poet,
Non est beatus, esse se qui non putat, Hee is no
happie man, which thinkes not himselfe
to be so. The mindes felicitie resting not in
the future expectation, but in the present
perswasion.
            
            And thus haue you his fiue Articles of Faith obiected,
like fiue vials of his malice eff
                  •
               sed;
whereof, the summe totall being, if you make
them, the erection of their C
                  ••
               rch her tribunall,
you may conclude as S. Cyprian of the fiue
schismaticall Priests,
                  
                     〈…〉
                  
                
               Ecclesiam spondent,
vt qui illi credit, in totum ab Ecclesia
pereat; they vrge & wold establish a church,
which who so beleeues, takes the ready course
wholy to renounce the Church.
         
         
            
            A conclusion to the gentleman M. F. T with
whom this Pamphleter beginnes
and endes.
            Sir, for my salutation must be such, as
Phauorinus gaue to an vncouth scholler,Gellius lib. 4. cap. 1.
               quicquid est nomē tibi, what you are I know
not, nor wil ēquire; as you haue, no doubt,
perused the pamphlet of Articles directed
against vs, dedicated to you, so, if preiudice
haue not fore-stalled your affections & vnderstanding,
compare this aunsweare ingenuously
and with a good conscience,
then iudge of both: some diseases are haereditarie,
so is not heresie; for were it so,
& you, by coniecture, the heire to an open
and stiffe recusant, not the booke of the
mightie God, much lesse this aunsweare
of a meane man, can mooue or disswade
you. If you be, as he pretendes you, a Protestant
setled, so remaine; if you were
once, and are fallen, returne; if you neuer
were, repent; if you neuer will be, perish.
            Yours in Christ
William Barlow.
         
      
   