
      
         
            
            
            ¶ A Sermon made in latine in Oxenforde, in the raigne of King Edwarde the ſixt, by the learned and godly Father Iohn Iuel, late Biſhop of Sariſburie, and tranſlated into Engliſhe, by R.Ʋ.
            DEDICATED VNTO the Biſhop of London, as appeareth in the Commentarie of Ma. Caluine, vpon the Galathians, in Engliſhe.
            
               1. Cor. 9.16.
Wo is vnto me if J preache not the Goſpell.
            Jmprinted at London, by Thomas Purfoote, dwelling in S. Nicholas ſhambles, within the Nevv-rentes, at the ſigne of the Lucrece.
         
         
            
            
            M. Doctor Humfrey in his Booke which he writeth of the life and death of Iuel. Pagina. 49.
            
               
                  QVam autem in templo Diuae Mariae concionē habuerit, quàm latinè, qùā comptè, quàm Theologicè, me ſilēte ipſa loquetur Oratio, cuius exemplū mutilum, vt potui, aliquantulum recognitum & correctius exhibere malui, quàm omninò ſupprimere, quae & Concionatores multa vtiliter cō
                     monefacit, & progradu Baccalaureatus ſuſcepto recitata videtur, verbis ex 1. Pet. 4. deſumptis, dominica intra Octau. Aſcenſionis.
               
            
            But what maner of ſermon he made in S. Maries Church, in how excellent Latine he made it, how finely & how like a Diuine he did it, his matter ſhal ſhew notwithſtanding I holde my peace;

the vnperfecte example whereof, beinge as well as I coulde ſomewhat peruſed and amended, I had rather ſette out, then altogether ſuppreſſe it or keepe it backe, which profitably putteth in mind and warneth preachers of manye things, and ſeemeth to haue bene preached when he toke his degree of Bachelaure in Diuinitie, the wordes being taken out of the firſt Epiſtle of Peter the 4. Chapiter, vpon the Sonday within the Octauois of the Aſcenſion.
         
      
      
         
            
            A learned and Godly Sermon, made in the Latine tongue, in S. Maries in Oxenford, vpon the Sonday after the Aſcention, in the raigne of King Edward the ſixt, by the famous and excellent Clearke Maister Iuel, late Biſhop of Sarisburie, and done into Engliſh by R. Ʋ.
            
               
                  The text If any man ſpeake, let him talk as the wordes of God.

                     1. Pet. 4.11.
                  
               
            
            
               
                  BRethren beloued in Chriſt I haue choſen theſe wordes chiefly out of that Epiſtle of S. Peter, which are accuſtomed to bee reade vnto the people this day, becauſe, that whereas I muſt preache in Latine according to the cuſtome of this place and time, the ſame in mine opinion ſeemed to belong properly to this aſſembly. The which, that they may be plainlier and better vnderſtande of you all, I muſt repeate a fewe wordes from the beginning of this whole Epiſtle. Wherefore we muſt call to mynd,

becauſe in thoſe firſte tymes, chriſtian Religion was ſhutte out euerye where, as pernitious to mens ſoules, and an infection of common wealthes, and that it ſeemed greate godlineſſe to roote oute the bringers in of newe Religion, leaſt (I ſaye) that Chriſtian men and thoſe that were Godlye, ſhoulde in that ſeaſon vtterlye bee diſcouraged, and caſte awaye all hope: Saynt Peter doeth ſo inſtructe them with this Epiſtle, that they ſhoulde conſider no newe or vnwonted thing to haue happened, that Chriſte himſelfe hath ſuffered farre bitterer and vnworthyer thinges, that they ſhoulde not be faynte harted, laſtlye that the waye to glorye is by afflictions and croſſes.
            And to that purpoſe hee warneth the people by themſelues and the Biſhoppes alſo, what belongeth to eache of them to take heede of. Concerning that whiche belongeth vnto the people, he ſayth, that they haue ſpente tyme ynough before vpon wickedneſſe, and that now they ought to chaunge their life with their Religion.
            
               That godlineſſe is placed, not in outwarde ſhewe and titles, but in ſoundneſſe of life, and innocencie of manners. That it is an ill thing with mouth and tongue onelye to worſhippe GOD, and to gyue oure mynde and ſoule to (worſhippe) the Deuill, and to diſagree from Idolators, not in life and manners, but in wordes and profeſſion (onely.) And becauſe they hadde departed from the moſte aunciente Ordinaunces and lawes of their forefathers, and that they being but a few had ſtirred all kinde of menne agaynſte them, hee warneth them that they yet woulde in all kynde of duetyes practyſe charitie among themſelues, one towarde another, leaſte they ſhoulde bee deuyded at any tyme by any diſſention of myndes or ſtudyes. That this is onelye the token of Ieſus Chriſte, whereby the bondeſtaues of the Deuill maye bee knowne from the Children of GOD. That ſo it ſhall come to paſſe ſhortelye, that

all the whole worlde ſhall imbrace the Goſpell and the heauenly doctrine, and that the enemies and the haters of the croſſe of Chriſt, whome godlines coulde not mone, may through ſhame be ouercome, and returne to themſelues. And the Biſhops hee warneth that in thoſe moſte harde times, they ſee to their office with all diligence and care, and that they looke about them diligently that ye Congregation take no harme. And that it is not a ſporting matter, but a very greate burthen that they haue taken vpō them. And therfore if they preache at any time to the people, that they ſpeake as the wordes of God, and that they ſo behaue themſelues, that others which heare thē, may thinke that they heare not men, but the meſſengers and interpreters of the word of GOD. This is the portion of ſcripture that I iudged moſt fit for this time and place. For becauſe therefore that partely we are entred into the holy miniſterie, & partly, as I hope, we haue alreadie directed the courſe of our ſtudies to that point, we ſhall be taughte in this place, how this heauenly office is to

be garniſhed, that our labor may in time to come be very profitable to the churche of God, and the holy Goſpell bee moſte largely ſpread abroade. But that this may be done the more orderlye, and leaſte I ſhould wander or go out of courſe in my ſpeaking, I thinke it good to touche theſe three poyntes in few words: Firſt, That a Preacher ſhould ſpeake: ſecondlye, What he ſhoulde ſpeake: Thirdly, How he ſhould ſpeake: that it maye bee vnderſtanded. Firſt, that hee is ſcantly a good preacher, which neuer ſpeaketh any thing to the Congregation, ſecondly, that a Preacher muſt ſet forth vnto the people, not old wiues fables, but ye worde of God, and laſt of al that that ſame word of God muſt be handled reuerently, and worthilye, according to the dignitie of the matter. But that God almightye woulde lighten all your hartes and my voice with his holy ſpirite, and that ſome fruite may come hereof vnto vs all, I deſire of you that you wil helpe my weakeneſſe with your deuoute prayers.
            Firſt of all I commend vnto your deuotion, the vniuerſall Church of Chriſt

diſperſed throughout the whole worlde, and as now it falleth out, in many places miſerably afflicted, and namely this our Church of England and Irelande, and in the ſame for our noble King Edward his Maieſtie, his moſt noble Siſters Marie and Elizabeth, the priuie Counſayle, the rulers eccleſiaſticall and politicall, and all the people of England, both Vniuerſities, & chiefly this Vniuerſitie of Oxenforde, the Chauncelor, ye Vicechaunceler, the Proctors, Robert Noruent Preſident of Corpus Chriſti Colledge, Doctor Raynald, Maiſter of Merton Colledge, and all the ſcholers in both theſe Colledges. Ye ſhall giue thankes vnto God almightie, for King Henry the ſeuenth and Henry the eight, Kings of noble memorie, for Humfrey Duke of Gloceſter, &c. that of his infinite goodneſſe he hath kindled thoſe lightes to the nouriſhing of good letters and ſpreading abroade of Religion: And ye ſhall praye that it woulde pleaſe him to raiſe vp others hereafter like vnto theſe, & to gather vs all to their ſocietie into the boſome of Abraham.
            
               
               Let him that ſpeaketh ſpeake as the wordes of God. To the end that the pith of theſe wordes may be the better vnderſtanded, becauſe I muſt intreate both of Paſtors and before Paſtors, I haue vſed this diuiſion, To ſhew firſt that a Paſtor ſhould ſpeake often, next of all that hee ſhould ſpeake out of the holy ſcriptures, laſt of al, That he ſhould ſpeake grauely and modeſtly according to the worthines of the matter. And ſurely concerning the office of Paſtors, as yet I ſee not ſufficiently what I ſhold ſpeake or not ſpeak. For to ſpeake that which hath bene before ſo often ſpoken, were not only hatefull, but out of ſeaſon: and to ſpeake nothing of ſo great ſlouth, and daſtardie of our times, I am much afrayde mighte ſeeme to ſhew a ſluggard and a daſtarde. Truely, in this caſe if the voyce of the immortall God might be hearde, there were no neede at this time of my voyce. For that I maye ſaye nothing beſide, all the ſcriptures doe ſufficiently warne vs of our duetie, God himſelfe hath commaunded nothing at any time, eyther more often, or elſe with more weightie

wordes, than that his people ſhoulde be inſtructed to know him, themſelues, and godlineſſe. Thou ſon of man, ſayth God, in Eſay, Crie and ceaſe not, crie oute aloude, lifte vp thy voyce as a Trumpet, and ſhewe vnto my people their wickedneſſe. How oft doth Chriſt crie▪ Go yee, Teache ye, Preache ye the Goſpell to euerie creature. Wo vnto mee ſayth the Prophet, becauſe I haue kepte ſilence. Wo vnto me, ſayth Paule, if I preache not the Goſpell. But ſuch is either our ſecuritie or daintineſſe, beſide that wee haue ſtopped our eare againſt wholeſome counſaile, that we account it as a reproche, if a man warne vs of our dutie. Neuertheleſſe whatſoeuer it ſeemeth to vs, this hath ſeemed to God a helpe both very firme and verye great to the making vp of his Church. For ſo hath GOD brought vs out of darkeneſſe into light, ſo hath he reſtored vs being deade vnto life, ſo hath he broughte vs being priſoners and captiues out of hel into heauen, ſo hath he broken the powers of the Diuell, ſo hath he broughte vs back agayne into his owne power and dominion, ſo

hath he ſpreade abroade the fame of his name into all landes. For if Chriſt, if the Apoſtles, if the Prophets had held their peace, in what caſe had we now bene in? what religion had there ben any where? what worſhip of God hadde there bene? That we beholde the light, that we haue eſcaped out of bondage, that wee are accounted, and be, the ſonnes of God, all that (I ſaye) wee owe vnto the preaching of the worde of God. Let vs not deceaue our ſelues brethren, let vs not deceaue our ſelues. Our matters are not ſo firmly eſtabliſhed, that they cannot fall. Except we take heede, excepte we looke about, except we put to ſtudie & diligence, all thinges will eaſily ſlide and fall into their former eſtate. A lampe, excepte you put oyle oft in it, will ſoone be out. The victorie is kept euen by ſuch meanes as it is gotten. For what engines doth not the deuill now vſe, what craftes doth hee not practiſe, what way doth he not take, to ouerthrow the Churche of God? Hee keepeth ſcoutwatch alwayes, he is neuer weried, hee hath broughte in ſo many vices, ſo much ignoraunce, ſo great blindeneſſe,

that there is no place in whiche a Preacher ought to be idle. And as, if the ſunne were taken away from the world, all thinges ſhould be left darke, diſparkled and confounded, ſo if the voyce of the Paſtor bee taken out of the Church, religion is left at ſixe and ſeuen, it is left blinde, troubled, all thinges are mingled with error, ſuſterſtition and Idolatrie: of ſo great weight is it to be a ſtewarde of the houſe of God. The Goſpel, religion, Godlineſſe, the health of the Churche dependeth of vs alone. This is our office, this we take vpon vs, & this we profeſſe. And excepte wee doe this, wee doe nothing, wee ſerue to no vſe. It is not ynough to knowe I wote not what learning. The Deuils perhappes knowe more then any of vs all. It belongeth vnto a Paſtor not ſo muche to haue learned many thinges, as to haue taughte muche. Lette it ſhame vs, that the baſeſt kynde of men, euen Coblars and Porters doe that whiche belongeth vnto them, and wee whiche oughte to giue light to al other are idle and do nothing.

For God would not haue vs idle bellies, but hee woulde haue vs both bee interpreters of his minde, miniſters of Ieſus Chriſte, Atturneyes of the people before the Lorde of Sabaoth, the lighte of worlde, ſalte, Angels, and the ſonnes of GOD, and ſo to bee called: And we are appoynted to gouerne, not dumme Cattell, not wylde Beaſtes, but the flocke of the Lorde, but the ſonnes of GOD, but the brethren of Chriſt. If any of theſe ſhall periſhe thorowe our default, his blood ſhall be required at our handes. If theſe thinges alone were ſtil ſet before vs, in oure eyes and myndes, wee woulde not ſo caſte from vs careleſlye and vnaduiſedlye the ſafegarde of our Bretheren and of our ſelues, wee woulde not ſo caſt from vs the blood of Chriſt. There is no cauſe why anye ſhoulde ſaye: Wee ſpeake to them that are deafe, the people giue no eare, wee laboure for them whiche are vnthankefull, we preuayle not, we caſt that whiche is holye vnto Dogges, Wee giue Pearles to Swine. Wee knowe that otherwhile theſe thinges are truely

ſpoken, and it greeueth me exceedingly, that they may be ſo truly ſpoken againſt thoſe that be Chriſtian men. Yet for all this we may not therfore hold our peace, but ſpeake ſo much the oftener, ſo muche the ſharper, ſo much the hotter. For looke how muche the diſeaſe is more perilous, ſo much the more needeth there a Phiſition. Neyther can wee iuſtly complayne of the peoples ſtubborneſſe, while we our ſelues doe all the while nothing. Let vs doe our indeauor, and leaue the ſucceſſe vnto the Lorde. Then ſhall they, if they be of ſo frowarde a minde, that they will not heare, die in their owne ſinne. But there is no cauſe why we ſhoulde bee in diſpayre of the peoples ſaluation. God himſelfe huſbanded the Vine, which for Grapes broughte out wilde Grapes. GOD himſelfe hath all the daye long ſtretched out his handes to a rebelious and ouerthwarte people. Howe ofte hath Chriſt himſelfe ſayde: Ieruſalem, Ieruſalem, how oft woulde I haue gathered together thy Children, as the henne gathereth together her Chickens, whereas they turned awaye their

eares and would not heare? This maladie will eaſily be taken away, if the medicine therefore bee vſed. Let vs bring forth the light, and God will open their eyes: let vs beate at their eares, and god will giue them a hart of fleſh: Lette vs giue the worde, and God will giue the ſpirite: let vs plante and water, and god in due time will giue the increaſe. For as it is our duetie to inſtructe the people with wordes, ſo it belongeth to God to ioyne vnto his wordes, fayth and force. Such is the ſtrength of the word of God that to worke nothing or to profite none, it is not poſſible. Much will fall into the buſhes, into the beaten waye, and among ſtones, yet ſome will fall into good groūd and bring forth fruite. For looke as the rayne commeth downe from heauen, and returneth not thither againe, but moyſtneth and watereth the earth, and maketh it bring forth, and giueth ſeede to the ſower, and bread to him that eateth: ſo my worde, ſayth the Lord, whiche goeth forth out of my mouth, ſhall not returne empty vnto me, but ſhall doe whatſoeuer I will.
            
               But becauſe it is not ynough to ſpeak, let vs now conſider that which in the ſeconde place I haue promiſed, namelye, what is to bee ſpoken. For ſome otherwhile ſpeake, who had bene better haue helde their peace, otherſome while they make a noyſe and crie out with greate contention, ſpeake to no purpoſe. Wherfore regard muſt be had, that we neyther ſpeake vnfruitefullye ne yet hurtfullye. For all thinges are not to be hudled out in a ſermon before the multitude. Wee muſte take care what the Religious ſilence of the people, what the reuerence of the place, what the greatneſſe of our office doe require. The truth muſte bee ſpoken, not lies: the Scriptures, not fables: the preceptes of the higheſt God, and not the dreames of men: For religion is to be ordred not by our iudgement, but by the worde of GOD. Wherein if we ſhall hearken to Moſes, or to the Prophets, or the Apoſtles, or Chriſte, or the Father himſelfe, wee ſhall not much goe oute of the waye. For Moſes, whatſoeuer was to be ſayde or done in ſo great a wilderneſſe, when he ledde the

people being baniſhed and wandering, by a ſauage and deſert region, alwais aſked counſaile at ye Lord, he neuer brought thē any thing of his own head. The Prophets always ſay, the word of ye Lord, the viſion of ye Lord, the voice of ye Lord: this ſaith the Lord, heare the Lord. I, ſayth Paule, haue receaued my Goſpell not of man, neyther by man: & agayne, I know nothing but Ieſus Chriſt, & the ſame crucified. And again, If an Angell frō heauē ſhall teach another goſpell then yt which you haue lerned, let him be curſed, chriſt ſayth, al thinges which I haue heard of my father, I haue deliuered vnto you: &, preach you, ſayth he, not whatſoeuer ſhal come in your head, but ye Goſpel to al creatures: &, whē as ye Phariſes & Saduces had moued the queſtions of diuorcement, & the reſurrection of the dead vnto life, he neuer had recourſe vnto the Rabins, but alwaies to the word of the Lord. God the father crying from Heauen, This, ſaith he, is my dearelye beloued Sonne: He ſayeth not, Heare your Fathers, your Graundfathers, or your great Graundfathers, but he ſayeth, Heare him, euen him. For our heauenly Father woulde

haue his ſonne & his word to be taughte, and to bee beate into mens heades in all places. And certainly it may not be douted of by any man, but that that, whiche the moſt excellent, moſt wiſe, and moſt liuing father hath giuen vnto vs for our cauſe, is moſt excellent, moſt wiſe, and to our reaſons moſt profitable. This is that riuer of water flowing abrode into life euerlaſting. This is that fleſh, this is that blood of Ieſus Chriſt, this is that onely both moſt delicate & moſt wholſome foode of our ſoules, with this only ſworde the deuill is ouercome, with this onely ſtone Goliah is layde along, with this onelye Maule the roughneſſe and hardneſſe of hartes is ſoftened and ouercome. And were it not for this, neither could religion floriſh, nor faith bee confirmed, or the Churche kepte within the limites of her duetie. Call to remembrance, I beſeech you for the Lordes ſake, that as oft as the worde of the Lorde languiſhed, howe often and into how many greeuous errors, and how great a breakenecke euill did the whole people fall into, how oft deſpiſed they the mightieſt and moſte louing

God their preſeruer and Father, how oft worſhipped they Aſtaroth, Beliall, the Sonne, the Moone, Calties and beaſtes, and turned away themſelues from all religion and godlineſſe, & put their whole hope and confidence in thinges moſt vain and filthie. For when as euery one hatched out of his owne mind a religion and holyneſſe vnto himſelfe, ſuperſtition and ſuch a multitude of new Gods, increaſed ſo ſodainly, that the Prophet was enforced to crie out, your Gods are in number as many as your cities. For whē as they had forſaken the truth, life, and religion, what remayned, but that they ſhould fall hedlong into lies, into deſtruction, into vngodly worſhippinges? I had rather make mention of theſe olde thinges, than to bring in examples which are freſh and in memorie. There is none of vs that euer was ſo blinde, that he ſaw not, or ſo blockiſh that he vnderſtoode not the calamitie of former tymes. We haue far gon beyonde, not only the ſuperſtitiō and vanitie of the Iewes, but alſo of the Egiptians and Grecians. For when the authoritie of Councels, and the conſpiracie

of a few Biſhops and Monkes, was placed aboue ye ſcriptures, when it was douted whether ye Romiſh biſhop were a man or a God, and whether he could ſin, when all thinges were referred to the conſtitutions of men, & nothing to the knowledge of Chriſt, when ſales of pardons, vowes and maſſes, were made openly & without al ſhame, when ye ſacramentes were miſerably torne in peeces, when the worde of God was condemned of fraude & hereſie, when nothing was left found & pure from ſuperſtition, when error poſſeſſed all things, and the truth could not be heard, where then, or what Church of God was there? It was hereſie in thoſe dayes, not ye diſagreede from the ſcriptures, but frō that which liked a few Biſhops. For the goſpell was thruſt into corners, nothing was left to the iudgement of Chriſt. Our gods were not then according to the nū
               ber of our cities, but they were as manye as we had ſtreats, yea almoſt houſes. So were all thinges vtterly out of frame, for that religion depended not on the worde of God, but on the wil of man. Theſe horrible caſes, bretheren, may warn vs, that

we neuer vnaduiſedlye departe from the word of God. And thereof it is that al the ſcriptures doe mooue vs ſo often & ſo diligently, that we neither ad any thing to the word of God, nor take ought therfrō, nor that we bow to the right hand or the left. Neither would the Lord yt we ſhold be Princes and Iudges, but meſſengers & miniſters of his worde. For looke what ſerueth to our ſaluation, & vnto godlines al that hath God himſelf ſet downe in his lawes. For the holy ſcripture, as Paule ſaith inſpired by God, is profitable to doctrine, to reproue, to correctiō, to inſtruction, yt the man of God may be perfect, inſtructed to euery good work: yt the man of God ſaith he, may be perfect & ſound, & as far as is requiſite either to godlineſſe or maners, yt he ſhold in euery reſpect be perfectly furniſhed▪ & now I pray you what ſhold God his embaſſador bring forth vnto god his people, rather then the word of God? He that is an Embaſſador in ciuile affairs, if perhaps he ſay any thing beſide yt which is cōmaunded him, he is accuſed that he hath not don his embaſſade rightly, he is called to his triall he is araigned

vpon life and death, and why doe not we with like fidilitie handle the worde of God? But too too, good God, too too ſecure a mynd, my brethren, too too ſecure a mynd be wee of. And as though men alone could not be deceaued, ſo do we hold ſo doe we defende that alonely, which is come from our forefathers. There were among the Iewes manye Murtherers, theeues and adulterers, and yet did not Chriſte enuey eyther more often or more bitterlye againſte any than againſte the Phariſeis & Scribes, you breake, ſayth he the commaundement of God for your owne traditions. In vayne doe you worſhip me, teaching doctrines and the preceptes of men. They are blind guides of the blinde Harlots and ſinners ſhall goe into the kingdome of God before you. How often▪ and with what wordes, doeth the Lorde in the Prophets complayn of this? Be aſtoniſhed yee Heauens, ſaith he, My people haue done two euils, they haue forſaken me the fountayne of liuing water, and haue digged vnto themſelues broken Ceſternes, which canne holde no waters. What is chaffe compared with

Wheate? what is the raſhneſſe of men compared with the eternall will of God? For Baſill doth ſay, that that man, which dareth put to or take away any thing frō the ſcriptures of God, is eyther a feeble Chriſtian, or a notable arrogant fellowe. To put to the word of God the inuentions of men, what other thing may it ſeeme, thā to mingle new wine, not with olde wine, but with wine that is deade, and with lees or dregges? and to ioyne light with darkeneſſe, a wilde beaſt with a man, a man with God? My thoughtes are not your thoughts, nor my ways are not your wayes, ſayeth the Lorde: for looke how farre the heauen is from the earth, ſo farre are my wayes from your wayes, and my thoughtes from your thoughtes. Nay rather looke how farre a man is diſtaunt from God, ſo farre is the vnderſtanding of man diſtaunte from the word of God.
            For although very much by the iudgement of all men is to be giuen to the Fathers, yet were they men, and alſo might erre, Truelye, to ſpeake nothing elſe of them, they did oftentimes verye ill agee

mong themſelues, about verye great and weighty matters. But the word of god is ſure, & firme, & certayn, & appointed for euery time. Peter would haue this kind of learning to be deliuered vnto ye people in a ſermō. And he yt wil haue doings (her in) with the people, muſt firſt bee inſtructed himſelfe with the word of God, yt he may vtter the word as inſpired with an heauē
               lye power. O if Peter were nowe aliue. What would he ſay, or rather what wold he not ſay, ſeing that religion, godlineſſe, the ſcriptures, are all paſſed into the inuentions & dreames of men? That is only in queſtion at theſe dayes, whether the cuſtomes of mē are rather to be retained, or ye lawes of God: That alone hath moued theſe turmoiles, that hath ſtirred the whole world, whether more credite is to be giuen vnto a man, or vnto god. I know yt theſe thinges ſeeme new to the moſt of you, & not to be beleued: but put frō you, I beſeech you, your affectiōs, & ye opinion of things which you haue alredy cōceiued, & you ſhal well perceaue, yt I faine nothing for the times ſake, but that I ſpeake the thing it ſelf. Chriſt hath ordeined the holy

Communion in remembraunce of himſelfe: men doe neither retayne anye remembrance of Chriſt, nor yet Cōmuniō, but haue chaunged all the whole matter into a gay ſhew, and almoſt a ſtage play. Chriſt ſayth, Yee ſhall haue the poore alwayes with you, but me ye ſhal not haue alwaies, I leaue the world and go to my father: It is expedient for you that I go away: and Chriſt ſpake this, not of his Godhead, wherewith he was equal to the father, or of his heauenlye nature, but of his body: Men ſaye, that Chriſte neyther hath with his body left the world, nor yet gone from hence to his father. Paul ſaith that Chriſt is in heauen at the right hand of the father, Peter ſayth in the Actes of the Apoſtles, Heauen muſt hold him vntil the time that al things are reſtored: Men ſay, That the body of Chriſt is in heauen and in earth both at once, and is diſpearced into an infinite multitude of places at one time. Paule ſaith, yt Chriſt hath once entred into the holy places, & hath with one only ſacrifice, & one oblatiō, made perfect al things: Men ſay, that they can ſacrifice chriſt himſelf again euery day, not

               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
only for remembraunce ſake, but in very deede, and that in infinite places. Chriſte ſayth, Thou ſhalt worſhip the Lorde thy God, and him only ſhalt thou ſerue: Men worſhip the Euchariſt, alack the while, being neyther Lord nor God, but a ſacrament of the Lorde, without authoritie of the ſcriptures, or exāple of the Apoſtles, and that as God. For, by the liuing God I beſeeche you, conſider in your myndes bretheren, who euer, I will not ſaye of the Apoſtles, but of the holy fathers hath either worſhipped the Sacrament himſelfe, or hath ſhewed it forth to bee worſhipped of others? I ſee that I ſpeake theſe things not before the cōmon ſort of men, but before them who are profoundly learned, I appeale to all your conſciences, I will vſe in this matter youre owne teſtimonie. Chriſt hath commaunded ye Sacramēt to be deliuered whole: Men haue torne the ſame after a miſerable maner, Chriſt willed that nothing ſhoulde bee added to his lawe: Men doe not only adde many thinges, but ye ſame they preferre before the worde of God. But why ſhoulde I recken vp more?

This onely will I ſpeake, and that in a worde, they whiche broughte in tranſubſtantiations, maſſes, calling vpon ſaints, ſole life, purgatorie, images, vowes, trifles, follies, bables, into the Churche of God, haue deliuered new thinges, and whiche the ſcriptures neuer hearde of. Whatſoeuer they crie or crake, they bring not a iote out of the worde of God. And theſe, as I haue ſayd, are the things wherewith the Church of God at theſe dayes are diſquieted. Vppon theſe lieth the watche and warde of the Churche. Theſe they honour in ſteede of the ſcriptures, and force them to the people in ſteede of the worde of God: vppon theſe: men ſuppoſe their ſaluatiō, & the ſumme of religion to be grounded. And yt which is much more greuous, notwithſtanding at this preſent by the great goodneſſe of God, religion is reſtored almoſt to her former dignitie and light, yet poore and pitiful ſoules they ſet great ſtore by theſe thinges, they to them againe, and teache them, as though without thē the Church could not be in ſafetie. O if the worde of the Lorde might be heard, among ſo mamany

clamours, and in ſo great a hurlye burly. If we would ſuffer God himſelfe, to ſitte as iudge in his own caſe, the matter woulde bee paſſed ouer with leſſe tumulte a greate deale, and more eaſilye mighte wee agree about the whole matter. Wherefore if all the worſhip of GOD, all godlineſſe, all religion, bee to bee ſought out of the word of GOD, If the inſtitutions of men, haue miſerably peruerted all thinges in all times, let vs, my bretheren, vnto whome the office of teaching is alotted, conſider how dangerous a thing it is to ſpeake more: and lette all, who will be, and wil haue themſelues accounted to bee Chriſtians, remember how daungerous a thing it is to beleeue more. And if there bee anye of this whole number, whiche hath giuen himſelfe to anye other kinde of life, yet let him conſider that theſe things belong vnto him, ſo that if he neither can, nor wil teach, yet let him diligentlye and attentiuely, heare him that ſpeaketh, and giue God thankes yt he hath happened on thoſe times, in whiche he maye heare the word of God freely and purely. Let vs not bee

wedded to much to our own wit, let vs not be wedded too much to the Fathers & forfathers. Let vs not vnaduiſedly think that men are ſo luckily borne, that whatſoeuer they ſay, they cannot erre. When we ſhall bee placed before that dreadfull iudgement ſeate, when all thinges ſhall burne, and the Angels of God ſhall tremble, to what Fathers, to what decrees of our forefathers, ſhall we wretches than appeale? We ſhall than haue refuge to Chriſt alone, than ſhall wee vſe the ayde and worde of Chriſt alone. Wherefore let vs not be of ſo ſecure a minde in ſo great a matter. Our life, our ſoule, our ſaluation is the thing in hande. The heauenlye father offreth himſelfe vnto vs, and of his own accord meeteth vs, Ieſus Chriſt crieth out, and calleth euery one of vs: Come vnto mee all yee whiche are greeued and I will refreſh you. How blind be we if we ſee not, howe blockiſh if we vnderſtande not, how miſerable if we runne from this? Where ſhall the worde of Chriſt be heard, if it cannot bee hearde among Chriſtians? If it cannot bee heard among Chriſtians where ſhall it

be heard? Let vs once yet open, bretheren, let vs open our eyes, that it may not be ſpoken againſt our ſtubborneſſe, therfore you heare not, becauſe you bee not of God: and that that ſaying of Eſayas be not conueniently applied againſt vs, The hart of this people is waxen groſſe, and they haue hardlyheard with their eares, and they haue cloſed their eyes, leaſt they ſhoulde at any time ſee with their eyes, and heare with their eares, and vnderſtande with their heart, and they ſhoulde be conuerted, and I ſhoulde heale them. And what I ſhould ſpeake more, before chriſtian men and the Children of God, concerning the worde of GOD, I ſee not.
            Now remaineth that whiche was put in the laſt part, namelye howe the ſcriptures are to be taught. For not only wiſdome and fidelitie, but alſo wiſedome and foreſight is to be vſed. Therefore ſayeth Peter, let him not ſpeake onelye, but let him ſpeake as the wordes of God. Nor yet is it ſufficient to profeſſe onlye, and outwardly to ſhew, that it is the worde of God which we teache, and with a faire

face and earneſt countenaunce ſing. The worde of the Lord: For the Iewes and Turkes and falſe Prophets doe ſo, they al crie out that Chriſt is theirs, and they all reſtraine true religion (as belonging) vnto themſelues. The Phariſeis and Scribes of theſe dayes, when they confirme their owne inuentions, and referre all thinges to the Apoſtles as their authors, and doe wreſte the worde of God, yet doe they crie nothing eyther oftener, or more importunately, than, The worde of the Lord. But Chriſt hath not taught diſſimulation and hipocriſie. Hee rather teacheth this, that Paſtoures maye haue in minde that they repreſente the perſon of Chriſt▪ yt they being induced through the greatneſſe and worthineſſe of ye thing it ſelfe, may ſo reuerently do their office, that all men may perceaue, that it is a heauenly buſineſſe whiche they haue taken vpon them▪ For the image of God himſelfe muſt ſhine in him that is the miniſter of God. And if the Apoſtles hadde not ſo vſed themſelues, they had neuer laied the foundations of Religion: there would neuer any haue lefte their alters,

their Sacrifices, their Fiers, and their Gods themſelues, to haue bene of the opinion of a fewe fiſhers. They counted all that they hadde as nothing, in compariſon of Chriſte Ieſus. When they were taunted, they taunted not agayne, when they were condemned to Priſons, and Fyers, they neuer ceaſed to giue thankes, they alwayes greatly reioyced. for that they were afflicted with all maner of puniſhmentes, for Chriſte his ſake. There was in them ſuche vprighteneſſe of heart, ſuche modeſtie, ſuche vertue, that whatſoeuer they ſayde▪ others were aſhamed to ſpeake agaynſt it. Euen ſo bretheren our life ought to 
                  •
               yue, that as oft as we ſpeake, wee maye ſeeme to ſpeake the wordes of GOD. For we are the ſalte of the earth, wee are the lighte of the worlde, wee are that Citie ſet vpon the Hill, all mens eyes are faſtned on vs, whatſoeuer we do, ſtraight waye example is taken to doe the like. It is a burden of greate difficultye and weighte that wee haue taken vppon vs. Which if we would all well weighe, the

courſe of the Goſpell would not be ſo hindered, the word of God would not bee ſo muche neglected. For when as we profeſſe God with our mouth, but denie him with our deedes, we fraye awaye the vnlearned multitude by our example from religion, and the thing that of all other is moſte diuine, we defile, not with vnpure handes, but with vnpure maners. So for our ſakes is godlines deſpiſed for our ſake is the truth contemned, for our ſake is the maieſtie of God empayred. Theſe things, brethern, are diligently to be conſidered, and earneſtly to be regarded of vs. For if we liue filthily and wickedly, and bringe into the pulpit nothing but a rolling of the tongue and impudencie, whatſoeuer we ſpeake, we ſpeake it not, either as it ſhold, or elſe as the wordes of God. But to the ende the worde of the Lorde may be handled according to the worthineſſe thereof, two thinges principallye are by vs to bee taken heed of: the one yt we be not weakened nor feebled by feare, ye other, that out of the Goſpel we reape no iote or peece of praiſe vnto our ſelues. A preachers minde muſte be prepared and diligentlye fenſ
                  ••
               
               
againſt eyther of theſe. For the Goſpell and the word of God, except it be ſtiflye and manfully vpholden and mainteyned, neither wil ſerue the goſpel▪ nor the word of GOD. For error is fearefull, baſe, and quaking, it feareth all thinges it dreadeth all thinges, it flyeth ſight, and light: but the truth, and the truth of the Goſpel of Ieſus Chriſte, neuer abaſeth it ſelfe, neuer flattereth any, diſſembleth nothing▪ fayneth nothing, is vnfearefull, free, bolde to ſhewe her face, and high. Wherfore as long as we ſpeak the truth, let not the force or authoritie of any man make vs afrayde. Let vs call to mynde that wee are the meſſengers and Embaſſadors of God, Let vs call to mynde that God hath giuen vs power to ſpeake. For what courage doth not Chriſt make vs, when he promiſeth that he will be the reuenger of the iniurie done vnto vs? he, ſaith he, that deſpiſeth you, deſpiſeth me, he whiche hurteth you, hurteth the ſight of myne eye, wherfore let vs ſpeake, not diſſemblingly, not darkely, as did the Phariſeis, but freelye and playnlye as hauing authoritie, as meete it is that the

Wordes of God ſhould be vttered. But neuertheleſſe moderation muſt be vſed, that we doe not vnſeaſonably touche or ſpot the good name and fame of others For then we ſhal ſeeme to taunt or raile, and to handle our owne cauſe, rather then to teache the worde of the Lorde. But it becommeth tht ſeruaunte of the Lorde to be modeſt and circumſpecte, not to blabbe out any thing raſhly or cockiſhlye: leaſte wee maye ſeeme to ſpeake not out of the holy pulpit, but out of the carte, neither yet to haue cited the Goſple, but to haue brought vp again the olde maner of Commodies.
            The nexte thinge is that a preacher haue not to greate a conceite of him ſelfe, but that he think that that function and office hapened vnto him from aboue from God, that he ſhoulde diſcharge his duetie diligently and with verye great feare, and that he ſhoulde thinke that he is occupied not in his owne buſineſſe but in Gods buſineſſe. So Paule ſayth hee is nothing: Iohn crieth that he is vnworthy to pull of the ſhoes of Meſſias: And therefore to abate arogancie, they are in the holy ſcriptures

called not Princes, not Magiſtrates, not Rulers, not Kinges, but ſtewardes, bailiffes, preachers or cryers, miniſters, ſeruauntes, to the end that foras muche as we doe this geare in the behalfe of another, we ſhold not grow proud for another bodyes praiſe. For the Lord hath not therefore committed his talent vnto vs, that we ſhoulde conuert it to our owne commoditie. For he would not haue vs preachers and criers of our owne wit and ſkill, but of his will, neather doe we for any other cauſe cary aboute this treaſure in Earthen veſſels, than for that it ſhould be the brightneſſe and cleare light of the power of God.
            I will not ſtaye you with any more wordes. Yee haue heard that a Preacher muſt ſpeake both oft, and out of the worde of God, and alſo grauelye and modeſtlye. We bretheren, eyther are Preachers or will be Preachers: let vs beare in minde that theſe thinges belong to vs, and that ſaynt Peter ſaith to vs, He that ſpeaketh let him ſpeake as the wordes of GOD. There is neede not only of our diligence but alſo of prudencie and fidelitie. Wherfore

whatſoeuer wee are able by nature, whatſoeuer by counſayle, whatſoeuer by wit and cunning, lette vs beſtow it all to ſerue the Church of God. We are ye ſtewardes of the houſe of God: let vs not diſſipate and ſcatter the houſholde of God. If we be the Apoſtles of God, let vs ſhew Apoſtolike mindes. If we be the brethren of Chriſt, let vs heare Chriſt, let vs feede his Lambes, let vs feede his ſheepe, let vs go, let vs preache, let vs teache. The vniuerſall worlde ſeemeth a good while ſince to trauayle of Chriſt, lette vs caſt about our eyes bretheren. How greate is the Harueſt euery where, how few be the Reapers? And this I ſpeake vnto them of whome there is ſome good hope. If there be any that laugh at theſe thinges, or mocke them, why ſhoulde I hope that they will heare me, who will not heare Chriſt himſelfe. Let the calamitie of our bretheren mooue vs, let the curſe of God mooue vs [namelye] Curſed is hee that doth the worke of the Lord negligentlye. let that moſt greeuous threatning moue vs (namely) Their blood will I require at thy hand. Let vs prepare our ſelues to

that moſt ſweete voice & ſpeeche of Chriſt (namely) Well done ſeruaunt, Goe in. Let vs ſpeake in ſeaſon and out of ſeaſon, let vs ſpeake the word of the Lord, let vs ſpeake as the wordes of the Lorde, that Gods prayſe may be ſet forth in al things by Ieſus Chriſt, vnto whome bee glorye and imperie for euer and euer. Amen.
            FINIS.
            
         
      
   